Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ltaqb0hMqjA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_127_-_Bhagavad_Gita_15.01-15.06_-_Understanding_the_metaphor_of_the_upside-down_tree_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=ltaqb0hMqjA&redir_token=4lXNFIfDo8-tRfXoLFAgLttglS58MTU0ODQ4OTcyOEAxNTQ4NDAzMzI4&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the 15th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. You know. We are discussing currently
the, you know, you know, jnana section. And in this section, you know, Krishna
is systematically establishing how jnana culminates in bhakti. So, in the 13th
Chapter, you know, He talked about the six items. "puruṣaṁ". "prakṛtiṁ".
"jñānaṁ". "jñeyaṁ". "kṣetraṁ". "kṣetra-jñam". And based on that, He explained
how, you know, bhakti is the ultimate goal of life. You know, or how, you know,
it is by bhakti that one can understand the prop..., gain a proper understanding
of this. And that was elaborated further in the 14th Chapter through the
analysis of the three modes of material nature. By which, you know, it was
understood that if one wants to transcend the modes, one has to, you know, you
know, v..., take shelter of devotional service. And that devotional service
ultimately culminates in understanding that Krishna is the, you know, f...,
support. The foundation of Brahman. You know. You know. You know. Now, in, after
this, you know, after concluding the 14th Chapter with, you know, emphasising,
you know, that Bhagavan is superior to bhakti. Then, Krishna, you know, you
know, elaborates on that theme in a different way. He elaborates on a theme of
how Bhagavan is the ultimate reality. By emphasising how Bhagavan is the
ultimate goa..., you know, is the, you know, you know, "puruṣottama". He is the
greatest person. Because this chapter is called as "Purushottama Yoga". The, you
know, you know, as Prabhupada translates it, "The Yoga of the Supreme Person".
So, let us look at, you know, Chapter 15 overview. You know. You know. You know.
You know. So, verses 1 to 6 are attaining liberation by detachment. And then,
for this, the, you know, you know, example of the, the metaphor of the
upside-down banyan tree is given. Then, verses, you know, 7 to 11 say that, ok,
if one does not attain liberation. Then, what will happen? There will be
bondage. And transmigration. You know. Now, in verses 12 to 15, you know,
thereafter, s..., ok, if you want to get out of this bondage by transmigration.
How will that happen? You know. That is by Krishna's mercy. So, we see, while we
are transmigrating material existence. How Krishna assists us. In our material
existence. And in our spiritual endeavor. That is talked about in verses 12 to
15. Then, verses 16 to si..., 18 talk about the essence of Vedanta. How Krishna
is "puruṣottama". This is often called as, also called as the Tri-Shloki Gita.
You know. You know. You know. You know. And then, verses 19 to 20 talk about to
know Krishna means to know everything. You know. So, that means Krishna, the
same point of the Tri-Shloki Gita is emphasised further in the last two verses.
Where it is said that this knowledge of Krishna is the most confidential
knowledge. And one who knows this, knows everything. So, you know, you know,
this is, you know, the, among the shortest chapters of the Gita. You know. The
12th and the 15th chapters. Both have 20 verses each. So, when both have 20
verses each, that means that, you know, both are, you know, you know, having
significant amounts of, you know, you know, information. Knowledge. Wisdom. That
has, you know, given in, condensed in, con..., concentrated form in these
chapters. So, we saw how 12th Chapter ha..., con..., talks about very important
concepts. About, you know, the, how Brahman, how, how it is better to worship
Krishna tha..., you know, personal form than impersonal. How there is a
descending ladder of mercy at various levels at which we can practice bhakti.
And in the qualities of devotees. Those are three things. So, in this fif...,
15th Chapter, Krishna is talking about through endea..., physical analysis, the
importance of taking shelter of Him. You know. You know. So, let us look, where,
let us start with the first verse. You know. You know. You know.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        ūrdhva-mūlam adhaḥ-śākham
        aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam
        chandāṁsi yasya parṇāni
        yas taṁ veda sa veda-vit

You know. So, "ūrdhva-mūlam adhaḥ-śākham". "ūrdhva-mūlam". That means, you know,
that which is above. You know. You know. You know. "aśva...". "adhaḥ-śākham".
You know. You know. So, the, you know, the roots are above. And the branches are
below. "adhaḥ-śākham". You know. "aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam". "aśvattham".
"aśvattham" is the, you know, you know, the, a tree. Banyan tree. Prabhupada
translates it as. "prāhur avyayam". It is said to be imperishable. "prāhur"
means it is said to be imperishable. "chandāṁsi yasya parṇāni". "parṇāni" are
its leaves. So, its leaves are the chandas. The, you know, you know, Vedic
hymns. And "yas taṁ veda". One who knows this. This what? This whole tree. In
its totality. "yas taṁ". "sa veda-vit". Such a person is "veda-vit". So, "yas
taṁ veda sa veda-vit". You know. You know. You know. You know. "veda-vit" means
one who is the knower of the Vedas. So, it is significant that Krishna says that
the leaves are the Vedic hymns. And, you know, just knowing the leaves alone is
not enough. That means, just knowing the Vedas enough. Vedic hymns alone does
not make one "veda-vit". You know. To become "veda-vit", one has to have the
comp..., know the complete tree. So, Krishna has also also earlier talked about
how:

        trai-guṇya-viṣayā vedā
        nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna

In 2.45, He has said that, the more, Vedas talk about things within the three
modes. So, go beyond the three modes, oh, Arjuna. Similarly, He has talked
earlier about how, you know, you know, you know, "śabda-brahmātivartate". The
transcendentalist who is going in an earthly lifetime journey. You know. You
know. When co..., you know, comes close to perfection. Krishna explains in 6.43
and 44. That such a person is attracted spontaneously by the principles of
spirituality. And go..., goes beyond, you know, karma kanda. He goes beyond the
range of fruitive activities. Which are talked about in the Vedic literature.
So, therefore, you know, you know, "veda-vit". Who, "veda-vit" means one who is
the knower of the Vedas. The one who is the knower of the Vedas should not just
know the Vedic hymns. They are only the leaves within the tree. But the leaves
are only one part of the hea..., tree. Along with the leaves, you know, you
know, you know, there are so many other parts. And all those other parts, which
are with, there with that, leaves, they all help in, you know, you know, they all
comprise the tree. And to understand the tree, understand its purpose,
understands its nature, that is, you know, the one who knows that is the knower
of the Vedas. So, you know, "ūrdhva-mūlam adhaḥ-śākham". So, what is this tree
being referred to over here? You know. One thing is very clear, you know, it is,
you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, a metaphor over here. So,
metaphor means, this tree is used to represent material existence. You know. You
know. When we talk about material existence, we are talking about the soul's
existence within matter. So, matter itself is existing. Always. But matter is
not aware of its existence. So, therefore, when we talk about material
existence. That is soul's existence within matter. You know. So, the tree is
given as an example to illustrate material existence. The existence of matter.
But not just the existence of matter. The existence of the soul within the arena
of matter. And the tree, you know, you know, tree represents material existence.
And material world in what sense? In the sense that here, things are, you know,
you know, the, upside-down. Things are the opposite of the way they should be.
Things are the opposite of the way they should be. What does that mean? That
things are, you know, here not necessarily positive. But they are negative. You
know. You know. So, here, in this world, Krishna is, you know, you know, you
know, Krishna is not the center. If the soul has had, you know, you know, a,
serve, the position is Krishna. And has become the center. That, of course, will
be talked about in 15.7. Here, the simply, the, you know, the, you know, you
know, inverseness. The obverseness. Inverse and obverse basically mean the
reverse. The, you know, the upside-down nature of this world is talked about
through the metaphor of this upside-down tree. You know. "ūrdhva-mūlam
adhaḥ-śākham". So, normally, the roots are downwards. And the branches are
upwards in a tree. But here, this is a tree, where the branches are downwards.
And the roots are upward. "ūrdhva-mūlam". That is, you know, you know, "ūrdhva".
"ūrdhva" is upwards. "mūlam". Roots are upwards. So, you know, you know, you
know, what does this refer to? So, the acharyas explain. And Srila Prabhupada
elaborates that, actually, you know, where do we see an upside-down tree? You
know. Normally, you know, no tree is upside-down. But we see an upside-down tree
in, you know, you know, a reflection. You know. You know. You know. If there is
a forest. And there is a beautiful tree, gar..., beautiful, you know, you know,
you know. garden. Or, or there is beautiful river on the banks of which the
forest is there. In the tree, on the bank, so, it will be reflected. And the
reflection will be upside-down. You know. So, this metaphor implies that our
world is like a reflection of the spiritual world. The world that we live in.
You know. It is not our world, actually. It is our present, the, presently, it
is our world. Our world is Krishna's eternal abode.

So, this is upside. This is downside. And, you know, in-between, you know, you
know, you know, you know, there is the struggle. To go from here to there. Or
the struggle to find a better place over here. "aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam".
"aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam". "avyayam" means imperishable. So, as we know,
material existence itself is imperishable. Material existence is, you know, you
know, you know, you know, eternal. It may be manifested some time. It may not be
manifested some time. Matter is sometimes present. Sometimes, the absence. But
it is "avyayam". And then, "aśvatthaṁ". You know. So, "aśvatthaṁ" has many
meanings. "aśvatthaṁ". You know. So, one meaning is that that which will not
last. So, you know, as we have discussed earlier, also, material existence is
eternal. But it is not that we are attracted to material existence per say. We
are attracted to material forms. We are attracted to materially beautiful,
beautiful objects. And those are not permanent. Those are temporary. And because
they are temporary, you know, you know, there cannot be lasting happiness in
those relationships. You know. In, in the relationships with other people. With,
you know, you know, things of this world. Because when we are attracted, are we
att..., we attracted to the substratum of matter? Or are we attracted to the
soul? Generally, we are attracted to the outer bodily forms. And the outer
appearances. And those appearances will disappear. They will not last. And that
is why there will be suffering. So, "aśvatthaṁ" means temporary. "aśvatthaṁ" can
also mean "aśva", "tthaṁ" "aśva" is a horse. "tthaṁ". A horse has the habit of
being situated on three feet. So, like that, this world is, you know, situated
unsteadily. It is "Ekapada Vibhuti". A "Tripada Vibhuti". A three parts of it
are in the spiritual world. And then, we know that, you know, material world is,
you know, the, you know, is, w..., the, all of material existence is "Ekapada
"Vibhuti". It is just w..., "Ekapada". "pada" means feet. "Vibhuti" is opulence.
It is just one fourth of material ex..., of the totality of existence. And the
major portion of the material existence is in the spiritual world. So,
"aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam". You know. You know. And then:

        chandāṁsi yasya parṇāni
        yas taṁ veda sa veda-vit

So, you know, the, Krishna introduces this metaphor by sa..., you know, pointing
out one fundamental thing that things are upside-down over here. So, Srila
Prabhupada writes in the purport, you know, you know, you know, that, you know,
you know, you know:

"For one who is engaged in fruitive activities, there is no end to the banyan
tree."

You know. You know. You know. There is no end. Because as we have discussed,
then: "nantam nabadhyam nabunasta vadim". 

So, Prabhupada talks about the process of, you know, you know, extrication. You
know. You know. We will discuss the, you know:

"The fruits represent the results of the living entities’".

You know. The fruits are dharma. Artha. Kama. Moksha. You know. So, you know,
you know, you know, the Vedic hymns, they offer us, just from the leaves go the
flowers and the fruits. So, like that, from the Vedic hymns, dharma, artha,
kama, moksha can come about. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know.
You know. You know. So, Prabhupada write that:

"Desire is the cause of things’ being situated in this reflected material
light."

"Desire is the cause". "Desire is the cause of things’ being situated in this
reflected material light". So, there is desire. And then, there is, there is,
you know, you know, you know, that, you know, because of our desires to enjoy
separate from Krishna, that is how we are placed in the material world. And that
is how we suffer, you know, the perils of material existence. So, you know, the
desire is the cause. And how is desire the cause? Because just as, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know, you know, one needs to, you know, look away
from the substance, so, the real tree to the reflection. You know. Then, one
sees the reflection. So, the, similarly, the soul who desires to enjoy separate
from Krishna. Who has a desire to, you know, who has a desire to, you know, be
bound, you know, to accelerate, re..., rejoice in, to delight in matter. And
material things. That soul, that misdirected desire causes material existence.
You know. You know. And after that, you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada
writes that:

"The material reflection of the real tree has to be cut off."

And:

"When it is said that a person knows the Vedas, it is assumed that he knows how
to cut off attachment to this material world."

So, now, in the Vedas, again, does not mean just, you know, knowing the Vedic
hymns. The yagnic brahmanas brahmanas knew that. But that was not enough. One
has to know how to cut off one's attachments to this world.

        adhaś cordhvaṁ prasṛtās tasya śākhā
        guṇa-pravṛddhā viṣaya-pravālāḥ
        adhaś ca mūlāny anusantatāni
        karmānubandhīni manuṣya-loke

"adhaś cordhvaṁ prasṛtās tasya śākhā". So, "adhaś cordhvaṁ". That means, you
know, you know, you know, you know, that "adhaḥ", "adhaḥ" is ju..., you know,
downwards. Now, Krishna is telling that, things are not so simple over here.
Actually, you know, it is not just, you know, it is not just, you know, a matter
of, you know, the things being here. You know. Tempora.., upside-down. But
actually, the things go up and down, also. So, just as now, so, some branches go
upwards. And some roots go downwards, also. "adhaś cordhvaṁ prasṛtās tasya
śākhā". So, the branches, sorry, you know, so, so, branches primarily. Not about
the roots over here. You know. You know. The roots are upwards. But the branches
go upwards as well as downwards. "adhaś cordhvaṁ prasṛtās tasya śākhā". Now,
what does this represent? The roots going upward and downwards? You know. Just
can, you know, actually, you know, you know, you know, this represents how the
living entity can move up and down in material existence. You know. The creation
has begun from Brahma. So, you know, you know, the roots are up. And from there,
things are moving downwards. So, Brahmaji is the first created living being. And
the soul, individual souls are also, you know, in a relatively pure stage. But
from there, they fall. You know. And then, they can, stay on in material
existence. And they go through various, you know, you know, you know, species.
And various directions. So, within their, you know, you know, transmigration
trajectory, that trajectory can go downwards. It can go upwards. So, the
branches here represent the, how the tree expands. So, that is why "adhaś
cordhvaṁ prasṛtās tasya śākhā". The "śākhāḥ" can move upwards. The "śākhāḥ" can
move downwards. "guṇa-pravṛddhā viṣaya-pravālāḥ". "guṇa-pravṛddhā". So, they are
nourished by the modes. So, this is the connection between the previous and this
chapter. You know. Every tree needs water for nourishment. So, what is the
nourishment? They are developed in the f..., through the modes. In the form of
the modes. So, the, we choose particular desires. And when we choose those
desires. You know. According to the three modes. Then, acco..., you know,
accor..., then, accordingly, our material existence expands. Accordingly, we
move forward in life. So, "adhaś co...", "guṇa-pravṛddhā viṣaya-pravālāḥ".
"viṣaya-pravālāḥ" means that, you know, you know, "viṣaya". "viṣaya" is the
sense objects. "pravālāḥ" is the twigs. You know. So, "viṣaya-pravālāḥ" refers
to that, the sense objects are the twigs. And, you know, "karmānubandhī...",
"adhaś ca mūlāny anusantatāni". So, "adhaś ca mūlāny anusantatāni", Krishna
says, then, later on, so, the roots also go downwards. What does that mean is
that, you know, you know, you know, the, a whole g..., tree is very complicated.
So, now, when we do..., cou..., use the word "root", we use it in many senses.
One is, you know, the root means from where things begin. Isn't it? You know.
That is one, you know, so, what are your roots? That means, ok, where were you
existing earlier? Where were your ancestors existing? You know. Where is the
root of the tree? So, we will look at, ok, deep down, what, there is the root.
So, you know, you know, the root indicates that, you know, we, where we are, you
know, you know, where our, you know, you know, you know, you know, where we have
come from. Now, if we look at ourselves, we could say our roots are in the
spiritual world. We all belong to the spiritual world. Another understanding is
that, actually, our roots are also in, you know, you know, the roots of all our
actions are in desir..., desires. You know. You know. So, you know, you know,
you know, you know, because we, the, as it is said, thought is the ancestor to
the deeds. The thought is the seed of the deed. So, you know, you know, what we
have to do is, if, we have to change our thoughts if we want to change our
actions. So, the, if we want to change our actions. And we want to change our
thoughts. But our, conversely, you know, you know, what happens is, if we do
certain actions, they affect our thoughts, also. So, in that sense, the roots.
So, roots are the conceptions that we have. You know. Which make us act in
particular ways. They also change. So, they also go upwards. And they also go
downwards. So, we go by our karma upwards and downwards. As per our good and bad
karma. That is of course the reaction that we get. The other reaction is also
that, our own inner conceptions change based on how we act. You know. Sometimes,
we act positively. Sometimes, we act negatively. And accordingly, our, our, we
also go up and down. So:

        adhaś ca mūlāny anusantatāni
        karmānubandhīni manuṣya-loke

"karmānubandhīni". Bou..., that person becomes bound by "karma". "manuṣya-loke".
"manuṣya-loke" is in material existence. So, you know, sorry. In human
existence. "manuṣya-loke". "karmānubandhīni". "ānubandhīni" means becomes bound.
So, "karmānubandhīni manuṣya-loke". When Krishna practice..., you know, when
Krishna is talking about "manuṣya-loke", He is referring to especially the
"martya-lokaṁ" where we human beings are present. You know. All living beings
are ultimately under the jurisdiction of the Supreme Lord. But the specific laws
that we call as a law of karma, do not apply in the same way to all species. So,
you know, the principle of cosmic accountability, the principle of we being
conscious agents is there who are responsible for our actions is there even in
the higher planets. You know. You know. But the specifics of the law of karma,
the way they apply to us, they do not apply in that way to, you know, people or,
or other species. That is why generally it is said that if one goes to heavens,
from heavens, one enjoys. And then, one comes back. So, if one goes to the
hells, there, one exhausts one's, you know, karmic reactions in terms of
sufferings. And then, one comes back up. But, you know, the future karma is
created in the human form. In the earthly planetary system. That devatas also
responsible for the reactions. And if they, they offend sages. Or they grieve,
do grievously wrong activities, then they also held responsible. But they have
much great, you know, ambit of freedom for action. You know. You know. So, you
know, you know, "karmānubandhīni manuṣya-loke". So, the bondage is created in
"manuṣya-loke". You know. In this way, living beings are bounded, bind, bound in
the world of human society. "manuṣya-loke". Prabhupada translates that as world
of human society. You know. You know. So, what is Krishna talking about over
here? You know. You know. So, Prabhupada writes that, you know, so the, the
lower parts of the tree are the demigods. Whereas, you know, so, lower, sorry,
lower parts of bran..., lower parts of the branches are the lower species.
Animals. Horses. Cows. Dogs. And cats, etc. And:

"on the upper parts are higher forms of living entities: the demigods,
Gandharvas and many other higher species of life."

You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. Then, you know, Prabhupada
talks about the five sense objects.

"The twigs are sound, form, touch, and so on – the sense objects."

And then, Prabhupada concludes by saying:

"This planet of human beings is considered the field of activities."

"karmānubandhīni manuṣya-loke". You know. You know. Now, Krishna says that, do
not get too confused by this. Because it is confusing.

        na rūpam asyeha tathopalabhyate
        nānto na cādir na ca sampratiṣṭhā
        aśvattham enaṁ su-virūḍha-mūlam
        asaṅga-śastreṇa dṛḍhena chittvā

        tataḥ padaṁ tat parimārgitavyaṁ
        yasmin gatā na nivartanti bhūyaḥ
        tam eva cādyaṁ puruṣaṁ prapadye
        yataḥ pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī

You know. So, "na rūpam asyeha". That the form is this tree, you know,
"tathopalabhyate". "asya". "iha". "asya" means of this tree. "iha" is in this
world. So, what, in this world, we cannot understand "upalabhyate".
"upalabhyate" is to be perceived. We cannot really understand the form of this
tree. Why? You know. It is so vast. It is so complex that, you know, "nānto na
cādir na ca sampratiṣṭhā". Where is its beginning? Where its is ending? Where is
its foundation? Just cannot be understood. Krishna has talked. Arjuna has
talked something similarly, you know, in terms of the "virata-rupa". You know.
The "viśva-rūpa" which was displayed in the 11th Chapter. And Krishna has said,
you know, "nāntaṁ na madhyaṁ na punas tavādiṁ". That I do not know my dear
Lo..., you know, "vi...", "viśva-rūpa". My dear Lord. Where is Your beginning?
Where is Your middle? And where is Your end? So, like that, "nānto na cādir na
ca sampratiṣṭhā". You know. Then, you know, you know, "aśvattham enaṁ
su-virūḍha-mūlam". So, this "aśvattham" is there. You know. You know. So, again,
as we have discussed earlier, in this material world, the important thing is not
to figure out, figure it out. The important thing is to get out. Do not try to
figure it out. Get out. That is what Krishna says. Do not try to figure out the
whole thing. It is, "na", "na rūp...", "na". "upalabhyate". It is not, not very
easy to perceive it. But, you know, what we can do is, we understand the basic
principle that we are bound here by our attachments. And that is what He says,
"su-virūḍha-mūlam". "mūlam" is the roots. "su-virūḍha". Their, it is very
strongly rooted. You know. You know. Our attachments to this material world are
deep-rooted. And therefore, what do we have to do? "asaṅga-śastreṇa dṛḍhena
chittvā". "asaṅga-śastreṇa". By, you know, the weapon of detachment, what do we
have to do? "dṛḍhena". You know. You know. So, detachment. And determination.
You know. "chittvā". "chittvā" means to cut down. We have to cut down this tree
with the weapon of detachment. "asaṅga-śastreṇa dṛḍhena chittvā". You know. You
know. So, "śastreṇa" is weapon. What is the weapon that we normally use for
breaking down a tree? It is, you know, you know, so, axe. So, we could say, the
axe of detachment. So, you know, "asaṅga" is the exact opposite of "saṅga".
Krishna has used the word, "saṅga", you know, several times. Especially in 13.22
in the bija vakhya. You know.

        kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya
        sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

So, you know, the bondage, you know, of the soul in matter, of the "puruṣaṁ" in
"prakṛtiṁ" is because of "guṇa-saṅgaḥ". And the soul has to come out of matter.
Then, what is required? "asaṅga-śastreṇa". And "asaṅga" is not very easy to
develop. Detachment takes time. Therefore, "dṛḍhena". One has to be determined.
Even if I do not become detached today, I will become gradually. Let me just
keep persevering. Let me go on determinedly. And then, eventually, it will
happen. "asaṅga-śastreṇa dṛḍhena chittvā". "dṛḍhena" means with determination.
And then, afterwards, what does one have to do?

        tataḥ padaṁ tat parimārgitavyaṁ
        yasmin gatā na nivartanti bhūyaḥ
        tam eva cādyaṁ puruṣaṁ prapadye
        yataḥ pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī

"yataḥ pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī". So, Krishna is, so, He does not say that, ok,
that, you know, now, you are detached from the material world. Now job over. You
know. No. There are, He says that is only part of the story. The other
remainder, remaining part is "tataḥ padaṁ tat parimārgitavyaṁ". "tataḥ padaṁ".
The destination that one attains thereafter, you know, you know, "yasmin gatā na
nivartanti bhūyaḥ". That that destination one attained, "tataḥ padaṁ". "na
nivartanti bhūyaḥ". One will not come back from that, you know, determined, you
know, that, you know, particular place. And then, what do we have to do after
getting to that place? You know. You know. So, even if one has attained the
place, whi..., from which, one will not come back, that does not mean that
everything is, you know, honkie, honkied, or, you, now, the story is over. And,
you know, happy ending. No. Even after that, we have to go further. What is
that? "tam eva cādyaṁ puruṣaṁ prapadye". There, what does one have to do?
"puruṣaṁ prapadye". Surrender to that person. Now, who is that person? You know.
Krishna is, gives a one line description about that person. "yataḥ pravṛttiḥ
prasṛtā purāṇī". You know. It is a "pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā". That means from whom
this whole "pravṛttiḥ", whole material nature has manifested. So, what, how,
Krishna, you know, you know, you know, is here talking about something
significant. He is explaining the point that actually when we are going from,
you know, you know, going in the mat..., journey of material existence. What
keeps us going is our "saṅga". You know. We discussed how the modes offer the
water by which the tree grows. So, we cannot get, end the tree of material
existence. But we can end our entanglement in material existence. So, just a
prisoner cannot destroy the prison. But a prisoner can end, you know, that one's
own, you know, sentence in prison. By proper behavior. By whatever. Means the
prisoner can, you know, become released from the prison. So, similarly, you
know, the same applies here, also. You know. That "asaṅga-śastreṇa dṛḍhena
chittvā". So, what do we do? We cut off our, you know, attachment to this world.
So, it is very important, you know, we, what are we doing? You know. We are
cutting our attachment. By, by, by detachment, we are cutting off our shackles.
Our, what are we cutting off? What binds us to this world. We are not
necessarily, you know, we are not going to end material existence. You know.
Material existence in and of itself will always remain a place of suffering.
There will be "janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-". Which cannot be changed. But what can
be changed is, you know, with, how much we suffer because of this
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-". The greater the bodily identification, the greater
we will be suffering because of it. And, you know, the lesser the bodily
identification, the lesser we will be suffering. You know. "yasmin gatā na
ni...", so, you know, you know, "tataḥ padaṁ tat parimārgitavyaṁ". So, once we
become detached from material existence, from the, for, from the misleading
varieties of this world. And the beauty. And the quality that comes with it. You
know. That underlies that variety. So, what happens? After that, one moves
forward. And one seeks an eternal destination. This is a very clear, you know,
indication that that supreme that the, the, that the Supreme Person to whom we
have to surrender is not something that we have to be detached from. You know.
You know. That the mayavadi idea is that, ok, you know, you know, use the
concept of an "iṣṭa-deva". "iṣṭa-devat...", "iṣṭa-devatā". Or one's, u..., use
the concept of your own worshipable deity. For the sake of, you know, you know,
you know, getting rid of your entanglement in this world. And moving towards the
spiritual world. You know. You know. And then, so, once we have become, so,
right now, we are attached to forms. Attached to thi..., material things. So,
ok. Then use a deity form. So, get rid of mat..., material attachments. And
eventually, so, become detached from material things. And then, after that,
become detached from, you know, you know, the "iṣṭa-devatā", also. And then, you
merge into the Brahman. So, their idea is to go beyond Bhagavan to Brahman. But
Krishna is saying that "yas...", "asaṅga" is required. Detachment is required.
But after one has bec... become detached. And one has attained a position from
which one will not fall back. That that that is also not the position, so,
perfection. And this is, you know, generally the "paravyoma". The spiritual sky
is the place where it is said once we attain it, we will not fall back. But
Krishna is very clearly telling that that is not going to be enough. After we
attain that, then we have to surrender. You know.

        tam eva cādyaṁ puruṣaṁ prapadye

Surrender to that person. Now, what kind of person is that person? You know. You
know. One, just one significant line, He says, "yasmin", you know, "yataḥ
pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī". That since time immemorial, it has been explained
that it is actually, the mat..., whole material nature is coming through him, is
manifesting through him. "yataḥ pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī". You know. You know.
Srila Prabhupada explains, you know, you know, that, you know:

"The word asaṅga is very important in this connection because the attachment for
sense enjoyment and lording it over the material nature is very strong."

So, it is not easy to become detached. When Prabhupada explains, "yataḥ
pravṛttiḥ". "yataḥ", you know, "pravṛttiḥ", "s...", you know, you know, that how
Krishna is the source of everything. You know. What He has said over here.
"yataḥ pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī". You know. So, what He, what has been mentioned
over here about that Supreme Person. That applies to Krishna. Because Krishna
has said already in 10.8, "ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo". So, same point. "yataḥ
pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī". And "ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo". So, Krishna is
referring to Himself here in the third person. You know. You know. You know. You
know. In third person. That means He is referring to Himself as that "puruṣaṁ"
to whom we have to surrender. We will see that Krishna will refer to Himself in
the first person, also, shortly. So, then, now, Prabhupada makes another twist
over here. Interesting.

"As soon as one surrenders unto Kṛṣṇa, one becomes detached automatically from
this material extension."

What is Krishna saying over here? What is Prabhupada saying over here? Actually,
the point that Prabhupada makes is simple here. The point is that when, you
know, it can, it, it is a, it is a reciprocal process. So, we surrender to
Krishna. And, you know, so, we become detached from this world. And we surrender
to Krishna. Or we surrender to Krishna. And by that, we become detached from the
world. Both are possible. So, one is the gradual process. We struggle, struggle,
struggle to detach ourselves from this world. And when we succeed in detaching
ourselves from this world, then we find out, ok, what is the reality beyond this
world? Then, we come to know about Krishna. And then, we surrender to Krishna.
That is the process which takes, which may take even multiple lifetimes.
"karma-yoga". "a...", "jnana-yoga". "ashtanga-yoga". Then, after that,
"bhakti-yoga". Gradually. "bahūnāṁ janmanām ante", it may take. So, you know,
this is the jnana section. So, Krishna is giving us that process. Yes. Ok.
Analyse that how this material world is false. And after we have become detached
from the falsity of this world, then do not become attracted to the false
pleasures of this world. You know. You know. Do not become attached to the false
pleasures of this world. And then, thereafter, you know, you know, one can turn
towards, you know, you know, Kri..., f..., finding out, what is the, what is the
reality beyond this world? That is a gradual process. But Kri..., Prabhupada,
merciful in the purport, gives us the proc..., devotional service where he says
that, wherever we are, we can just surrender to Krishna. And He will take us, He
will take us beyond everything. So:

        vāsudeve bhagavati
        bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ
        janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ
        jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

So, "vāsudeve bhagavati". That I, if we perform "bhakti" to Lord "vāsudeve",
then by His mercy, detachment and knowledge arise. The knowledge that arise is,
is called the causeless because, you know, you know, that knowledge does not
require any material cause to be assimilated. And that means, it is not that to
understand this knowledge, one has to be super intellectual. Or something like
that. No, one just has to have a receptive heart. And one understands. And
thereby, one moves forward. You know. You know. You know. So, after talking
about, you know, how, surrender to that Supreme Person. So, right n..., that
means, now, what Prabhupada is saying is wherever we are. It is not that we have
to be detached in order to surrender. We just from the beginning wherever we
are. No matter how attached we are. We just start the process of surrender. And
eventually, we will attain perfection. So, now, Krishna will, you know, conclude
this description about the material, you know, existence using the metaphor of
the tree. To, with one verse. Which, you know, elaborates on the process of
surrender.

        nirmāna-mohā jita-saṅga-doṣā
        adhyātma-nityā vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ
        dvandvair vimuktāḥ sukha-duḥkha-saṁjñair
        gacchanty amūḍhāḥ padam avyayaṁ tat

You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know.
"nirmāna-mohā". "nirmāna-mohā". So, "niḥ" means without. Without prestige.
"māna". And "mohāḥ". Without illusion. "nirmāna-mohā jita-saṅga-doṣā". Having
conquered, you know, "doṣāḥ". You know. You know. Faults. "jita-saṅga-doṣā".
Then, "adhyātma". "nityāḥ". You know. You know. In spiritual knowledge, one is
situated in eternity. "vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ". You know. "vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ" means given
up lust. Prabhupada writes "vinivṛtta" is disassociated. You know. Di..., you
know, disassociated. You know. That means, you know, the word, you know, you
know, we have seen the word "vṛtti". "vṛtti" means in..., inclination. "nivṛtti"
means going against one's inclination. Giving up. In the Vedic, you know, in the
traditional Vedic conception, there are two paths. There is the
"pravṛtti-mārga". And there is the "nivṛtti-mārga". You know. so,
"pravṛtti-mārga" is the one of, is the path of attachment. And "nivṛtti-mārga"
is the path of detachment. So, it is roughly, can be equated with karma-kanda.
And, you know, you know, you know, karma-sannyasa. You know. Giving up activity.
And practicing jnana-yoga. Or basically practicing, you know, path of
transcendence. Where is, dis..., disengaging oneself from this world. So,
"pravṛttiḥ" and "nivṛtti". Tho..., these are there. But beyond "pravṛttiḥ" and
"nivṛtti", you know, is bhakti. So, bhakti involves being in the world. But, you
know, fixing the heart on an object that is beyond this world.
"vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ". So, here, you know, "vinivṛ...", you know, what we have to
do, we do not have to renounce the world. But we do have to renounce the desire
to enjoy the world. In fact, it is not that we have, now, it, we, the world is
just, "nivṛtti" is also used to, you know, refer to retirement. "nivṛtti". You
know. That person gets retired. Then, the person says, got "nivṛtti". You know.
Not retired on so and so date. Or what, at so and so age. Or whatever. So,
"vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ" refers to, you know, becoming detached from, you know, yyou
know, the material, you know, de..., desires. Especially the desire for kama.
The desire for sensual enjoyment. Why "vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ"? Because it is the
desire for material enjoyment. That binds the soul.

        ... prakṛti-stho hi
        bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān

We discussed in 13.22, how, why is the soul pre..., situated? "prakṛti-stho hi".
Because "bhuṅkte". Desire to enjoy. Just like a person watching a movie. And
then, once the person starts watching the movie, all the emotions of the movie
start coming upon that person. Anger. Fear. You know. You know. You know. You
know. Terror. Horr..., you know, joy. Whatever. You know. You know. You know.
Emotions are there. They will all come about. You know. But when one is no
longer desiring to watch the TV, then those things will not come out. So, as
long as we want to enjoy material existence, so many of these material emotions
overwhelm us. But "chittvā". "saṅga-". So, "vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ". We give up our
entanglement with material desires, then we become deatched. "dvandvair vimuktāḥ
sukha-duḥkha-saṁjñair". "dvandvair vimuktāḥ". You know. So, one becomes detached
from the dualities. "vimuktāḥ sukha-duḥkha-saṁjñair". That means one stays
equipoised amidst happiness and distress. And the person, who can do this,
"gacchanty amūḍhāḥ padam avyayaṁ tat". You know. Such a person is "amūḍhāḥ".
Such a person is unbewildered. You know. You know. You know. That person is
well-situated. Is not caught up in the material energy. Is "mūḍh...", mater...,
material energy makes us "mūḍhāḥ". But the person, who is, is situated, having
this consciousness, is "amūḍhāḥ". And that person "padam avyayaṁ tat". You know.
You know. That person will attain the eternal destination. "padam avyayaṁ tat".
You know. You know. You know. You know. So, what is this "padam avyayaṁ"? You
know. You know. The "padam avyayaṁ" cre..., has been described earlier, you
know, you know, you know, as the impersonal..., perishable destination. That is,
will be mentioned in the couple of verses later, also. As Krishna's personal
abode. You know. You know. Krishna has ref..., has referred to this "padam
avyayaṁ" earlier in the Eighth Chapter. There were several places, it has been
referred to. But in the Eighth Chapter, it is referred to as in 2-3 verses.
8.21, 22, 23. It is referred to as:

        avyakto ’kṣara ity uktas
        tam āhuḥ paramāṁ gatim
        yaṁ prāpya na nivartante
        tad dhāma paramaṁ mama        

"tad dhāma paramaṁ mama". That is My abode. What is the nature of that abode?

        avyakto ’kṣara ity uktas
        tam āhuḥ paramāṁ gatim

This is supreme destination. It is unmanifested. It is, you know, it is
imperishable. "avyakto ’kṣara". "avyakto ’kṣara ity uktas". You know. You know.
You know. You know. So, that, you know, supreme abode can be attained by
surrender. You know. You know. So, this world is a, you know, this verse is an
elaboration of the previous verse. Wherein the previous verse, it was stated
that, you know, you know, you know, "tam eva cādyaṁ puruṣaṁ prapadye". One has
to do "prapadye". One has to surrender to that Absolute Truth. So, how that
surrender is to be done is explained in this verse. Now, you know, you know, you
know, "nirmāna-mohā". Now, Prabhupada explains each of these things in his
purport. First, he said it

"The surrendering process is described here very nicely. The first qualification
is that one should not be deluded by pride."

You know. "nirmāna". Why "nirmāna"? You know. You know. Because, you know, one
recognises that, you know, actually, I am being kicked by material nature. You
know, you know. Material nature is making me dance like a puppet. This, so, I, I
think I can do this. I can do that. But actually, I am so fragile. I am so
powerless. You know. I am, I am just being made to move like a leaf tossed, you
know, in the waves of material nature. So, therefore, I have to do, go beyond
these waves. Beyond the waves of material nature. And that happens when I get a
shelt..., anchor that is a, beyond the reach of these waves. That anchor is the
Supreme Lord. So, you know, we need to be strong enough to admit that we are not
strong enough. We need to be strong enough to admit that we are not strong
enough. Many people think that str..., being strong enough means, being strong
means, ne..., never admitting any weakness. Yes. No problem at all. I just stay
calm. I stay, you know, I will put on a profile. Unflappable profile. As if
nothing can disturb me. You know. So, yes. In some services, in some
professions, even one can put on a face like that. If that is required. But the
point is we cannot stay artificially. We cannot say artificially, you know, you
know, you know, you know, we can put a mask for, of peacefulness for some time.
But unless there is some shelter within, that mask cannot stay for long. The
mask will fall off in the face of the adversities of this world. So, for the
conditioned soul, actually, to, you know, to admit that I am weak is very
difficult. You know. For the conditioned soul think, to imagine that, yes, I
alone can do whatever needs to be done. That is what the conditioned soul
normally thinks about. So, I, I, so, I am great. I am supreme. I am this. I am
that. So, that sort of isolated, you know, self-contemplation, whereas there
has been, where that circum..., temp..., contemplation is not supervised by
a, you know, by a, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, by a
responsible guide. It can lead a lot of problems. So, therefore, what is
required is, you know, the, now, we do, everybody needs some level of
self-confidence. So, we all need, you know, that bhakti gives us the
self-confidence. By telling us about the real self. And then, by pra..., giving
us the confidence that this soul, self has a part of Krishna, is filled with
divine potential. And not only that is the self filled with divine potential.
But the self is also loved by Krishna. And Krishna's omnipotence is also
available for a devotee. So, a devotee does not lack self-confidence. You know.
The self-confidence is important for a devotee. And the devotee has its
self-confidence. But that self-confidence is based on an understanding of the
self. And, you know, that understanding, once it is there, then the
self-confidence is fine. You know. In fact, Prabhupada must have had a lot of
self-confidence. You know. You know. We may say that his confidence is in
Krishna. That, you know, he says Krishna is going to, Krishna is going to share,
Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's prophecy is going to be fulfilled. Yes. That is
going to be fulfilled. But that I have, I, that I might be the instrument for
fulfilling that. That conviction, that courage of conviction, later on, that
can, once the prophecy is successful. And there are, there are disciples from
all over the world. IT may think that Prabhupada is just sitting on a high
asana. And, and en..., enjoying life. You know. Prabhupada was never enjoying
life. He was sleeping only very few hours every day. He was working ha..., so
hard until the end. So, Prabhupada himself, Prabhupada's life himself is an
example of "prapadye". This surrender. So, you know, "nirmāna-mohā". We see,
Prabhupada in his "Markine Bhagavata-Dharma". In the songs that he wrote on the,
you know, Jaladuta. He is himself so humble. He is saying:

"Signed—the most unfortunate, insignificant beggar"
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami,"

So, Prabhupada is feeling himself "unfortunate, insignificant". But Prabh...,
still, Prabhupada feels that no. I want to, you know, give the message of Lord
Krishna to these people. And therefore, Krishna, make my words understandable to
them. Make me dance according to their tune. Please manifest as the Shabda
Brahman. And, you know, participate in the, you know, in the revival of the
spiritual happiness. In the revival of our awareness of our spiritual identity.
And in the reconnection of our heart with Krishna. With, with, sha..., with the
reconnection becomes the source of unlimited happiness. So, for that, "nirmāna"
is required. As long as I think that I am strong enough. I can deal with all my
problems. I can deal with my anarthas. I can tackle this. I can tackle that.
Then, what happens? "nirmāna". One cannot really be there to help each other.
One cannot be, really be there to seek help of anyone. What to speak of Krishna?
So, humility is important. "nirmāna-mohā". And "jita-saṅga-doṣā". You know. You
know. So, "mohā" is illusion. Here, the word "mohā" is not used specifically in
terms of tamasic "mohā". As it was used in the 14th Chapter.

        prakāśaṁ ca pravṛttiṁ ca
        moham eva ca pāṇḍava

There, the word "moham" was used specifically to refer to the illusions created
by "tama guṇāḥ". But here, "mohā" is general. You know. Thinking that I am the
body. Thinking that bodily things are related with me. And, you know, they are
mine. In the sense that, you know, I am the, not just the caretaker. But the
proprietor of those things. This is all illusion. So, "nirm...", one has to be
free from within. "nirmāna-mohā jita-saṅga-doṣā". The modes create, you know,
bonda..., you know, create, you know, dualities. And those dualities become
false which bind us in material existence. But "jita-saṅga-doṣā". One is freed
from that. Then, "adhyātma-nityā vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ". One stays always in spiritual
consciousness. And one stays free from lust. "vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ". Then, "dvandvair
vimuktāḥ sukha-duḥkha-saṁjñair". "dvandvair vimuktāḥ" is that one stays free
from dualities. And, you know, such a person can attain, you know, the ultimate,
you know, perfection of life. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada writes, you
know:

"One has to cultivate knowledge of what is actually his own and what is actually
not his own."

So, it is important, Prabhupada acknowledges that there is something that is our
own, also. What is our own? Actually, our, you know, you know, our spiritual
advancement. Our bhakti. Our connection with Krishna is our own. You know. You
know. Bhaktivinoda Thakur says, "ām...":

        āmi to’ tomāra,  tumi to’ āmāra,
        ki kāja apara dhane

Krishna, I am yours. And you are mine. What other wealth, you know, do I want?
So, you know, we have a connection with Krishna. And our "Mamatva". Or "mamatā".
Our affection. Our sense of possessive. possessiveness. Rather than being
rejected as rebellious. And as illegal. You know. Actually, Krishna, you know,
bhakti, dovetails it by our, our increases as to see, to harmonise it with
Krishna's supreme understanding. So, when we do that, by supreme proprietorship.
So, you know, you know, you know, Krishna Himself becomes a property of His
devotees. So, that is, that connection with Krishna which we have right now,
that is our most precious property. All the other wealth will come and go. But
this wealth if we maintain throughout our life, then we will attain eternal
existence. By the, you know, power, by the grace of this wealth. By the grace of
Krishna come, you know, co..., of Krishna, that will come when we hold unto this
wealth properly. Throughout our lives. Sincerely. So, this is the process of
surrender. The "vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ" has a significant word here. Retire. As a
nature, retired. Come. And "vi...", "nivṛtta" is requirement. "vinivṛ...",
"vinivṛtta" is totally retired. That means no chance of coming back.
"vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ". "vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ". Completely retired from material
existence. "dvandvair vimuktāḥ sukha-duḥkha-saṁjñair". So, you know, with the,
when we talk about retirement, you know, f..., of lust, what is it based on? You
know. We become lusty because we see, oh, this form is attractive. This form is
not all that attractive. That form is very attractive. So, all this is duality.
And this duality is caused by the hope of pleasure. And the fear of failu...,
you know, fear of misery. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
we have to be, we have to convince ourselves that I am done with lust now. That,
you know, lust can never make me happy. Lust is worse than my worst enemy.
Especially, lust makes me act in anti-spri..., anti-devotional, anti-spiritual,
you know, ways. So, therefore, once I understand this, "vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ". I am
done with lust. Nothing doing. Nothing doing. You know. You know. The Vedic
culture does not encourage divorce. But actually, it does encourage divorce of
the soul from matter. You know. That is a divorce which is essential for our
happiness. Divorce the, the band..., bondage of the soul to matter. Tuck. Rip it
apart. And that will lead to supreme liberation. So, now, Krishna then start
talking about Himself in the first person. So:

        na tad bhāsayate sūryo
        na śaśā...

You know:

        na tad bhāsayate sūryo
        na śaśāṅko na pāvakaḥ
        yad gatvā na nivartante
        tad dhāma paramaṁ mama

"na tad bhāsayate sūryo". That that abode. Which is that abode? You know. Which
has talked about in the previous verse. B..., that, that, by that, this will be
attained by surrender. So, that will not be illumined by the sun. "na śaśāṅko na
pāvakaḥ". It is not illumined by the moon. Or by the fire. "yad gatvā na
nivartante". You know. That having gone there, one does not return back. Why?
"tad dhāma paramaṁ mama". You know. That is My supreme abode. So, Krishna is
telling, clea..., you know, referring to Himself in the first person over here.
In the "Purushottama Yoga". When He is focusing on the material world. He is
talking about Himself in the third person. But when He focuses on Himself,
focuses on that which is beyond this world. Then, He talks about Himself in the
first person. So, He says, that is My abode. So, wha..., what, what is this
indicating? You know. That it is not illumined by all these things. You know.
You know. It indicates that this abode is self-luminous. It does not depend on
anything for its illumination. Now, it is not that the sun, moon and the, and
fire are not there. Or, you know, they are there in the spiritual world. But
they are not needed. In this world, without those things, there will be
darkness. And darkness will lead to confusion and helplessness. You know. But in
the spiritual world, there is no darkness. In the spiritual world, there is, so,
everything is self-luminous. So, but when the moo..., moon is there in the sky
for the s..., at, say, at the time of Sharad Purnima. That is simply to enhance
the sweetness of the rasa. That is to, you know, co..., you know, you know, to
enrich the background for the pastime. To make the setting of the pastime
mo..., more, you know, whole..., wholesome. More, you know, you know, appealing.
And more enriching for that pastime. So, it is simply the setting. You know. So,
the, they are not needed for illumination. Sun, moon may be there. They are not
needed for illumination. In this world, unlike that they are needed. Now,
Prabhupada, interestingly, "pāvakaḥ", translates it, also, not just as fire. But
fire or, and electricity. Now, somebody may wonder, you know, there is no
electricity mentioned. How can, Prabhupada added electricity over here? So, in
the Isopanishad, we discussed in one of the purports, from the, I think,
"Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad". There is a similar word.

        na tad bhāsayate sūryo
        na śaśāṅko na pāvakaḥ

And there, the word "vidita" is also there. "vidita" is electricity. So, you
know, you know, that is also mentioned elsewhere in the Upanishad. So, in that
sense, it is not wrong. But, you know, you know, you know, you know, the point
of this ver..., you know, Prabhupada's translation is, you know, you know, you
know, to make it clear that to convey the point. The point is that this is
self-luminous. And because it is self-luminous. So, therefore, you know, you
know, it does not need any other source of illu..., illumination. So, that is
the point. That is, the point is not to, you know, you know, you know, h..., you
know, split hair over details. So, Krishna may say, oh, there is no fire over
there. But maybe, matchstick is there. Maybe, some other source of light is
there. No. We can, if we want to just make a comprehensive, exhaustive list of
all the sources of light. Then, that can itself be a long, long, long list.
Krishna is not making a comprehensive listing of all the sources of light. And
saying that, no, this is not that. This is not that. This is not this. This is
not that. That is not that. That is not the point. Krishna is giving a generic,
you know, you know, giving a gene..., you know, you know, you know, a generic
list of the, you know, there is gene..., gene..., Krishna is making a generic
statement giving the major sources of light. And saying that they are not needed
in the spiritual world. So, in the Vedic times, electricity might not have been
so common. You know. People, you know, when they wanted, they could use mantras,
also, to ill..., create luminosity. You know. You know. But in general, today,
when people talk about light, you know, most people do not think about the sun
first. Most people think of the power switch first. You know. Light means power
switch. That it does not necessarily mean the sun. So, electricity, of course,
ultimately, is nothing, but recycled sunlight. Without sunlight, we, none of our
power plants, with, there is, you know, even if the, you know, not just
solar power plants. But hydro power plants. Or thermal power plants. None of
them could have existed if the sun was not there. So, you know, you know, you
know, the power chord, the electricity is ultimately recycled solar, sol...,
sol..., solar energy. You know. So, in that sense, also, the, it is not wrong.
You know. The, it is inclusive. You know. So, this is, it, this is not an
exhaustive list. This is a representative list. That is inclusive of other
things, also. But along with that, the important is that whenever a, you know,
whenever a translation of an ancient book is done, you know, then the, in, there
are two aspects to balance. One is precision. And the other is relevance.
Precision means, ok, what does it literally, precisely, accurately, technically
mean? And relevance is, how does that have any bearing on the val..., value of
the re..., current readers? How does it add value to their lives? How does it
benefit them? So, you know, you know, that is important to recognise. The, you
know, the, you know, you know, you know, relevance part. So, generally speaking,
precision and relevance, both are important. You know. So, now, for, Srila
Prabhupada in case, some cases, you know, he tells more towards relevance than
precision. Because he has to make sure that, as Prabhupada would say that, you
know, people have no inclination to read books. And I want to make sure that in
every page, they get the essential message of the, of Krishna Consciousness. So,
that is why he, he is, you know, tends to, you know, make sure that the basic
points get adequate coverage in his purports. Get the fundamental, essential
lessons of Krishna Consciousness. When they get, you know, deep when they get,
you know, re..., repeatedly stressed in his purports. And then, repeatedly
hammered into our consciousness. Then, they will get deep-rooted fruit over
there. So, to con..., to focus on the side of relevance, what Prabhupada does
over here is, he includes electricity. Because the point is, to con..., the,
the, it is not a precise matter. What all is there in the list. So, that is not
the point. The point of the verse is to say that there is no, you know, need for
any external source of illumination. And that is well-conveyed by saying that,
you know, no, by electricity is also not required. So, you know, and now, you
know, you know, you know, this can also be taken slightly in a symbolic sense.
That actually, "na tad bhāsayate sūryo". The sun is associated with fire. Now,
fire is associated with speech. Sorry. You know. The sun is, sun gives
illumination. By which we see forms. We are then able to see things. So, "na tad
bhāsayate sūryo" means that which cannot be perceived with the eye. "na
śaśāṅko". The moon is associated with the mind. That which cannot conceived by
the mind. "na pāvakaḥ". Now, fire. Fire is associated with fiery speech. That
which cannot be described by the words. So, that which is, you know, you know,
you know, invisible. That which is in..., you know, indescribable. And that
which is inconceivable. That. Such is My abode. And that is the, what is the
characteristic? Once one goes there, one does not come back from that abode. And
then, Prabhupada writes, it, that, you know, you know, you know:

"One should be captivated by this information."

What is this inormation in the spiritual world? You know. Just like a person,
who hears about, you know, you know, a better place. The pla..., and then,
often, that captivates a person. You know. One of the reasons why, say, many
people, say, from India go to America, is because they hear something about
America. And they fr..., oh, it is a land of plenty. And prosperity. And
freedom. And so many things. And that is what, that is what attracts them to go
there. So, when we hear of something attractive, if we, i..., i..., we hear it
seriously. Then, it develops our attraction. Desire for us to go there. So, same
way, when we hear of the spiritual world, actually, it should develop. We, oh,
naturally, had attraction. Oh, is this such a place? Where one act, in, even
if I go to America, it is not that my life will be problem free. But actually,
if I surrender to Krishna. If I attain His spiritual world. Then, that is fine,
you know, once I go there, then no coming back to this miserable material world.
Therefore, you know, you know, that is how one should, you know, go beyond. And
then, Prabhupada writes, you know as far as, you know, detachment is concerned,
you know, you know:

"One cannot become detached from the attraction of the material world simply by
dressing himself in saffron cloth. He must become attached to the devotional
service of the Lord."

You know. You know. And:

"Therefore one should take it very seriously that devotional service"

You know:

"is the only way to get out of this false representation of the real tree."

So, only way out. So, we, important point is, it is not an, spiritual
advancement is not a matter of dress. It is a matter of the heart. The dress
may, can help us to develop, you know, the right disposition of the heart. But,
you know, you know, ultimately, it is a matter of the heart. So, you know, what
we have to do is, you know, you know, the, you know, you know, important thing
is to, you know, you know, to, you know, become attached to devotional service.
Even when a devotee takes sannyasa. The purpose of that is to become more
attached to devotional service.

        etāṁ sa āsthāya parātma-niṣṭhām

You know. As Chaitanya Mahaprabhu quoted the vrata of the "Avantī brāhmaṇa". He
says that, I will cross over the insurmountable material existence by holding
on. Determinedly to the devotional service of the Lord. So, the more we become
attached to Krishna, the more we will become liberated from the material world.
And ultimately, we will attain the spiritual world. And that is the ultimate
perfection of life.

Thank you very much. Hare KRishna. 
