Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vaExYycsRUo
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. You
know. We are now in the part of the Bhagavad Gita which will take us from
karma-yoga through jnana-yoga to bhakti. So, in the previous class, we had
discussed about varnashram. And now, as we will move from how varnashram will,
you know, in the, after practicing ""bhagavad arpit" bhakti-yoga, one can move,
"bha...", "bhagavad arpit karma" yoga. That means doing karma-yoga. And
"sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya". Doing it for the pleasure of the Supreme Lord, one
moves onwards to bhakti. So, this is, Krishna will talk about, how one will move
towards bhakti through the process of jnana. So, let us look at this, so, 49 to
53 describe jnana in brief. And then, 54 describes how jnana leads to bhakti.
You know. You know. And then, 55 explains how, you know, you know, pure bhakti.
Para bhakti takes us to Krishna. You know. So, 18.49:

        asakta-buddhiḥ sarvatra
        jitātmā vigata-spṛhaḥ
        naiṣkarmya-siddhiṁ paramāṁ
        sannyāsenādhigacchati

So, "asakta-buddhiḥ sarvatra". You know. "asakta-buddhiḥ". That means, "asakta"
is attached. "asakta" is detached. So, with detached intelligence.
"asakta-buddhiḥ sarvatra". You know. You know. "sarvatra" means all living
beings. "jitātmā vigata-spṛhaḥ". "jitātmā" is the soul who has conquered
material existence. "jitātmā", you know, it is, you know, having conq...,
sorry, it was not conquered material existence. "jitātmā". So, here, "ātmā"
refers to the mind. So, one who has conquered the mind. "vigata-spṛhaḥ".
"vigata-spṛhaḥ" is one who is detached. Free from material desires.
"naiṣkarmya-siddhiṁ paramāṁ". By the practice of "naiṣkarmya". "siddhiṁ
paramāṁ". The supreme destination. The perfection. "sannyāsenādhigacchati". How
can, through "sannyāsa", "adhigacchati", one can attain. So, essentially,
Krishna is talking here about, He, He is talking about the detachment in three
different ways. First, He says "asakta-buddhiḥ". "jitātmā". And then,
"vigata-spṛhaḥ". So, through all this, He is talking about the detachment. Then,
that is the same point emphasis "sannyāsenādhigacchati". And "naiṣkarmya". So,
until now, in the, previously, Krishna was talking about "sva-karma". He was
talking about "sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya". You know. By practice of one's karma,
worship the transcendental Lord. But here, it, He takes us to another level.
Where He talks about "naiṣkarmya". You know. You know. You know. "naiṣkarmya"
means, He says that, one should know. One does not need to practice karma over
here. One gives up karma. One acts without, one acts, one gives up action. And
lives in not just renou..., the spirit of renunciation while doing action. But
actually, one renounces action entirely. So, this is also a valid path. And that
is talked about in the Bhagavad Gita at this level. In 18.49. "asakta-buddhiḥ
sarvatra". So, the idea is that, varnashram, you know, creates a platform for
transcendence. Varnashram in and of itself is not always transcendental. You
know. Varnashram, if it is done for the practice of, it is done for the purpose
of satisfying Lord Vishnu as is mentioned in the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". And in the
"Vishnu Purana". Other places. Especially, the, you know, scriptures that focus
on devotion. Therein, it talks about how, you know, you know, you know:

        ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā
        varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ
        svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya
        saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

The purpose of varnashram is "hari-toṣaṇam". Satisfaction of Lord Hari. And
similarly, the so..., purpose of varnashram is, you know:

	varṇāśramācāravatā
	puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān
	viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā
	nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam

"nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam". There is no other "kāraṇam". Apart from that, apart
from what? "varṇāśra...", "puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān", "viṣṇur ārādhyate". The
"puruṣa", the "paraḥ puruṣa" who is Vishnu. He, apart from his worship, there is
no other purpose of "varṇāśrama". You know. You know. So, that is, you know, so,
that means if we consider the three levels. There is karma-yoga. One practices
karma-yoga. That is, if one does it for the satisfaction of Lord Vishnu, then
that is, that can lead one directly to devotional service. When that, you know,
you know, the alternative way is that one practices karma-yoga. Then, one
renounces the world. Pratices jnana-yoga. And then, after jnana-yoga, througha
the practice of jnana-yoga, one will eventually come to the practice of bhakti.
That is what we will be discussing now. You know. Hereafter. You know. You know.
So, the practice of "varṇāśrama" is supportive to the practice of bhakti.
"varṇāśrama" itself is not bhakti. And "varṇāśrama" should never be used to, you
know, you know, beat down or suppress the principles of bhakti. Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu makes it very clear when he subordinates the "varṇāśrama" identity to
the Vaishnava identity. There is the famous verse which he would recite,
especially, when he was in front of Lord Jagannath, in the Jagannath Ratha
Yatra:

        nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir nāpi vaiśyo na śūdro
        nāhaṁ varṇī na ca gṛha-patir no vanastho yatir vā

So, he is, you know, disidentifying himself. Not misindetifying. Disidentifying,
Means, he, not at, no, I do notidentify myself with this. With what? With any
"varṇā". Or with any "āśrama". With anything associated with "varṇāśrama". And
he says, then, who am I?

        kintu prodyan-nikhila-paramānanda-pūrnāmṛtābdher
        gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ

"gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor". That that Lord, who is the master of the gopis,
you know, I, I am the servant of the servant of the servant. So, here, Lord
Chaitanya, he rejects "varṇāśrama" for the sake, the "varṇāśrama" identity. For
the sake of Vaishnava identity. The Vaishnava identity, we are the servant of
the servant of the servant of Krishna. You know. So, you know, var...,
"varṇāśrama", we accept the, you know, social organisation of "varṇāśrama". But
not the philosophy of "varṇāśrama". What do we mean by the philosophy of
"varṇāśrama"? The philosophy is that, one progresses from a low, lower "varṇā"
towards a higher "varṇā". Like I discussed earlier. From "brāhmaṇ...",
"kṣat...", from "śūdra" to "vaiśya". To, you know, "kṣatriya" to "brāhmaṇa". And
eventually, to moksha. That is the philosophy. So, that is, when, you know, one
is pra..., following the gradual path. But if one practices bhakti, then what
leads to spiritual advancement is not the gradual elevation that happens through
"varṇāśrama". What leads to spiritual advancement is the potency of bhakti
itself. You know. You know. So, for that potency of bhakti to work, what we
primarily need is purification. And that purification happens through, you
know, the, you know, you know, actually, we do not need purification. The
practice of bhakti itself leads to purification. And the, what we need is the
desire to serve Krishna. The association of devotees. Wherein that desire to
serve Krishna is stimulated within us. And then, anybody can become elevated.
So, Krishna will talk about this elevating potency of bhakti. Wherein it can
elevate anyone from any level. In 18.57. So, right now, He is talking about the
gradual process. The gradual process means, one moves from, you know, the lower
mode, you know, lower yo..., gu..., yoga, you know, from karma-yoga to
jnana-yoga. So, let us look at, you know, this. Now, the next verse will give
jnana sadhana. You know. You know. So, yes. You know.

        siddhiṁ prāpto yathā brahma
        tathāpnoti nibodha me
        samāsenaiva kaunteya
        niṣṭhā jñānasya yā parā

"siddhiṁ prāpto yathā brahma". You know. "siddhiṁ prāpto". How one can attain
perfection. "brahma". "brahma" is a generic name referenceable, referring to the
Absolute Truth. "tathāpnoti nibodha me". You know. So, "nibodha me". You know.
You know. You know. Try to understand. "bodha" means to understand. So,
"nibodha". "āpnoti". How that "brahma" can be attained. Please understand from
Me. "samāsenaiva kaunteya". In summary, I will tell it to you. "samāsa". "niṣṭhā
jñānasya yā parā". You know. So, "jñānasya yā parā". By the process of "jñāna",
one can gradually raise to the, to raise to the transcendental level. You know.
You know. So, let us, so, this is the three verses which talk about, you know,
jnana sadhana. Krishna is giving a prelude in the previous two verses. And in
this verse, He is, starts talking about the actual process.

        buddhyā viśuddhayā yukto
        dhṛtyātmānaṁ niyamya ca
        śabdādīn viṣayāṁs tyaktvā
        rāga-dveṣau vyudasya ca

        vivikta-sevī laghv-āśī
        yata-vāk-kāya-mānasaḥ
        dhyāna-yoga-paro nityaṁ
        vairāgyaṁ samupāśritaḥ

        ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ
        kāmaṁ krodhaṁ parigraham
        vimucya nirmamaḥ śānto
        brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

You know. So, here, Krishna is telling, "buddhyā viśuddhayā yukto". So, one has
intelligence. But one purifies the intelligence. You know. We can have
contaminated intelligence. And we can have pure intelligence. Krishna has
earlier talked about in 3.40 how even the buddhi is a residing place of lust.

        indriyāṇi mano buddhir
        asyādhiṣṭhānam ucyate
        etair vimohayaty eṣa
        jñānam āvṛtya dehinama

So, in 3.40, He has said that, lust is situated in three places. So, those three
places are, you know, the senses. The mind. And the intelligence. And yet,
Krishna is telling in the same section, you know, which, four, three-four,
verses later. In 3.43, you know, as thirt..., three verses later, He says that:

        evaṁ buddheḥ paraṁ buddhvā
        saṁstabhyātmānam ātmanā
        jahi śatruṁ mahā-bāho
        kāma-rūpaṁ durāsadam

So, therefore, with intelligence, you know, you know, know yourself to be
transcendental. And situate yourself on the transcendental platform. And
thereby, conquer lust. "evaṁ buddheḥ paraṁ buddhvā". So, knowing oneself to be
transcendental, what does this mean actually? You know. You know. It essentially
means that one, you know, that means, the buddhi can be a pro..., you know, can
be a residing place of lust. And the buddhi can also be the pla..., ut..., tool
for us to conquer lust. You know. How does, how does it work in two different
ways? It depends on whether the buddhi is pure. Or the buddhi is impure. So, you
know, for example, when people want to have, say, you know, you know, some
illicit affairs. Say, some extramarital affairs. Then, you know, people often
use a lot of intelligence to try do everything secretly. You know. So that
nobody detects. That one can do things discretely. Privately. Whatever. So, now,
that also requires intelligence. Or if that person wants to, say, you know, you
know, enjoy in a way without, some way. Enjoy se..., lust without being
detected. That planning for that. And executing that. That also requires
intelligence. So, intelligence can be used, so, this is how, for fulfilling
one's lusty desires. Or intelligence can be used to recognise the futility of
one's lusty desires. And to go, you know, choose desires beyond those lusty
desires. So, that difference is, is a, that diversit..., that choice is there
for everyone. Whi.., which way a person will go. Down. Or up. You know. You
know. And what determines which way a person will go will, you know, one's, you
know, spirituality. Will be one's, you know, sorry, way, one's basic, you know,
focus on spirituality. Or lack of that focus. So, if one understands through
scripture that, you know, I am essentially spiritual. And it is spiritual level
where I can get real happiness. Then, one will not in..., indulge in lust.
Otherwise, one will indulge in lust. And then, one will use one intelligence to
indulge in lust. And or one will use in..., one's intelligence to go beyond lust.
So, here, you know, if one wants to practice the jna..., proc..., process of,
one wants spiritual elevation, it is a quite "buddhyā viśuddhayā yukto".
"viśuddhayā". The intelligence has to become purified. "dhṛtyātmānaṁ niyamya
ca". So, what does it mean? Purifying the intelligence. "ātmānaṁ niyamya". You
know. One has to be controlled. Self-controlled. How? "dhṛtyātmānaṁ". "dhṛtyā"
is pa..., it, determination. You know. Actually, you know, if we want to achieve
sense-control, determination is important. Because, you know, determina...,
without determination, it is not possible. If we, if we, wejust end up following
other stray desires that keep coming in our mind. And these three, stray desires
will end up making us miserable. So, therefore, "dhṛtyātmānaṁ". "dhṛtyā" is
determination. You know. We fall once. Twice. Thrice. Four times. Does not
matter. I can always rise. And I can eventually win. So, actually, "dhṛtyātmānaṁ
niyamya ca". In our, re..., as we have discussed briefly earlier how in our
confrontation with our lower desires, we will go through four stages. There will
be helpless failure. There will be struggle. And failure. There will be
struggle. And succle..., success. And there will be effortless success. That
means the struggle and helpless failure means, say, if a person comes initially
to spiritual life, that person feels that, you know, you know, you know, giving
up this, no, giving, no meat-eating. No intoxication. No illicit sex. So, all
these things. You know. Better no Krishna Consciousness only. Forget the whole
thing. So, one thing is not possible only. So, that is effo..., you know,
helpless failure. One feels I cannot do it only. But then, after that, there is,
you know, succ..., struggle. And failure. One decides. No. I am not going to get
involved in this. But still, a person succumbs to it. You know. You know. Says
no, but still succumbs. Says no, but succumbs. Struggle. And failure.

Then, after that, there is struggle and success. One decides. Makes resolutions.
And then, one again s..., feels the pull of temptations. And prays to Krishna.
Takes inspiration from scripture. Takes con..., guidance from devotees. And
fights. And survives. That is struggle. And success. And eventually, there is
effortless success. That effortless success comes when we actually become strong
in our spiritual life. And we become situated in the spiritual ta..., you know,
spiritual taste. Then, there is no temptation only. Actually, one goes beyond
the temptation. It is like a devotee habituated practicing Krishna
consciousness. Even if somebody offers meat to that devotee. That devotee is not
attracted. You know. Meat. No. Acts only. There is no temptation only at all in
it. So, that is how we will go through these sto..., four stages. And sometimes,
we may feel that I am not making, no progress at all. I am just, you know, I am
feeling the same temptations again. And again. No matter what I am doing, you
know, you know, actually, am I making progress, although chanting? I am doing so
many things. Still, I seem to be in the same situation month after month. Year
after year. What should I be doing? You know. Actually, the fact is, we are
definitely making progress. Definitely. Step. One step. Two step. Three. We are
making progress. But the essence of making progress is not, you know, is not,
you know, just doing the things that we like to do. But the essence of making
progress is to remember that every mantra that we are chanting. Every, you know,
act of devotional service that has to be, that we are doing is internally
nourishing us. So, sometimes, when an elephant is small. At that time, you know,
the baby elephant is shackled with a, you know, is shackled with a terrible
dis..., you know, with a strong shackle. And then, the shackle is set right to a
pole. And then, the elephant pulls. And pulls. And pulls. And what happens is,
the shackle, you know, just causes torment. And pain for the elephant. You know.
You know. And the elephant struggles like that. And it is a, like starts
bleeding because of pulling. Pulling. And eventually, it gives up. Into, every
time, going to pull. All that I am going to get is pain in my leg. And
therefore, the elephant decides, I will no longer pull. But as it, every day
that eating, eating, eating, it is growing. And eventually, when the elephant is
taken out to the forest, it may be able to even shake and uproot trees. And
carry huge logs. And it has grown up so much that actually it can just pull out
the log. You know. Pull out the log to which it is tied to the chain. But when
that same elephant is just so formidable, you know, in the forest, is brought
back. You know. When the shackles put around it, you know, tuck. This is, you
know, now, I am lost. You know. Now, I am tied. I cannot do anything. So, the
elephant stops trying only. Why? Because there was a past failures. The, and the
past pain that was the, involved in the pre..., you know,  previous efforts, the
elephant thinks, now, I cannot fight. If I fight, I will suffer. So, better, I
do not fight only. And in that way, the elephant decides, elephant decides,
forget it. You know. So, that is unfortunate. That is very unfortunate. So,
avoid this misfortune, what one needs to do is, you know, know that, this is so,
it, one is growing. And becoming stronger.

So, in the past, we may have tried to overcome our bad habits. Our weaknesses
against our anarthas. And we may have found that we just get into so much
torment. You know. So much trouble. So much suffering. That we feel better I do
not get involved in this business, only. Just forget the whole thing. There is
no fighting. And whenever, temptations, I just indulge in it. And then, then go
on with my life. But that is how we stay trapped. But every day, we are
chanting. We are nourishing ourselves spiritually. We are becoming good for...,
bigger. And bigger. So, initially, say, the anartha was this big. And we were
this small. You know. Like a baby. Tuck. We can be beaten by the anartha. But
every day that we are chanting, what is happening is we are growing. Growing.
Growing. Growing. Growing. So, eventually, we began, become bigger than our,
bigger than the anartha. We means our spiritual conviction. Our spiritual
strength. Our stay, our, you know, being situated in the spiritual state. So,
we, eventually, become stro..., bigger and stronger than the anartha. But then,
when we confront the anartha, we still remember. In the past, when we had
succumbed. And because we remember the, in the past when we had succumbed, so,
we again fall back to the same thing. But if we remain strong, then tuck. No
matter how badly we are attacked, no matter how badly we are attacked, we can
still stay strong. And still protect ourselves from maya. You know. You know.
So, what we can do is, there is, confrontation is going to be there. But
gradually, we can win against the confrontation. So, you know, the only way we
will come to the level of effortless success is by going through these
stages of struggle and failure. And struggle and success. So, maybe, advanced
stage in our, some of our, when our battle with anarthas, we, we are at the
stage of effortless failure. Or, or hopeless failure. But we will come to this
level, also, if we are ready to go through these two earlier levels. So, which
that is why here, you know, what is required is "dhṛtyātmānaṁ niyamya ca".
"dhṛtyā". "dhṛtyā" means determination is required. And then, how is that
explain..., expressed?

        śabdādīn viṣayāṁs tyaktvā
        rāga-dveṣau vyudasya ca

"śabdādīn viṣayāṁs tyaktvā". So, this is talking about the stage of
"pratyāhāra". Where one shuts out all the sense objects. You know. You know.
"śabdādīn". "śabda" refers to sound. So, the sound is one of the sense objects.
Now, there is beautiful music. Melodious sounds. Pleasing voices. All this
attracts us. So, we shut it out. "śabdādīn viṣayāṁs tyaktvā". And then,
"rāga-dveṣau vyudasya ca". "vyudasya" means one stays free from "rāga". And
"dveṣau". Putting it aside. And then:

        vivikta-sevī laghv-āśī
        yata-vāk-kāya-mānasaḥ

So, "vivikta-sevī". "vivikta-sevī" means one stays in a secluded place. So, you
know, if, see, that means again, there are three levels. Either one can have
materialistic association. One can stay away from material associatio...,
association. Or one can have devot..., devotee association. So, Krishna has
talked about devotee association in 10.9. Wherein He said:

        mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā
        bodhayantaḥ parasparam
        kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ
        tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca

You know. You know. So, He has talked about how, you know, you know, the devotee
is read..., del..., delights in the sangha of devotees. But here, He is talking
about something else now. "vivikta-sevī laghv-āśī". So, here, He is talking
about the process of "jñāna". In the process of "jñāna", one does not
necessarily delight in, you know, you know, spiritual, in, you know,
materialistic association. But one has not yet developed in, developed the taste
for devotee association. So, then, one stays away. Krishna has talked about
this earlier, also, in the 13th Chapter. When He talked about, you know, you
know, the characteristics of one who is in "jñāna".

        aratir jana-saṁsadi

"vivik...", "vivikta-deśa". And, and He says, talking, "vivikta". One, "aratir
jana-saṁsadi". One stays away, generally, from people. So, "laghv-āśī".
"laghv-āśī" means one eats minimum. "laghu" means minimum. Or less. "āśī" is to
eat. "laghv-āśī" means to eat less. So, actually, you know, when one eats more,
you know, then one's senses become strong. And one f..., gets tempted with, you
know, all the other desires for enjoyment. So, "laghv-āśī" does not necessarily
mean that one has to starve. But, you know, you know, you know, one, it, should
eat. You know. Basically, in the process of "jñāna", one tries to cut off one's
material engagements as much as possible. So, by eating less, one can keep the
senses from becoming too strong. Because the body does not have any extra energy
for sense..., for sense gratification. And thereby, one can focus on higher
spiritual purposes. "yata-vāk-kāya-mānasaḥ". "yata-vāk-kāya-mānasaḥ". So, again,
the three things, these channel faculties. The body. The mind. And the speech.
"yata". One keeps them under control. "dhyāna-yoga-paro nityaṁ". "dhyāna-yoga".
One practices "dhyāna". One does "dhyāna". "yoga-paro nityaṁ". So, "dhyāna-yoga"
together, this can refer to "dhyāna-yoga", also. Or it can, refers to, you know,
"dhyāna". Meditation. So, even if, in the path of "jñāna", one does meditation.
It may not necessarily exactly the same meditation that one does when we
practicing in "dhyāna". You know. The path of "dhyāna-yoga". So, "dhyāna-yoga"
together can be one word. Or they can be two different words. So, one does
"dhyāna". Practices "yoga". "paro nityaṁ". "paro nityaṁ". So, one wants to come
to the, you know, transcendental platform. And "vairāgyaṁ samupāśritaḥ". So,
Krishna is emphasising again, like He is, you know, He talked about "sannyāsa"
in the previous verse. Similarly, "vairāgyaṁ". He is talking this verse. This
is, you know, this whole process is centered on negation. On rejection. Krishna
has not yet talked about the positive connection. Which He will talk about in
18.54 onwards. Here, He is talking about, you know, disconnection from the
material world. So:

        ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ
        kāmaṁ krodhaṁ parigraham
        vimucya nirmamaḥ śānto
        brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

So, the p..., whole end of all this is to come to "brahma-bhūyāya kalpate". To
come to the "brahma" level. And He is giving a list of the mentalities that can
keep us away from the "brahma" platform. "ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ". So, all these
are the mentalities that can keep us away from, from the spiritual platform.
Arrogance. Strong, excess, now "balaṁ darpaṁ". Now, "balaṁ", strength is not,
not necessarily bad. But one has overconfidence in one's strength. And one
relies only on one's strength. And does not take shelter of the highest strength
of God. Then, that creates problem. "darpaṁ". "darpaṁ" is arrogance. You know.
"kāmaṁ krodhaṁ parigraham". "kāmaṁ krodhaṁ". As we have discussed about this
pair of wanting to enjoy. And when I cannot enjoy, then I destroy everything.
You know. So that nobody else can also enjoy. "parigraham". So, Krishna has used
the word "aparigrahaḥ" earlier, you know, especially, in the Sixth Chapter. You
know. You know. So, "parigraham" means possessiveness. You know. "a",
"aparigrahaḥ" means giving up possessiveness. So, these, here, Krisna is talking
about things which we should give up. "vimucya". So, one gives up the possessive
mentality. "nirmamaḥ śānto". And in this way, give out the sense of
proprietorship, one becomes peaceful. And then, "brahma-bhūyāya kalpate". So, we
will see. It is quite a, you know, quite, quite mercy, ma..., you know,
formidable list of attributes to be required. By which, one can come to the
spiritual platform. "brahma-bhūyāya kalpate". By this, one will come to the
"brahma" platform. You know. Once one comes to the brahma platform, one becomes
peaceful over there. "brahma-bhūyāya kalpate". You know. You know. You know. So,
the word that Krishna is using over here is significant. That where has the word
"brahma-bhūyāya kalpate" come earlier? You know. It has come earlier in 14.26.
Where Krishna has talked about, the 14th Chapter was about the three modes. And
then, when He says, Arjuna asks, you know, at the, towards the end of the 14th
Chapter, what is the means by which one can transcend the modes? And there, He
describes in, you know, you know, 14.21, when the question comes up, you know,
how does one transcend? And there, He tells, bhakti-yoga is the means to
transcend.

        māṁ ca yo ’vyabhicāreṇa
        bhakti-yogena sevate
        sa guṇān samatītyaitān
        brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

So, one comes to "brahma-bhūyāya kalpate". One comes to the "brahma" platform by
practicing bhakti. You know. You know. So, by practicing "abhicāreṇa", one can
come to the "brahma" platform. But that, Krishna is not talking about over here.
Krishna is not talking about how by ja..., you know, steady practice of "jñāna",
By disconnection with the material world, by re..., by staying equipoised
towards everything material, one can come to the "brahma" platform. So, here,
that is what Krishna is talking about. And Prabhupada quotes, you know, in the
purport, you know, you know, you know, you know, about how can one come to the
"brahma" platform, he quotes the famous verse 2.70 from the "Bhagavad-gītā":

        āpūryamāṇam acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ
        samudram āpaḥ praviśanti yadvat
        tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarve
        sa śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī

So, this is "sa śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī". That by this, one can attain, you
know, one can attain perfection. You know. You know. You know. "na kāma-kāmī".
That by letting, just as desires flow into water, ocean, but they do not disturb
a person. Similarly, one can go beyond the disturbance of material things by
practicing, you know, by, you know, becoming self-satisfied internally. So, if
one is internally like an ocean, then the flow of desires, which are like
rivers, coming inside, does not disturb one. So, by cultivating, you know, you
know, awareness of one's spiritual identity, which can come through "jñāna". Or
by cultivating, you know, the taste for spiritual devotional happiness that
comes through bhakti, one can become internally like an ocean. And then, one
will not be disturbed. So, Prabhupada is talking about, this is the way to
become de..., you know, to give up of, give up "kāma". That, you know, so, that
was what Krishna has talked about over here. So:

        ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ
        kāmaṁ krodhaṁ parigraham

So, we give up "kāmaṁ krodhaṁ". And then, one comes to the spiritual platform.
You know. So, "brahma-bhūyāya kalpate". By tolerating material desires, one
comes to the spiritual platform. Now, you know, you know, you know, you know,
you know, Krishna will talk about, you know, you know, how after coming to the
"brahma" platform, then one may attain s..., bhakti. This is a very important
verse.

        brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā
        na śocati na kāṅkṣati
        samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu
        mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

So, "brahma-bhūtaḥ". You know. "brahma-bhūyāya" was talked about in the previous
verse. So, there is a continuation from there. "brahma-bhūtaḥ". One is in the
"brahma" platform. That means on a spiritual platform. "prasannātmā". So, now,
soul, the "ātmā" is sat-cit-ananda. So, even when comes to the "brahma"
platform, one experiences an inner peacefulness. "na śocati na kāṅkṣati". One
becomes free from hankering. And lamentation. "samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu". You know.
You know. You know. When one is situated equipoised in other things.
"mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām". You know. "mad-bhaktiṁ labhate". One attains My
bhakti. This is a, for the impersonalist, this is a devastatingly, you know, you
know, irrefutable attack. This verse. For the mayavadis, especially, who have
the idea that bhakti is a tool to mukti. So, they have the idea that, ok, you
con..., we, you, where you visualise some of, some, you know, brahma, brahman is
formless. But you can visualise some form for the brahman. And worship that
form. And by worshipping that form, you will attain transcendence. That is their
idea. And those who have this idea practice some level, some kind of bhakti. You
know. You know. Some kind of bhakti means that they also may externally do the
rituals of bhakti. But their goal is, once we come to the brahman platform, then
we will, there will be no need for the forms. We will go beyond the form to the
formless. But what Krishna is telling over here is beyond the brahman platform
is the platform of bhakti. So, again, we have to, we can visualise this as a, as
a nega..., zero. Positive axis. And negative axis. So, Krishna is telling over
here, to come from, you know, to use the process of "jñāna" to come from the
negative axis to the zero point. You know. That means that is what Krishna has
talked about in the previous, you know, verse. "brahma-bhūyāya kalpate". So,
give up everything mat..., all material attachments. And come to the zero
platform. You know. But once one has come to the zero platform, then Krishna is
saying, what happens? "mad-bha...", the zero platform is the brahman platform
over here. After there, Krishna is saying, "brahma-bhūyāya kalpate". Sorry. You
know. Sorry. "bha...", "mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām". He says, then, one gets
bhakti. So, here, you know, actually speaking, you know, you know, you know,
bhakti comes when one moves to the transcendental level. Not when necessarily,
when one is not yet at the transcendental level. So, bhakti is not just limited,
you know, to the, you know, to the the material platform. Bhakti is not just a
tool for, or going from the material to the spiritual. Bhakti is characteristic
of, you know, life at the spiritual level. So, actually speaking, there is very
little ambigui..., very little scope for misinterpreting this verse in any way.
Krishna has said "brahma-bhūtaḥ". That is very clear. What is the platform of
the person? "brahma-bhūtaḥ". Then, "prasannātmā". Naturally, that person is, you
know, you know, relishing, you know, to, the joy, joy of the "ātmā". Because
one, once one is from material illusions, then the sat-cit-ananda, ananda nature
of the "ātmā" can be experienced to some extent. So, "prasannātmā". So, one is
joyful. And then, "na śocati na kāṅkṣati". You know. You know. There is no
hankering. There is no lamentation. Which is also indicative of a platform that
is beyond, you know, a platform within the modes. Because the, even in the
goodness, there is some hankering and lamentation. There may be hankering for
material things. You know. You know. But still, there is hankering. And then,
"samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu". "samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu". One sees all living beings
equally. This is also a platform of a person who has gone beyond the influence
of the modes.

So, clearly, this verse is talking about a person who has transcended the
material reality. Transcended the material level of consciousness. And still, it
is saying, after that, one attains bhakti. What kind of bhakti? "parām". Supreme
bhakti. Transcendental bhakti. Pure bhakti. So, "mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām". So,
bhakti is not the, you know, you know, bhakti is not preliminary to "jñāna".
Bhakti is the postgraduation after "jñāna". You know. Preliminary to "jñāna"
means, something which we do before the real thing. Just like, there are
preliminary exams. You know. The real exams comes afterward. Before that, there
are just some preliminary exams. So, bhakti is not preliminary to "jñāna". That
is what the mayavadi idea is. But bhakti is the, you know, you know,
postgraduation after "jñāna". After one "jñān...", cultivates "jñāna". then the
perfection is that one, you know, attains bhakti. You know. You know. So, you
know, now, we will see, does it mean that, actually, to practice bhakti, you
know, one has to first go through "jñāna"? That, ok, bhakti will come, or
"parām" bhakti will come after "jñāna". Then, does it mean that one has to,
before that, practice bhakti? You know. Before that, practice "jñāna"? Or some
other pro..., or some other process? No. We will see that, actually, you know,
Krishna will mention it in the, four..., just few verses later, 18.56-57, He,
when He says. You know:

        sarva-karmāṇy api sadā
        kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ

You know. You know. So, He will mention about whatever level one att.., that
is, one can take His shelter. And move towards transcendence. So, by this, He
will indicate that, we can actually, you know, move from any level towards
Krishna. And that will help us to make spiritual advancement. So, "na śocati na
kāṅkṣati". You know. So, this is, actually, a characteristic of a person who is
at the level of impersonal perfection. And such a person attains bhakti. But
Prabhupada often uses this verse to describe the joy of the spiritual level. So,
this can also, this, because even a bhakta is at the "brahma-bhūtaḥ" pra...,
platform. Of course, a devotee's understanding of what is "brahma-bhūtaḥ" is
more developed. More mature than the understanding of a jnani. You know. A
jnani's idea is just to recognise that "Aham Brahmasmi". That is
"brahma-bhūtaḥ", also. But a deep, but a deeper understanding is also that, you
know, you know, I am a servant of Krishna.

        jīvera ‘svarūpa’ haya — kṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’

That is also "brahma-bhūtaḥ" platform. So, even devotees will discu..., will
have these characteristics. Devotee will also be "samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu".
Devotee will also be "na śocati na kāṅkṣati". But overall, "mad-bhaktiṁ labhate
parām". So, that means, this verse can be in the flow of the Gita. This verse
refers to the characteristic of a transcendentalist. Who has transcended the
material level. And then, attains "parām" bhakti. But in a generic sense, this
verse can be used to characterise any transcendentalist. Any mature
transcendentalist. And can be used to characterise bhaktas, also. That even
bhaktas will also be free from hankering and lamentation. And Prabhupada writes
in the purport, you know, you know, you know:

"As there is no fear of a serpent with broken teeth, there is no fear from the
senses when they are automatically controlled."

So, actually, Srila Prabhupada is transla..., is paraphrasing a verse by, you
know, you know, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī over:

        durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭra-yate

That, you know, just as a, when the fangs of a snake are destroyed. Then, the
snake has no, the snake does not cause any danger. So, like that, when the
enjoying mentality is removed from the senses, then senses pose no danger for
the transcendentalist. So, this, that, at the pers..., at this brahman level,
when one has actually situated at the spiritual level, then one does not
experience the, there is no enjoying mentality left. And therefore, the senses
are no longer cause of trouble. You know. Now, Krishna will talk about what
happens after one attains bhakti.

        bhaktyā mām abhijānāti
        yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ
        tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā
        viśate tad-anantaram

You know. You know. So, here, He is telling, you know, by bhakti, one can know
Me as I am. And when one, when one, you know, knows me in that way, in truth,
then one will att..., will attain the spiritual world. So, let us look at this
verse a little bit more, you know, s..., deeply. "bhaktyā". Each of the
component.

        bhaktyā mām abhijānāti
        yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

"tattvataḥ". In truth. I can be known through bhakti. "bhaktyā mām abhijānāti".
There is no way to know Me in truth, except through bhakti. And when one,
somebody knows me in truth like this through bhakti, then that person attains
the transcendental destination. So, now, Krishna has earlier talked about, you
know, "tattvataḥ" in another very important place. That is 4.9.

        janma karma ca me divyam
        evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

So, Krishna has said that one who knows Me, "tattvataḥ". One who knows my, you
know, birth and activities to be, My appearance and activities to be tran...,
the "divyam". To be transcendental. What happens to such a person? You know.
You know. You know. You know.

        janma karma ca me divyam
        evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ
        tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma
        naiti mām eti so ’rjuna

So, "tyaktvā dehaṁ". When they give up the body, "punar janma naiti", such a
person will not take birth again. But in contrast, will attain Me. You know. You
know. "mām eti so ’rjuna". Such a person will come back to Me. And when that
person once comes back to Me, then there is no further, you know, you know, no
further illusion. No further bondage. No further suffering. "mām eti so ’rjuna".
You know. So, there, Krishna has not told about the process by which one can
know Him in truth. Although, this next verse gives us a slight indication when
He says:

        vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā
        man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ
        bahavo jñāna-tapasā
        pūtā mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ

So, there, He says many people have come back to me. Thus, have attained
"bahavaḥ" for Me. You know. Have attained be..., love for Me by "man-mayā mām
upāśritāḥ", primarily. By taking shelter of Me. By fixing their mind on Me. But
here, Krishna is elaborating that, you know, further. When can one, we fix the
mind on Him?  When, when we get, take shelter of Him? When there is bhakti. So,
the way to know Him, "tattvataḥ". And the way to return back to Him is "bhaktyā
mām abhijānāti". So, "abhijānāti". To know Him properly. And if that is not
clear, "yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ". As I am, actually. So, what was mentioned?
So, the, you know, "tattvataḥ" understanding and its result is mentioned in 4.9.
In 18.54, the means to that "tattvataḥ" understanding. The central heart of the
process, by which we can know Him "tattvataḥ". Bhakti. That is emphasised. Now,
if we look at that further verse, what it says after that is, that such a person
will come to Me. Now, it does not say that that person will simply go into some
impersonal merging. He says, no, such a person will come to Me. "mām eti so
’rjuna". And what does Krishna say over here? He says that "tato māṁ tattvato
jñātvā". So, one, when one understands Me in truth like that, "viśate
tad-anantaram". You know. So, this might seem a bit impersonalistic to a, some
people. "viśate" generally means "ananta...", you know, "viśate" means to enter
into. And "tad-anantaram". Thereafter. So, after knowing Me in truth, such a
person, "viśate". Such a person will enter. Now, what does it refer to? Now, we,
most people may say, oh, that means after knowing Krishna, one will enter into
the Brahman, brahmajyoti. So, is that what Krishna is talking about over here?
"viśate tad-anantaram". Actually, the word "viśate" does not necessarily have to
have vai..., impersonalistic meaning. The "viśate" can have, also have a co...,
personalistic meaning. You know. The word "viśate" can very well refer to how a
bird enters into a tree. A green bird, when it enters into a green tree, it
seems to have become one. But although, both are still there. They are
different. And, although they do not seem to be different to the naked eye. So,
"viśate" can also refer to a geographical territory, into which one enters.
One enters into a city. You know. So, when one enters into a city, it is not
that one has become, you know, merged into the city. You know. One has one's
entity.  But then, one has entered into a city. A train enters into a city. A
car enters into a city. You know. A plane enters into a city's area. Like that.
So, the point here, Krishna is making, is, the soul enters into the spiritual
world. And what is the specific destination? If we correlate this with verse
4.9, it is clear. "mām eti". That person comes back to Me. It is not just some
impersonal merging. You know. You know. Actually, the impersonal level of
realisation has already come and gone in 18.54. You know. That, that level of
"brahma-bhūtaḥ". And "prasannā...", "na śocati na kāṅkṣati". And actually,
"samaḥ sarveṣu bhūt...", that is already mentioned. And actually, beyond that is
the perfectio..., it is a perfection of bhakti. And, you know, from bhakti, that
"parām" bhakti, one comes to know Bhagavan. When one comes to know Bhagavan,
then one goes beyond. That means one attains the spiritual world. So,
"tad-anantaram". You know. You know. You know. So, "viśate tad-anantaram". This
does not have to be necessarily taken impersonalistically. You know. So,
Prabhupada exp..., emphasises this point that one can know Krishna through, you
know, you know, a proper knowledge.

"Surface acquaintance with the ocean is not sufficient; one must have complete
knowledge of the aquatics living in the ocean depths."

So, here, Prabhupada is, you know, talking about, you know, the famous, you
know, you know, you know, river-ocean metaphor. The mayavadis use this metaphor
to say that, just as rivers enter into ocean and become one with the ocean. Like
that, we enter into the, liberated soul enters into Brahman. And becomes one
with the Brahman. But, you know, you know, Rupa Goswami talks about this analogy
in different way. And he explains that, actually, some people, you know, some,
the river may merge into the ocean. But actually, if in the river, there are
certain va..., aquatics which are living. So, if the river goes to the ocean,
the aquatics may also go to the ocean. But that does not mean that the aquatics
become one with the ocean. The aquatics still have that distinct identity. And
they live with that distinct identity inside of the ocean. So, like that, the
souls who are serving Krishna in this world, so, for, here, the river is like
the river of love for Krishna. So, the river of love for Krishna takes them
towards Krishna. And then, in the ocean of devotion to Krishna, this is,
devotees, del..., you know, this, devotees, which are like aquatics in the
ocean, they delight eternally. So, there is, does not have to be only one
interpretation of this, you know, you know, verse. That, you know, of this
metaphor of river-ocean. That it has, it has to necessarily refer to merging.
No. It can also be referring to meeting. You know. To, you know, living in a
different reality. Where, you know, others still have their own, everyone has
their individual identity. And now, after this, Krishna will talk about how one
can practice bhakti from whatever level one is at. So, one does not have to,
have to, you know, you know, you know, you know, practice from a materialistic
level itself. One can practice, one does not have to practice bhakti from the
transcendental level alone. You know. One can start from the material level. If,
one also can practice bhakti. And, you know, you know, li..., raise to the
transcendental level. So, here, let us look at the jnana-yoga. You know. You
know. Now, so, we are, what, let us look at what is happening in this chapter
now. So, until now, you know, garma-yog..., karma-yoga offered to Krishna was 41
to 48. Then, you know, how jnana-yoga leads to bhakti. You know. You know.
Jnana-yog..., sorry, jnana-yoga leads to bhakti. And leads to Krishna. You know.
You know. That was talked just now in 49 to 55. Now, from 56 onwards, Krishna
will talk about sub..., an entirely different subject. He will talk about
bhakti-yoga itself. So, you know, you know, let us look at this verse. You know.
Now, that means, Krishna is talking about a different subject now. Not a
continuation of the earlier subject. A different subject.

        sarva-karmāṇy api sadā
        kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ
        mat-prasādād avāpnoti
        śāśvataṁ padam avyayam

So, "sarva-karmāṇy api sadā". So, while doing different kinds of karma, "kurvāṇo
mad-vyapāśrayaḥ". "kurvāṇo". While doing that, "mad-vyapāśrayaḥ", you know. When
after taking shelter of Me:

        kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ
        mat-prasādād avāpnoti

By My mercy, such a person obtains. What does such a person obtain? You know.
"śāśvataṁ padam avyayam". One attains the eternal destination. "śāśvataṁ padam".
You know. You know. So, Krishna, in, the important point in this verse is
that, you know, with respect to the understanding the flow of the Gita, the
u..., vital point is that, "sarva-karmāṇy api sadā". That whatever karma a
person might be doing, that does not matter.

        sarva-karmāṇy api sadā
        kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ

"sarva-karmāṇy" means, earlier, Krishna has talked about how, you know, you
know, one has to practice, you know, un..., one has to act according to one's
varnashram duties. And then, come to the transcendental platform. And then, one
will attain bhakti. You know. You know. So, bhakti is at the same, at once, the
summit of spirituality. It is, you know, the summit. But at the same time, it
does not, it is not only limited at the summit. You know. Bhakti is a process.
Which, to which one comes after going through different processes. After going
karma. Jnana. Then one comes to bhakti. But then, bhakti does not have to depend
on karma. And jnana. Bhakti can independently also extend downwards. And le...,
elevate a person from a very low level. That is why "sarva-karmāṇy api sadā".
Whatever be the karma that one is practicing. Still, "kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ".
If that person takes shelter of Me. And then, what happens when the per..., such
person takes shelter of Me? "mat-prasādād avāpnoti". By My "prasādād", by My
mercy, such a person, "śāśvataṁ padam avyayam". Such a person will attain the
eternal destination. So, we will see over here, you know, you know, you know,
so, Krishna has started introducing "mat". If you see it to, before this in this
chapter. Before the 54th verse, you know, you know. Krishna has not talked about
"mat". You know. You know. "mam" and "mat". You know. In this chapter. Because
He is focusing more on a summary of the Gita. He is talking about things from
the perspective, or the le..., from the level of the transcendentalist. You
know. The karma-yogi does not know about Krishna. The jnana-yogi does not know
about Krishna. Who knows about Krishna? It is the bhakta-yogi who knows about
Krishna. So, when Krishna is talking about bhakta-yogi, then He talks about
"mam" clearly. Yes. So, Krishna is telling, what such a person do, "kurvāṇo
mad-vyapāśrayaḥ". That person takes shelter of Me. And by taking shelter of Me,
"mat-prasādād avāpnoti". By My person..., My mercy, such a person will attain.
So, the word "prasād" is very important. "prasād" can mean purity.  "prasād" can
mean mercy. You know. You know. Generally, we use the word "prasād" to refer to
what we take with the tongue. Yes, that is true. That is "prasād". But actually,
"prasād", the word 'prasād" is not really limited only to that. You know. What
it represents essentially is mercy. So, if we get the mercy of Krishna, then by
the mercy of Krishna, we become elevated. We become purified. We become
liberated. So, here, Krishna is talking about the potency of bhakti. Which is
actually the, involves the poten..., mercy potency of Krishna. By which, one can
get elevated from wherever one is. So, from the lowest level, one can raise up
to the highest level. And, you know, "śāśvataṁ padam avyayam". That eternal
destination one attains. And in this way, one becomes purified and liberated.
So, now, in the next verses, Krishna will talk more about bhakti. And the focus
will become on the glory of bhakti, more and more study. You know. You know. You
know. So, Prabhupada writes in the purport, you know, you know, very encouraging
purport. You know. You know.

"In spite of all difficulties, he is eventually placed in the transcendental
abode, or Kṛṣṇaloka."

So, "In spite of all difficulties". Difficulties will be there. But, you know,
you know, there are no limitation. You know. There is no, ultimately, devotee
will transcend the, all difficulties. And attain the spiritual level. Let us
look at this further.

        cetasā sarva-karmāṇi
        mayi sannyasya mat-paraḥ
        buddhi-yogam upāśritya
        mac-cittaḥ satataṁ bhava

That "cetasā sarva-karmāṇi". Whatever karma might, might be doing. If one does
that karma properly, "mayi sannyasya mat-paraḥ". "mayi sannyasya". So, what, if
we are, you know, "sarva-karmāṇi". That was the same point. Whatever doing,
karma we might be doing. But with our consciousness, we offer ourselves to
Krishna. "mayi sannyasya mat-paraḥ". Make Him the supreme goal of life.
"buddhi-yogam upāśritya". You know. "buddhi-yogam". You know. You know. You
know. Krishna has used the word "buddhi-yogam" several times. We discussed this
earlier, also. That Krishna used the word "upāśritya" in the 10th Chapter. You
know. He has used earlier in 2.39, also. And now, He is using it again. And each
of these uses, there is a progressively deeper understanding of the word
"buddhi-yogam". In 2.39, He is talking about how He used "buddhi" to do "yogam".
That means, you know, used "buddhi". The understanding of the difference between
matter and spirit. To do yoga. To become situated in the platform, you know, in
a process that will connect one with transcendence. You know. "eṣā...", you
know, that was at, you know, 2.39. You know. Then, in 10.10, when Krishna talked
about "buddhi-yogaṁ":

        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ
        yena mām upayānti te

You know. There, it was more about the "buddhi". About how to do yoga. That is
given by Krishna. So, you know, the yoga that is given by Krishna is
bhakti-yoga. The "buddhi" that Krishna gives us is the "buddh...", the, is the
intelligence to practice bhakti. And by both of these, one can move forward
towards transcendence. So, here, Krishna makes it very clear from the context.
"buddhi-yogam" is actually bhakti-yoga. So, "buddhi-yogam" is not a separate
sadhana. It is not so, therein, the primary yogas are karma-yoga, dhyana-yoga,
jnanay-yoga, ashtanga-yoga. These are four. Sorry. Karma yoga. Jnana yoga.
Dhyana Yoga. And bhakti yoga. So, dhyana and ashtanga yoga are the same. And
sometimes, it is also referred to at hatha-yoga. Generally, hatha-yoga refers to
the preliminary, the first stages of the process of, you know, ashtanga-yoga.
So, "yama". "niyama". "asana". "pranayama". Where the physical element is
more emphough..., emphasised. That is called as hatha-yoga. You know. So, that
is also called as kundalini yoga sometimes. So, basically, there are four main
yogas. You know. Karma. Jnana. Karma yoga. Jnana yoga. Dhyana yoga. And bhakti
yoga. "buddhi-yogam" is not some, some fifth, the fifth type of yoga.
"buddhi-yogam" is simply referring to the yoga that involves the use of
"buddhi". And, you know, what that will refer to, we will have to look at the
context to understand that. From this context, it is clear. "mad-vyapāśrayaḥ".
That Krishna is telling, actually, you know, "mad", sorry:

        mayi sannyasya ...
        buddhi-yogam upāśritya

Take shelter of Me. So, when we look at the context of taking shelter of
Krishna, it is very clear that this is referring to bhakti. And then,
"mac-cittaḥ". It is very comm..., "mac-cittaḥ". "satataṁ bhava". Always be
conscious of Me in this way. So, here, Krishna is slowly, but surely, taking us
towards bhakti-yoga. And that focus on bhakti-yoga will become even more clear
in the future verses. So, let us look at these verses in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
