Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K5tad_EiN7k Audio:
https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=R4MrCuNfZr5mCUilIOX_LBgS1Md8MTU0ODQ5MDA5NkAxNTQ4NDAzNjk2&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_141_-_Bhagavad_Gita_18.22_-_18.28_-_Action_and_doer_in_the_three_modes_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=K5tad_EiN7k&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya totra vetraika panaye jnana mudraya krishnaya gitamrita
duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the heart of the 18th Chapter. We are discussing, you know, "jñānaṁ".
"karma". And "kartā". Within the three modes. So, in verses 21 and 22 of the
18th Chapter, we have discussed, you know, you know, "karma", you know, "jñānaṁ"
in goodness. And "jñānaṁ" in passion. We discussed in 20 and 21. So, let us move
forward to 22. Where it is "jñānaṁ", knowledge in ignorance. You know. This
seems to be a paradox of, you know, you know, content, knowledge and ignorance
are considered opposite. So, let us see what is this knowledge in ignorance.

        yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin kārye saktam ahaitukam atattvārtha-vad alpaṁ
ca tat tāmasam udāhṛtam

You know. You know. "yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin". If "ekasmin". You know. There
is only one, you know, thing that is a reality of. So, to consider one part of
reality to be the totality of reality, that is knowledge in the mode of
ignorance. So, "kṛtsna-vad" means everything. So, to think of "ekasmin".
"ekasmin" is one thing. To think of one thing to be everything, that is, you
know, you know, "tat tāmasam udāhṛtam". So, that is first thing. One thing is
everything. What are the characteristics? "kārye saktam ahaitukam". "kārye
saktam". That means to become attached to one activity as if it is the totality.
As if it is everything. "ahaitukam". You know. The word "ahaitukam", you know,
is normally used in a positive sense to refer to bha..., you know, to
"ahaitukam" bhakti. That is how we use it. But here, "ahaitukam" refers to
causeless in the sense of being logicless. Senseless. So, it is not in the sense
of being transcendental. Or unmotivated. Or pure. It is in the sense of having
no rationale basis. Having no intelligent basis to things. "atattvārtha-vad
alpaṁ ca". "atattvārtha-vad". So, that, which does not have any
"tattvārtha-vad". That which does not have any, you know, you know, true meaning
to it. "tattvārtha". True meaning. You know. True meaning to it. "alpaṁ ca". And
that deals with a, only a, you know, part of reality. It only looks, it is
on..., it is meager knowledge. It is not complete knowledge. So, "tat tāmasam
udāhṛtam". That is knowledge in the mode of ignorance. Let us try to understand
this further. You know. So, Krishna is not, you know, calling specific things as
ignorance. Or knowledge in mode of ignorance. But He is giving the generic
characteristics. And depending on time, place, circumstance, depending on the
various different schools of thought that are present at different times. Some
of them will be, can be classified in goodness. Some in passion. And some in
ignorance. Now, here, you know, you know, Krishna, first of all, Krishna's, you
know, explanation is in terms of knowledge which makes one attached to one
fragment of reality. "ekasmin". "kār...", "ekasmin". "kārye saktam". That one
becomes it, too attached to one fragment of reality as if it is the complete
reality. "yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin". "ekasmin". One thinks of one thing to be
complete. "kārye saktam ahaitukam". And one is too attached to things not
understanding that completeness. Not understanding their reality. Totality. So,
for example, we have materialism today. Materialism is, you know, widespread,
you know, school of thought. When materialism is often considered to be
progressive. People think that when we are becoming materialistic, they think
that, we are, you know, giv..., giving up the old fashion. Prescientific. You
know. Mythology based ideas of different religious dogmas. But, you know, you
know, what does materialism actually have as its end result? Materialism
essentially leads to, you know, assuming a part of reality, that is matter to be
the totality of reality. And it is obviously an incomplete part of reality. You
know. We are not matter based creatures. We are spirit based creatures. Matter
is something which is our outer covering. It is not our inner substance. So,
when we mistake the outer covering to be both, not to, not just outer. But also
inner. To be everything. Then, that leads to, you know, that leads to knowledge
in the mode of ignorance. So, what is this knowledge in the mode of ignorance?
So, it is knowledge, means, now, if we look at, there are many materialistic
thinkers. And in their own way, they are, you know, they have their own logic.
They have their own intellectual brilliance. And by that, they try to explain
things. But, you know, you know, the problem is, their vision is unidimensional.
They have reduced a polydimensional reality. That which is polydimensional.
Polydimensional means there are many aspects to reality. There is matter. There
is spirit. And there is the Supreme Lord. Who is the source of matter and
spirit. So, there are multiple aspects to reality. They have just taken one
aspect of it. And assumed it to be the totality of reality. And then, based on
this misconception, they try to analyse and explain how, you know, you know,
everything has come about. So, therefore, when a mother feels love for a child.
They try to explain. Or, you know, how it is nothing, but some secretion of
chemicals in the brain. And just because certain biochemicals are secreted in
the brain. That is how they try to explain emotions. And that is how these
reductionistic materialists, they try to explain everything in terms of matter.
So, you know, you know, Bhaktivinoda Thakur talks about such knowledge. You
know. That:

      jivake karaye gadha

So, he says that, such knowledge, what does it do? There is knowledge. But it
makes a person know better than an animal like a donkey. So, people work very
hard. And working hard itself is not bad. But working hard for a meaningful
purpose is desired. Not for a valueless pur..., not for something which is not
actually valuable. So, "yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin". "ekasmin". One takes only
one aspect of reality. And assumes it to be the complete reality. "kārye saktam
ahaitukam". "kārye saktam". When one is attached. And one becomes, you know, you
know, without analogical basis. You know. Nobody has exp..., demonstrated how,
say, matter has, you know, led to the emergence of consciousness. Nor has it
been explained, you know, you know, theoretically wha..., to any reasonable
degree of satisfaction. And yet, that is assumed to be the default way of
looking at things today. You know. So, going back to Bhaktivinoda Thakur's
avidya..., "Vidyara Vilase" song. So, he says that:

        jaḍa-vidyā jata, māyāra vaibhava, tomāra bhajane bādhā

You know. "jaḍa-vidyā jata". "jaḍa-vidyā jata". "jaḍa" refers to matter. Which
is unconscious. Which i..., lacks in consciousness. So, it is called "jaḍa".
"jaḍa-vidyā jata, māyāra vaibhava,". That this is actually the opulence in
illusion. It is no actual opulence. It is false opulence. "jaḍa-vidyā jata,
māyāra vaibhava,". So, "māyāra vaibhava" means, suppose that person becomes a,
you know, billionaire in a dream. You know. The person is a billionaire. But it
is in a dream. Now, how long is it going to last? It is a "māyāra vaibhava". You
know. "māyā...". You know. But then, "jaḍa-vidyā jata, māyāra vaibhava,". You
know. You know. You know. "jīvake koraye gādhā". "tomāra bhajane bādhā". So, he
describes there are two consequences of it. What is it? "jīvake koraye gādhā".
That it makes a person live like a, the word is very strong. Donkey. It is a
very strong word. And, but it is used to indicate how the person's, you know,
functional as well as intellectual faculty is, are not used at a level mu...,
much higher than animals. And such kind of knowledge is "tomāra bhajane bādhā".
It is a "bādhā". It is to, obstacle. In worshipping Krishna. In devoting oneself
to Krishna. Because when one is not worshipping Krishna like this. Or when is,
when one is, you know, obsessed with material knowledge. And one thinks that
material knowledge contains a solution to all problems. Then, one does not feel
the need for God. And that is why it becomes a "tomāra bhajane bādhā". And we
see, you know, you know, you know, in the history of, you know, you know,
modern, say, modern intellectual history. Which is largely western history
nowadays. Because western, the European and then subsequent American, the
European thinkers, they, Europe..., Europe's civilisation spread all over the
world. Over, over a period of time. So, you know, you know, the European
thinkers, their thoughts spread all over the world, also, over a period of time.
So, "jīvake koraye gādhā". "tomāra bhajane bādhā". So, what happened is, in the
pursuit, conflict between science and religion, it was thought that science won.
Starting from the point when Galileo was thi..., Galileo, Copernicus, they, you
know, you know, they, you know, won the conflict against s..., you know, the
church. You know. Be, about the nature of the universe. Whether it is
heliocentric. Or geocentric. If we look at history from that point of view. What
happened is, most people thought that, you know, science has all the answers.
And science does not need God. And because of distant conceptions that science
has the answers. And science does not need God. The result was that many people
became enamoured by science. And that enamourment with material knowledge,
which, you know, you know, infatuation, material knowledge led to people giving
up God. So, "tomāra bhajane bādhā". And same way, what will happen is, the more
people turn away from, you know, turn, you know, get intoxicated with material
knowledge, the more they will feel the lack of necessity for God. But if people
keep acquiring material knowledge without getting infatuated by it, then as, you
know, there are several thinkers, like Pascal has said, a little of God, you
know, a little of science takes person away from God. But immersion in science
brings one back to God. So, there are quotes like this by various scientists,
also. And various thinkers. So, let us move forward. So, this is knowledge in
the mode of ignorance. Where one assumes a fragment of reality to be the
totality of reality. So, basically, when Krishna is analysing this way, you
know, the essence, the thrust of his argument is, do not live in ignorance. Try
to live in goodness. So, let us look at the next verse. You know. "yat tu
kṛtsna-vad ekasmin". So, this 18.23.

        niyataṁ saṅga-rahitam arāga-dveṣataḥ kṛtam aphala-prepsunā karma yat tat
sāttvikam ucyate

So, "niyataṁ saṅga-rahitam". So, what is He talking about? "sāttvikam", "karma".
So, "karma" and "sāttvikam" comes in the last two lines. So, He is talking now
about "jñānaṁ karma ca kartā ca". That is what was mentioned in the 19th verse.
You know. Three things, Krishna will be talking about. So, 19.22, you know, so,
20, 21, 22 talked about "jñānaṁ". Now, 23 to 25 will talk about "karma". So,
this talk, this verse will talk about "karma" in the mode of goodness. So,
"niyataṁ saṅga-rahitam". "niyataṁ" means that which is prescribed by scripture.
"saṅga-rahitam". "saṅga-rahitam" means that which is done without any
attachment. You know. "arāga-dveṣataḥ kṛtam". "arāga-dveṣataḥ". When one does
not have attachment. And one does not have aversion. "aphala-prepsunā karma".
"aphala-prepsunā" means that without any att..., atta..., without the motivation
of the fruit of the result. "yat tat sāttvikam ucyate". So, we will see this,
you know, consistent theme. You know. The Gita. That as long as we are attached
to the fruit of work, to the extent we cannot think about the transcendental
reality which exists beyond the realm of action. And its fruit. So, that is why
Krishna wants us to rai..., raise our consciousness to spiritual reality. And
that is why He repeatedly urges us to not be attached to material fruits.
Because material fruits will bind us in material existence. So, "arāga-dveṣataḥ
kṛtam". Without any attachment or aver..., aversion. Now, in 18.24, Krishna will
talk about action in the mode of passion. You know. You know.

        yat tu kāmepsunā karma sāhaṅkāreṇa vā punaḥ kriyate bahulāyāsaṁ tad
rājasam udāhṛtam

So, "rājasam udāhṛtam". That is in the mode of passion. What is it? "yat tu
kāmepsunā karma". "kāmepsunā". The work which is done with the desire, with
worldly desires. So, "kāmepsunā". One, when one has "kāma" for the, you know,
fruits of the work. And "sāhaṅkāreṇa vā punaḥ". "ha...", "ahaṅkāra". You know.
"ahaṅkāra" means, you know, arr..., arrogance. There are thinkers thinking that
I am the doer. So:

        yasya nāhaṅkṛto bhāvo buddhir yasya na lipyate

A few verses earlier, Krishna has talked about in 15..., in 18.16-17 that one
who has "nāhaṅkṛto bhāvo". One who does not have any "ahaṅkār", that person will
not be bound. But now, He is talking about "sāhaṅkāreṇa vā punaḥ". When the
person has "ahaṅkār". "kriyate bahulāyāsaṁ". "bahula". "bahula" means after
great trouble, that is involving severe labor. So, this is referring to ugra
karma. You know. "kriyate bahulāyāsaṁ". "bahulāyāsaṁ". So, you know, you know,
ugra karma can be in passion. Ugra karma can also be in ignorance. It depends on
what, you know, the specific activity. And the consciousness in which that
activity is done. So, "kriyate bahulāyāsaṁ". "bahulāyāsaṁ". So, actually, the
work in, which is in the passion. And which is in ignorance, it is not the same.
But many times, that which is, which is in passion, goes down to ignorance after
some time. So:

        kriyate bahulāyāsaṁ tad rājasam udāhṛtam

You know. In the Amritu Manthan Lila, which is described in the Eighth Canto of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you know, the demons, and the demigods, both make a truth so
that they can churn the milk ocean. So, when they are about to churn the milk
ocean. At that time, they find that each of them, they, they, both of them want
to hold onto the, you know, you know, head. You know. And not the tail. Because
the idea is, they think the head is a more honorable part of the snake "Vāsuki".
And the tail is a, you know, is not an honorable part. So, they both want to
hold onto the head. And not the tail. You know. And the Lord, cons..., Lord, you
know, sees the obstinacy, the stubbornness of the, you know, you know, asuras.
And agrees to let them hold the head. And they first re..., rebel against the
Lord's allocating them the tail. And the Lord ackno..., allows them to hold the
head. And then, what happens? When "Vāsuki" is being pulled, as he uses a rope
to churn the milk ocean, at that time, from his mou..., mouth, poisons flames
start coming out. And those flames scorch and torment the demons. So, the demons
work hard. Prabhupada writes in the purports over there. Demons work very hard.
Without profit even to themselves. Without profit even to themselves. That means
they work without gaining anything all. You know. Either for themselves. Or of
course for others. They did not benefit the devatas. And they did not benefit
themselves. As they had to trouble themselves. So, "kriyate bahulāyāsaṁ". So,
often, work in the mode of passion, you know. one feels dragged to do more. And
more. And more. And one never feels satisfied, no matter how much one does. No
matter how much one does, one feels, oh, I am not satisfied. May..., I am not
satisfied. I want something more. I want something more. And one never gets
satisfied that way. So:

        kriyate bahulāyāsaṁ tad rājasam udāhṛtam

Now, after describing this, you know, Krishna moves forward. And then:

        anubandhaṁ kṣayaṁ hiṁsām anapekṣya ca pauruṣam mohād ārabhyate karma yat
tat tāmasam ucyate

So, "anubandhaṁ kṣayaṁ hiṁsām". "anubandhaṁ kṣayaṁ hiṁsām". That, you know, that
kind of, now, Krishna is talking about work in the mode of ignorance here.
"anubandhaṁ". That which causes bondage. Now, all work causes bondage. But mode
in ignorance, it is especially. And excruciatingly binding of him. Just like,
there are addictions. You know. The addictions, they are like vicious bindings.
Which people just find very difficult to break through. "kṣayaṁ hiṁsām".
"kṣayaṁ" is, you know, violence. Destruction. "akṣayaṁ" is the opposite. That
which is not destructible. "kṣayaṁ". So, when people, for example, terrorism,
vandalism, all these are actions in the mode of ignorance. "kṣayaṁ". "kṣayaṁ" is
destruction. "hiṁsām" is violence. So, now, we may wonder what is the difference
between "kṣayaṁ" and "hiṁsām". Both seem to be similar. So, generally speaking,
you know, you know, "kṣayaṁ" refers to things. And "hiṁsām" refers to people.
You know. We talk about "ahiṁsām". "ahiṁsām" means nonviolence. So, nonviolence,
we generally, we talk about against people. You know. When peop..., somebody
hits peop..., others. Somebody attacks others. Brutalises others. That is
peop..., considered a violent person. And destructive is often with respect to
things. Somebody gets angry. And, you know, punches a, you know, fist on the
table. And cracks the table. Or throws things. And breaks them. So, "anubandhaṁ
kṣayaṁ hiṁsām". So, in mode of passion, mode of ignorance, either one is
violent. Against people. Or viol..., destructive towards things. So, this is a
very self-defeating kind of action. "anapekṣya ca pauruṣam". So, "anapekṣya".
Now, we will see that words can have different meanings depending on their
context. You know. You know. So, the words may sound similar. But they may have,
you know, no similarity in their meaning, actually. So, "anapekṣaḥ śucir dakṣa".
So, in the qualities of a devotee which are mentioned in the 12th Chapter of the
Gita. "anapekṣaḥ". "anapekṣaḥ" is referred to as a devotee who does not have,
who does not have expectations from other things. But whereas, here, the word
"anapekṣya", that is used, is, is not in terms of expectation. But is in terms
of consideration. One is so reckless. One is so foolhardy. That one does not
think about consequences. One acts, you know, care..., recklessly.
Self-destructibly. So, "anapekṣya ca pauruṣam". "pauruṣam". "pauruṣam", you
know, so, "pauruṣam" here refers to harshness. Harshness means, you know, in
terms of speech. The person is, is not sensitive. The person is monstrously
insensitive. And speaks bad words. Uses foul language. And also, you know,
speak, and thinks that to speak insultingly, you know, is, you know, you know,
it is, as if it is, it is something very intelligent. The sign of cleverness.
You know. Sometimes, people make a parody of things. Parody means, you know,
they make a caricature. They car..., they imitate in a mocking way. And by that,
they try to prove how, you know, you know, actually, whatever is being told, is
not correct. And, but they rather than doing constructive criticism, they do
destructive criticism. And destructive criticism means their goal is not to
improve upon what another person has suggested. Their goal is to, you know,
destroy the person's idea. And destroy the person's morale, also. So, that is
ha..., you know, "pauruṣam". And, you know, this is often, this is often seen as
a sign, unfortunately, in some circles, it is seen as cle..., sign of
cleverness. You know. The more, more stingingly a person can taunt somebody
else. You know. The cleverer that person is, so, considered. Oh. What a taunt
you have made. What a cir..., what a comment you made. Actually, this is not a
sign of cleverness. Of course, it may require cleverness to come up with taunts.
But, you know, the point is that, you know, when one speaks in a way that hurts
others. And one delights in the hurt that one is causing. Then, that is tamasic.
You know. You know. Actually, the pure devotee is ready to take up suffering so
that, you know, you know, others can become free from suffering.
"para-dukha-dukhi". Pure devotees are, they consider the, you know, they become,
you know, unhappy when they see others unhappy. And they want to relieve others
in happiness. And for that purpose, they are ready to take up anxiety upon
themselves. As contrasted in very tragically perverted ways that those who
consider, you know, you know, you know, that by causing pain to others, I will
get pleasure. So, this is "mohād ārabhyate karma". "mohād ārabhyate". So,
"pauruṣam", it can mean harshness. You know. You know. Prabhupada translates
over here, also, as self-sanctioned. You know. The word "pauruṣam", you know,
you know, you know, you know, you know, can also:

        dambho darpo ’bhimānaś ca krodhaḥ pāruṣyam eva ca

So, there was a similar word in, in the, while describing the qualities of the
demoniac. In 16.4. "krodhaḥ pāruṣyam". "pāruṣyam". is harshness. So, here,
Prabhupada refers to "pauruṣam". So, again, it is a similar-sounding word.
Prabhupada translates it self-sanctioned. Self-sanctioned means, you know, one
t..., imagines that one can do it because one is, one is clever enough. Whatever
I feel like doing, I will do it. Because ultimately, it is my life. I can choose
whatever I want to do. So, "pauruṣam". And "mohād ārabhyate". We had discussed
earlier, what is the word, "mohāt" is very common with, when describing the mode
of ignorance. Even while describing renunciation in the three modes. In this, in
the start of this chapter itself. Krishna talks about "mohāt tasya parityāgas".
That when one does tre..., the, "tyāgaḥ" because of "mohāt". That is considered
to be in the mode of ignorance. You know. "yat tat tāmasam ucyate". That is
"tāmasam". That is in the mode of ignorance. Then, you know, Krishna moves
forward to the next verse. You know. Krishna. Let us discuss what Krishna is
talking about now. So, now, He is talking about "kartā". The three types of
"kartā" in the next three verses. 26. 27. 28.

        mukta-saṅgo ’nahaṁ-vādī dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ siddhy-asiddhyor
nirvikāraḥ kartā sāttvika ucyate

So, "mukta-saṅgo ’nahaṁ-vādī". So, here, there is "mukta-saṅgaḥ". One is not
attached to one's, one's own activities. You know. You know. The, one is not
attached to the fruits of the activities. One is liberated from that attachment
to the fruits. And "’nahaṁ-vādī". One does not imagine oneself to be the doer.
One understand that whatever success comes about, there are multiple factors
involved in that success. And I am alone not the doer.
"dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ". "dhṛty-utsāha". So, there is, "samanvitaḥ" means
imbued with. Permeated with. You know. Com..., you know, filled with. Prabhupada
says. Qualified with. "dhṛty-utsāha". Determination. And enthusiasm. You know.
So, we have discussed this earlier, you know, you know, when we discussed
"utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt". In our discussion of the Upadesamrta. When we were
talking about the factors that are favorable. And the factors that are
unfavorable. So, "dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ". So, actually, when there is
enthusiasm without, you know, you know, patience. You know. B..., actually, you
know, what a dev..., what a person needs to make a long-term progress is
enthusiasm. And determination. Just like if I have, a person has to go on a
long, one has to go cross-countries, say. One has to go from, by car, from here
to Calcutta. Maybe, it is a fifty-hour journey. Or a four, thirty-hour journey.
Whatever. Long journey, it is. Then, one has to go on a long journey. One has to
have determination. But along with that, one has to have enthusiasm, also. If
one does not have enthusiasm, then one will not embark on this journey, only.
And even if one has enthusiasm, one will not be able to sustain that enthusiasm
if one does not have determination. So, in goodness, one has enthusiasm. And
determination. "dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ". So, sometimes, people think of, you
know, goodness as very bor..., life in goodness is very boring life. You know.
You know. We think of life in goodness as a life in slow motion. Life in slow
motion means, we think that, ok, you know, because I am in goodness, I have to
do everything slowly. You know. I should not speak fast. May..., I should not
run fast. I should not do activities fast. Slow. Slow. Slow. Well, slowness is
not necessarily a defining characteristic of the mode of goodness. In the mode
of goodness, the defining characteristic is there is contemplation before
action. There is contemplation before action. That means one thinks, one
reasons, and then one decides what one is going to do. That is action in the
mode of goodness. And in contrast to that, in the mode of passion, actually,
there is action. And after that, there is thinking. Oh, why did I do that? Why
did I do that? Then, there is lamentation, also, which comes up. So, that kind
of action, you know, first, and la..., you know, co..., think, thought later,
that often leads to regrets. Regretful anala..., actions. So, now, if a person
has, is we..., well-organised. As well-thought out. Has clear principles. Then,
that person's contemplation will be click, quick and clear. And then, the action
will follow. So, a person can work fast, also. It is not that a person in
ign..., goodness has to necessarily work slowly. You know. A person in goodness
can work fast. The only difference is that the person in goodness, who is
working fast, then that person is doing, you know, passion, who is working up,
fast. The, externally, both may be fast. But a person in passion is actually in
bondage. Is in illusion. Is not contemplating properly. Is not weighing the
consequences of one's actions. So, as the person in goodness is weighing the
consequences of actions. That is why it is called as, you know,
"dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ". There is enthusiasm. And there is determination. Both
are there. And by this, the person can move on steadily. "siddh...", and Krishna
describe further, "siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikāraḥ". "nirvikāraḥ". "vikāraḥ" means
change. "nirvikāraḥ" means no change. So, when such a person, whether that
person gets happ..., success. Or failure. There is no change.
"siddhy-asiddhyore nirvikāraḥ". "nirvikāraḥ" means, you know, there is no
change. Things remain the same. And the person moves forward. "kartā sāttvika
ucyate". Such a person is "sāttvika", "kartā", is "kartā" in the mode of
goodness. And after that, Krishna will move forward. And describe action in the
mode of passion. You know.

        rāgī karma-phala-prepsur lubdho hiṁsātmako ’śuciḥ harṣa-śokānvitaḥ kartā
rājasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ

You know. "rāgī karma-phala-prepsur". So, you know, "rāgī". "rāgī" means, you
know, very much attached. One who is filled with "rāga". You know. Like "kāmī"
means a person who is filled with "kāmāḥ". So, "rāgī" is a person who is filled
with attachment. You know. You know. "rāgī karma-phala-prepsur". Such a person
is very attached to "karma-phala". Wants the fruits of one's work very quickly.
"lubdho hiṁsātmako ’śuciḥ". "lubdho" is greedy. "hiṁsātmako ’śuciḥ".
"hiṁsātmako" is always envious. You know. So, the word "ātmako" can be related
with the word "ātma". So, "hiṁsātmako" means, actually, for such a person,
"hiṁsā" is the essence. You know. Person does not, person thinks that action
means there has to be violence. Otherwise, what is the fun? One, you know, one
does violence. "hiṁsātmako ’śuciḥ". And then, "harṣa-śokānvitaḥ kartā". So, you
know, let us, you know, we compare this. "dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ" was there in
the, for the "kartā" in the goodness. You know. And here, it is
"harṣa-śokānvitaḥ kartā". You know. You know. What is the difference? You know.
You know. "harṣa" and "śoka", you know, you know, are the results of action. You
know. When one does action. And when one gets the result. You know. You know. If
the result is positive, you know, then one, if one, if the result is desired,
one gets jubilation. And "śoka", if one does not get the result, then there is
dejection. So, what is happening is, then the, for a person in the mode of
passion, you know, the focus is not on the action. But on its consequence. So,
this sort of, you know, you know, short-sighted, attitude, or imbalanced
attitude. lopsided attitude, where one does not focus on the process. Only on
the product. That leads to, you know, you know, you know, underperformance. And,
you know, and entanglement further. You know. Why underperformance? Because if
one is not, if one wants to do well, then one has to concentrate on what one is
doing right now. You know. If while giving a class, I am constantly thinking,
ok, will people like my class? Will people appreciate it? How many people will
praise it? Who will praise me what? You know. This is all stupidity. When, you
know, I am supposed to give a class. Then, just I have to zoom in. And focus
only on the class. And nothing else. And that is the only way I will be able to,
you know, be productive. So, similarly, if I want to be productive, then I have
to be, focus on the action. So, that focus on the action comes by
"dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ". Which was talked about in the 26th verse.
"dhṛty-utsāha". "dhṛty". It is, you know, determination. "utsāha" is enjoyme...,
you know, enthusiasm. But instead of that, here, there is "harṣa-śokānvitaḥ".
So, we have to learn to focus on "harṣa". You know. Not on "harṣa-śokān". On not
let get carried away by the results. Whether they be positive. Or they be
negative. But rather, focus on the commitment to the process in terms of
determination. And enthusiasm. So, in passion, one's focus is very much on
externals. You know. You know. People, when they, say, there is a weight-lifting
competition. And there is a weight-wuild..., lifter. Who lifts a huge quantity
of weight. You know. Whatever is a record. That quantity of sca..., weight, the
person lifts. When the person lifts that quantity of it, people are saying, ok,
how much weight the person lift. Ok. This person was maybe fifty pound. You
know. Maybe, you know, five pounds more than the earlier record. Or se..., ten
pounds more than the earlier record. Seven pounds more than the earlier record.
And the earlier record was this much. So, what peop..., what the records focus
on is the results. Ok. This much weight was lifted. But how was that person able
to lift that much weight? If it is a, if it is a truly, a champion
weight-lifter. Then, before that, the person has exercised. And the person has
built muscles. On a long-term basis through rigorous unflinching training. And
only then, has come to the result. So, if one is too captivated by the result.
You know. And does not, you know, you know, and does not focus on the process.
If the, then, the person will not get the, will not work. And even if one works,
one is, just like students, if they are only thinking of the marks. The marks.
The marks that come in the exam. And then, when they get the marks, they will be
jub..., jubilant. And if they do not get the marks, they will be morose. But
then, you know, the unidimensional focus on marks, you know, does not allow them
to study properly. Some students may have the skill how they just, you know, you
know, you know, memorise the necessary information just before the exams. And
then, regurgit..., regurgitated. Just vomit it out during the exams. And get
good marks. But that does not lead them to mastery of the subject. Nor does it
lead to the dev..., development of their intellectual capacity. Their capacity
to learn. The development of their minds. So, it does not lead to that. You
know. Therefore, what is important is that one focus on the process. And that
focus on the process happens in goodness. But it is difficult to have, it does,
rarely happens in passion. Because in passion, everything is focused on
externals. Not on internals. So, what one sees is the, ok, how much marks has
that person got? Not how much one has studied. Ok. How much weight has the
person lifted? Not how much exercise the person has done. So, how, so:

        rājasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ

Krishna says, such an action, such a person is in the mode of, you know, such a
doer is in the mode of passion. Now, what essentially is the difference between
"karma" and "kartā"? "karma" refers to the specific activities that are being
done. Whereas "kartā" refers to the person who is in the activities. Or
sometimes, that person may be in goodness. But the person may have to do
passionate activitiy. On the other hand, the person may be in passion. And the
person may have to do goodness activity. So, that can vary depending on time,
place, circumstance. You know. You know. For example, you know, teaching, we
could call it broadly an activity in goodness. Why is teaching an activity in
goodness? Because teaching essentially involves, you know, you know, the
principle of, its, its focus on subtle things. Ok. There is knowledge. Which is
subtle concept. We understand it. We internalise it. And when we share it with
others. And then we see, others are learning. That gives a sense of fulfillment.
So, that is positive. But at the same time, if somebody is teaching, just for
the sake of prestige, you know, that person is not really concerned whether I
have knowledge or not. That that person is not concerned whether others are
learning or not. That person is simply concerned with displaying how much I
know. I know so much. You know. So, there is some different kinds of teachers.
You know. Some teachers, you know, they delight in showing student, how foolish
their students are. That means they speak things in such confusing and complex
ways, as students think, it is so, phew, what, I do not understand anything. And
when that happens, the person's ego may be ditches, ego may be critical. I, see,
these people, they thought they are so clever. Now, I have shown how foolish
they are. But then, has that led to the increase of learning? Has that led to,
you know, you know, the, you know, the, you know, increase in the desire to
learn among the students? You know. You know. If it has not, then what is the
use? So, this is undesirable. You know. Anoth..., other, other kinds of teachers
who just focus on, you know, analysing the subject without considering the
audience. That means that they just go deep into the subject. And they think I
have to do justice to the subject. But what about doing justice to the audience?
They speak in such a lofty way. It is not that they want necessarily impress
others. But it is just that they are not concerned about the others. So, there
is some people who are just, who, some people who just want to impress the
audience. Some people are indifferent to the audience. And some people want to
educate the audience, actually. Help, so, they are, these, the best teachers.
They understand, ok, this is the level of the audience. And if I start from this
level, then I can move upwards. And the teachers, students can learn. So, that
is the best way. So, here, why was I giving this example of, say, of, you know,
different motives for teaching? Because teaching in itself can be broadly said
to be an activity in the mode of goodness. But then, if one is doing teaching
with "sāhaṅkāreṇa vā punaḥ". If one is doing teaching in a, with, you know, the,
with arrogance. Thinking that, oh, I am so great. That I am going to teach this.
This. This. And I am going to exhibit my knowledge. My learning. You know. Then,
that is not a very elevated stage. That will lead to, you know, that will lead
to the, "karma" may be in goodness. But the "kartā" is in passion. So, Krishna
is giving us both. So that over a period of time, we can, you know, choose
"karma" in goodness as much as possible. And also, we can, you know, become a
"kartā" who is in goodness. So, you know, Prabhupada explains, you know, in the
purport that, you know, "aśuciḥ". So, Kri..., Prabhupada says that here:

"Such a person is envious of others and prepared to do anything wrong for sense
gratification."

You know. So, here, you know, the word was "ātmako", "ā...", "hiṁsātmako
’śuciḥ". So, "hiṁsātmako", you know, actually, it can refer to violence. And it
can also refer to envy. Why? Because in, which, generally, we do violence
towards others when we have envy for them. You know. We see somebody is a, the
better, better situated than us. And we feel, oh, why should that person be
better situated than me? You know. I want to be better situated than that
person. Somebody is wealthier than us. Then, we decide that, ok, I want to bring
down that person. So, "hiṁsātmako ’śuciḥ". So, in this way, such a person is in
the mode of ignorance. Sorry, is in the mode of passion. So, let us move forward
to the next verse. You know. You know.

        ayuktaḥ prākṛtaḥ stabdhaḥ śaṭho naiṣkṛtiko ’lasaḥ viṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī ca
kartā tāmasa ucyate

So, this is very graphic description by Krishna over here. "ayuktaḥ prākṛtaḥ
stabdhaḥ". "ayuktaḥ". So, "yuktaḥ" means well-situated. Well-connected. That
here refers to according to scripture. "ayuktaḥ" means that which is not
according to scripture. "ayuktaḥ prākṛtaḥ stabdhaḥ". "prākṛtaḥ" means
materialistic. So, "prākṛti" is generally used to refer to material nature. So,
"prākṛtaḥ" is materialistic. So, now, there is a word, "prākṛta-sahajiyā". You
know. That is also often used within the Vedic tradition, you know, to refer to
people who are, who are, you know, quite materialistic. Although, they may seem
to be devotees. So, "prākṛta-sahajiyā"s. So, they take, you know, devotion very
cheaply. "sahajiyā". And "prākṛtaḥ" means, actually, they are materialistic.
They are based in material nature. You know. Their conceptions. And their even
aspirations. They are all within mater..., the realm of matter, only. But they,
they have a religious garb to them. So, "prākṛtaḥ" refers to material. "ayuktaḥ
prākṛtaḥ stabdhaḥ". "stabdhaḥ" means impoten..., you know, insolent. As, it is
the Prabhupada translates it as obstinate. That means, these people, once they
decide to do something, then even if it is wrong, they just do not give it up.
Now, even, actually, obstinacy and determination seem to be similar. But they
are not. Determination is a positive describer. Somebody is determined to do
something. That means this is good. And even if I do not get success, I will
continue to do it. So, that is determination. Obstinacy, on the other hand, is,
you know, something is undesirable. And one should give it up. You know. You
know. But still, one does not give it up. Although, one ha..., one may, gets
experience oneself. One learns from others. But still, one does not give it up.
So, there is obsti..., determination which is positive. And there is obstinacy
which is negative. So, you know, for example, when Dhruva Maharaja goes into the
forest. You know. It is, requires a huge amount of determination. Even Narada
Muni discourages him. But, you know, you know, when Narada Muni discourages him.
You know. Now, is Dhruva Maharaja being, is that, that time, he is not Maharaja.
He is just Dhruva. The child Dhruva. Five year old child Dhruva. So, is he being
obstinate at that time? No. We do not call him obstinate. We call him
determined. On the other hand, we see the same Narada Muni also appears in the
Mahabharata. And he discourages Duryodhana. He, Duryodhana is being told that,
you know, do not wage war against the Kauravas. You will be destroyed. There is
no chance that you can survive or succeed. Do not try it. But what does he do?
It is personal, he just goes on a suicidal course. Now, do we say that
Duryodhana was determined? No. We say Duryodhana was obstinate. Why? What is the
difference? In both cases, somebody else is giving council. And one i.., and one
is going on with the particular course of action. Irrespective of the contrary
council that is given. So, why is, so, why is one considered determined?
Positive? And another negative? That is because, you know, you know, in general,
determination is for good things. So, especially, if something is according to
scripture. Or is overall in harmony with the principle in, of s..., principles
given in scripture. Then, that which is, you know, desirable, if one sticks to
it, even amidst obstacles, that is determination. But when one goes against,
when one goes against scriptures. And seeks one's own selfish enjo...,
gratification without considering what is going to be the consequence for
others. You know. And without considering the long-term consequence even for
oneself. That means when something, one's, when one is doing something
undesirable. Non..., antiscriptural. And one rejects good advice. One rejects,
rejects scriptural council which is urging one to stop. At that time, it is
considered obstinacy. So, here, what is "stabdhaḥ" is obstinate. So, for
example, Duryodhana is "stabdhaḥ". "Rāvaṇa" is "stabdhaḥ". And the, "Rāvaṇa" was
advised by so many people. Do not go against Lord Rama. Now, right from his
mighty general, Akampana. To "Mārīca". To "Vibhīṣaṇa". To even, you know, you
know, you know, "Kumbhakarna" at one particular point of time. And of course,
Lord Rama sent messengers. Hanuman went. You know. You know. "Aṅgada" went. And
like that, there were different people. Who all tried to warn "Rāvaṇa". But
"Rāvaṇa" was never ready to listen.

        śaṭho naiṣkṛtiko ’lasaḥ

"śaṭho". "śaṭho" means deceitful. "śaṭho". "śaṭho" means that person who is very
treacherous. That means to do one, get one's own ends, the person will act in
such, you know, diabolical ways that the person just does not care for others.
That means one uses others for one's own purpose. So, "śaṭho". That is "śaṭho".
Deceitful. One uses onesel..., you know, one uses others for one's own good
without caring for, you know, the moral principles involved. You know. So, for
example, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, now, nowadays, there
is the whole idea of copyrighting things. You know. Of having, you know,
trademarks. And having, you know, one's own, you know, brand, fine, sort of
trademarks that others do not take it. So, there are some people who try to, you
know, get copyrights of, for things which have been existing in ages. For
example, there are some yoga teachers who try to copyright yoga. They say that
nobody in the world can do this particular yoga asana. You know. It is my hands.
I can move my hands whichever way I want. I can move my legs whichever way I
want. Somebody says no. This yoga is my copyright. So, nobody can do this yoga
asana without paying me money. Now, this seems outrageous. Similarly, there are
some, you know, natural herbs. You know. Which have been growing for
generations. From millennia, you know, in various parts of the world. Especially
the world, parts of the world which focus more on agriculture. And suddenly,
some big companies come up. And the farmers who have been growing it, they do
not even know anything about, you know, so, trademarks. And copyrights. And
suddenly, some company comes up. And tells, that if you grow this crop again
anymore, then you will be, you know, penalised. You may be, even be arrested. It
is so horrible. But what has happened? Deceitfulness. Deceitfulness means one
just concern..., is concerned only about one's own good without considering the
good of others. So, now, for example, there is something called as tween
advertising. Tween advertising means, so, there are teenagers. Generally, from
the age of 13. 12, 13, 14. One, when puberty starts coming up. That is t...,
more or less teenage starting. You know. But, you know, there are tweens. Tween
comes from the word between. So, those are between the teen and the childhood.
So, for example, 8, 9, 10, 11. So, there is advertisment targetted just for
these children. And when this advertisement target to these children, the
children do not have, you know, you know, the capacity to discriminate. Their
intelligence is not yet developed. And they may like some, you know, you know,
character. They may like Harry Potter. Or they may like whatever character is
there watching in the cartoons. And the movies. And in the popular ga..., video
games. And within that, there are advertisements. So, particular characters will
have particular brands. Which they want to purchase. And what happens is, these
children, they like those characters. And along with liking those characters,
they also like the, you know, you know, they also start liking those particular
brands. And those brands may be selling products which are very expensive. But
the children think, oh, because I like this character, I have to take this
brand. And that is how they become trapped. So, this is "śaṭho". "naiṣkṛti".
"naiṣkṛtiko". Prabhupada translates as expert at insulting others. It is a very
stainised way of putting it, Prabhupada is putting. Expert at insulting others.

So, that mea..., you know, earlier, we discussed this, also. "paur...",
"pauruṣam". So, you know, you know, you know, "naiṣkṛtiko". I said, sarcasm, if
it is meant to convey truth. In a way that is, you know, you know, you know,
that is meant to illuminate another person. Then, that is good. But sometimes,
"naiṣkṛtiko". People just delight in hurting others. And that is very
unfortunat..., very undesirable. "naiṣkṛtiko'". "’lasaḥ". "lasaḥ" means,
"alasaḥ", lazy. "alasaḥ". So, "viṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī ca". So, lazy means, one does
not do anything. And "dīrgha-sūtrī", which will come later, "dīrgha-sūtrī"
means, you know, procrastinating. Delaying. So, Prabhupada says, what can be
done in one hour, they will perform of, they will delay for one year. Not do it
only. So, sometimes, you know, many times, people have to do follow-up.
After, we say, you know, say, A tells B. Please do it. And then, A has to call B
dozen times. Have you done it? Have you done it? Have you done it? Have you done
it? Now, we see Srila Prabhupada, you know, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura
just gave one instruction. One instruction. Only one's, practically speaking.
Why, while you are educated young man, man, why don't you preach the message of
Lord Chaitanya all over the world? And then, and then, second time was, when
Prabhupada sent a letter. You know. When Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura just
before departed even the world, and then, his last correspondence with
Bhaktisiddh..., with Srila Prabhupada, he sent a letter. He is saying, I, I am
confident that you can turn yourself into a very good preacher in the English
language. Now, what, what follow-up did Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura do? No
follow-up at all. Prabhupada was, you know, you know, in one sense
self-motivated. Of course, the, the inspiration came from his spiritual master.
But his motivation was himself. Individually. Self-motivated. And so, he moved
forward. Self-motivated. So, "viṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī ca". "dīrgha-sūtrī" means
the exactly opposite. One has to be prodded. And pushed. And reminded. And
still, the person is not ready to do anything. And after great difficulty, the
person does something. So, that is, you know, "dīrgha-sūtrī". "dīrgha-sūtrī"
means postponing things a lot. "viṣādī". "viṣādī" means one who li..., you know,
is always morose. You know. There is, morose means, that person just thinks, he
is so self-centered that, you know, now, generally, we think of selfishness as
something, I want more. I want more. Generally, we think of selfishness in terms
of, you know, wanting more and more possessions. Let us say, children are
playing. If there are two brothers who are playing. And then, there are two
toys. And one of the boy, the bigger brother says, I want both the toys. He may
say, do not be selfish. Share. Isn't it? So, generally, we think of selfishness
in terms of, you know, things. You know. You know. That, you know, even I want
all the things for myself. That is selfishness. But selfishness can be at the
level of thoughts, also. What do we mean by selfishness at the level of
thoughts? That means one wants everyone's attention upon oneself. So, that can
be positive when, you know, you know, it can be positive in the sense that, you
know, when I achieve something so wonderful. You know. I achieve something
so wonder..., I am so great. I am so powerful. I am this. I am that. And in that
way, one gains honor. One gains respect. That is one way of doing things. And
the other is that one thinks that, you know, I am so fall..., I am so miserable.
Everything has gone so wrong for me. Oh, life is so bad. And this. And that. And
by that, again, what is one doing? One is actually, you know, wallowing in a
pity pot. Pity pot means, you know, a pity. Pity for oneself. And that way,
also, what is one doing? One is simply attracting attention to oneself. So, in a
perverse, if there are, there are people who are called as hypochondriacs.
Hypochondriacs are people who pretend to be sick. So, that others will give
attention to them. You know. Somebody will come and ask. How, how are you? Is
your health ok? Can I do anything for you? So, people are so desperate for
attention that they pretend to be sick. So, that is physical sickness they may
pretend to have. Some people, you know, you know, can become mentally sick.
Mentally sick means, they always thin..., keep thinking of, you know, you know,
themselves in a negative way. Now, this sort of self-pity is not humility. It is
very important to understand. Self-pity is not humility. Self-pity is very
self-centered. Self-centered means when I am thinking, I, I, I, one does not
think about others at all. Or not much. When I am, think of others only to the
extent that others are ready to give attention to me. So, when we want to
attract others' attention to us. You know. Either it can be in the sense by, I
do such wonderful things that by which I attract the attention from others. And
others, you know, alternatively, it is that, I do such, I fee..., I attra..., I
act as a, such dreadful things have happened to me. Everything is so miserable
that what can I do? You know. I, life is terrible. Terrible. Terrible. And then,
one also, one starts, you know, going into a mode of self-pity. So, in this way,
both can be very undesirable.

        viṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī ca
        kartā tāmasa ucyate

So, moroseness. In the moroseness. That one always feels sorry for oneself. Oh,
the world is so bad. I am, nothing is going to work out nice for me. Everything
is going to be bad. Now, what, humility, I said, as self-pity is not humility.
Humility is never self-centered. Humility is Krishna-centered. We feel small.
Because we understand the greatness of Krishna. You know. We understand, ok, I
may be great in terms of other people. You know. You know. I may be cleverer
than others. I may be wealthier than others. I may be sma..., I may be more
good-looking than others. Whatever. That may be true. And that can make me
proud. But when I comp..., when I have Krishna as the cen..., focus of my
consciousness, then no matter how great I am, as compared to Krishna, I always
remain small. And by remaining small in comparison to Krishna, I stay humble.
Otherwise, I become proud. And in this way, one can move up. Or one can move
down in one's spiritual life. So, we can move up in our spiritual life by
keeping our consciousness fixed on Krishna. This is very graphic description
where Krishna gives, you know, you know, six chap..., you know, where gives
seven different characteristics of the "kartā" in the mode of ignorance.

        ayuktaḥ prākṛtaḥ stabdhaḥ
        śaṭho naiṣkṛtiko ’lasaḥ

Actually, there are eight characteristic, "viṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī ca". So, we, to
the extent we can individually combat these tendencies. The tendencies to be,
the, be lethargic. The tendencies to be procrastinating. The tendency to
procrastinate things. The tendency to be se..., con..., you know, to be wallow
in self-pity. You know. The word wallow means like a pig. You know. Sometimes, a
pig goes into dirty water. And bathes in dirty water. Now, actually, that is
called wallowing. Now, nothing is going to happen by that. That is going to only
become more dirty in many ways. But, so, like that, we wallow in self-pity. So,
that is unfortunate. And that is, you know, characteristic of the mode of
ignorance. And to the extent, we can give it up, to that extent, we can, you
know, become happy. And become productive. So, we will see a lot of
psychological problems, people go to psychiatrists to such a large extent. And
many times, that is because their whole life is in the mode of ignorance. So,
because their life is in the mode of ignorance, so, therefore, when they act
also in ignorant ways. And to the extent, they act in ignorant ways, to the
extent, they have to bear the consequences of those ignorant actions. And one
consequence of ignorant action is mental dejection. Mental depression. And all
sorts of mental problems. So, some mental problems may also, of course, be
because of brain defunctioning. Damaging. And things like that. But in many
ways, if people can choose, you know, to stop living in ignorance. And try to
change their living to goodness. Then, they will find that a large number of
mental problems will decrease. And one may be able to live much more peacefully.
And productively. So, in a, you know, you know, so, today, we completed
discussion of "jñānaṁ". And then, we discussed of "kar...", discussed "karma".
And "kartā". In the three modes. Now, in the future, in the next class, we will
discussing about "dhṛtiḥ". You know. You know. "buddheḥ". And "sukhaṁ".

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
