Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cNEJJ9lcrXE
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_124_-_Bhagavad_Gita_14.08-14.13_-_How_the_modes_compete_and_how_we_can_choose_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=OX3PsMr7Y-wHEa-TlWVHmjegZVB8MTU0ODQ4OTY1NkAxNTQ4NDAzMjU2&event=video_description&v=cNEJJ9lcrXE

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the heart of the 14th Chapter. We, we discussed first the introduction of
how the soul becomes entangled within matter. And then, you know, we discussed
about the, you know, characteristics of the three modes. So, we discussed about
passio..., goodness and passion. Now, you know, you know:

        rajo rāgātmakaṁ viddhi
        tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam

We discussed that verse. And now, let us move forward to the characteristic of
the mode of ignorance. Before that, let us have a quick overview of the chapter.
So, you know, you know, we are in the section third, how the modes bind the
soul. You know. Let us start with verse 8:

        tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi
        mohanaṁ sarva-dehinām
        pramādālasya-nidrābhis
        tan nibadhnāti bhārata

You know. You know. You know. You know. So, "tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". That
the mode of ignorance is born of ignorance. Now, this might seem a little
peculiar. But we will discuss this. "mohanaṁ sarva-dehinām". You know. That it
is, it deludes all living beings. "pramādālasya-nidrābhis". And how does it
delude? By producing "pramāda". Madness. "ālasya" is laziness. And "nidrā" is
sleep. "tan nibadhnāti bhārata". You know. You know. You know. So, "tamas tv
ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". What does it mean? You know. We may say, "ajñāna" is
ignorance. And generally, the word "tamas" is translated as ignorance. So,
"tamaḥ guṇāḥ" is mode of ignorance. So, what does it mean that the mode of
ignorance is born of ignorance? You know. The point is that this is a, you know,
perpetuate, it is a, you know, we, self-perpetuating vicious cycle. That first,
there is ignorance. And when we act, based on that ignorance, you know, you
know, you know, we aggravate the influence of the mode of ignorance. And in that
way, we complicate our life. You know. So, there is, you know, basic ignorance
with which we act. And then, we go into deeper ignorance. Just like when a
person is having trouble. And that person thinks that by, you know, you know,
taking alcohol, I can become free from that trouble. So, that itself is
"ajñāna". You know. I can just co..., forget all my troubles. You know.
Temporarily. But after that, they will come back. In a far more troubling form
than what they were at present. So, "tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". "ajñāna-jaṁ
viddhi" means that, that idea that, you know, alcohol will product me from,
pro..., you know, will, you know, free, will solve my problems. Or will
free me from my problems is born of ignorance. And when one acts on that, then
what happen is, one goes into further ignorance. "tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi".
And, you know, you know, you know, when one drinks, so, that is how there is
some basic ignorance. Because of which, one acts in then the mode of ignorance.
And that mode of ign..., action in the mode of ignorance further increases the
ignorance. And when one acts further in the mode of ignorance. So, one drinks,
one, one peg. Two pegs. Five pegs. And then, one does not have money, then one,
you know, you know, mortgages one's house. Or, you know, gambles. And loses a
lot of money. Then, one takes loans. And then, one robs. One may even end up
killing. There is no limit to how low, you know, you know, a blinding addiction,
just characteristic of the mode of ignorance can drag a person. How low that can
drag a person. So, "tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". Now, generally, we think about
some people. Yeah. This person is in the mode of goodness. This person in the
mode of passion. This person in the mode of ignorance. You know. So, we think of
it like that, generally speaking. But then, Krishna is telling over here,
"mohanaṁ sarva-dehinām". So, He has not used such a describer for everyone. For
the earlier modes, He has not used the describer, ok, that this is the mode that
binds all living beings. But He is using this mo..., point over here that
"mohanaṁ sarva-dehinām". It deludes all living beings. Why does it say deludes
all living beings? There are multiple levels of understanding of this. Firstly,
you know, you know, the very bodily conception itself is ignorance. And that,
all living beings are in the bodily conception of life. That itself, you know,
is one level of "tamas". Beyond that, there is also the, you know, you know,
understanding that everybody ha..., has to, you know, you know, take re..., you
know, sleep. And before sleep, we feel tired. So, that kind of slee..., you
know, "anidrā". "anidrā" is a basic bodily function. So, now, does it mean, now,
do, when people go into ignora..., people sleep, are they in the mode of
ignorance? Yes, they are. So, there may be, by pure devotees who may sleep,
also, for Krishna's pleasure. And they dream about Krishna. They are exceptions.
In general that "pramādālasya-nidrābhis". "nidrā" is something which everybody
has to go through. So, there is, you know, you know, you know, the mode of
ignorance which affects everyone. In that sense of, you know, everybody needing
sleep. But there is necessary, you know, contact with the mode of ignorance. And
there is unnecessary aggravation of the mode of ignorance. So, the aggravation
means that, you know, the mode of peop..., people, you know, we say small,
people drink or take drugs. And by that, they make the situation worse. So,
"pramādālasya-nidrābhis". So, "ālasya" is laziness. We have to do something. But
we refuse to do it. We put off doing it. "pramāda" means madness.

        pramādālasya-nidrābhis
        tan nibadhnāti bhārata

"tan nibadhnāti". That born, binds this, in, souls. So, here, Krishna is talking
about something which is very important. He is talking about "tamas tv
ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". So, the mode of ignorance is born of ignorance. It deludes
all living beings. And that is a common factor. But in some people, you know,
those who become lethargic. Those who become into..., intoxicated or infatuated.
Especially by destructive substances. You know. "tan nibadhnāti bhārata". So,
now, you know, you know, so, Prabhupada writes, you know, you know, that:

"the word tu is very significant. This means that the mode of ignorance is a
very peculiar qualification of the embodied soul. The mode of ignorance is just
the opposite of the mode of goodness."

So, goodness was characterised by "prakāśakam". And this is, cause characterised
by "ajñāna-jaṁ". You know. You know. You know. You know. "ajñāna-jaṁ". And
"prakāśakam". So, "ajñāna-jaṁ" is, it, darkness. Or ignorance. Or illu..., or,
or, or, you know, unawareness of what is the truth. And "prakāśakam" is the
illumination that one ena..., enables one to see the right thing. So, "tamas tv
ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". Now, in these three verses, Krishna has given us a quick
summary of the three modes. A brief introduction to each of them with their
primary characteristics. So, now, you know, Krishna, the whole point of this
discussion is that the modes bind. So, you know, you know, the introduction is
also that:

        sattvaṁ rajas tama iti
        guṇāḥ prakṛti-sambhavāḥ

"saṅgena badhnāti". "saṅgena badhnāti". "nibadhnāti" was there in all the
verses, also. So, now, Krishna gives a summary, you know, it was one-one verse
introduction. But now, after that, there is a one verse summary in this 14.9.
Where Krishna says exactly in one word how these three modes bind the person.
So, let us look at it now.

        sattvaṁ sukhe sañjayati
        rajaḥ karmaṇi bhārata
        jñānam āvṛtya tu tamaḥ
        pramāde sañjayaty uta

You know. "sattvaṁ sukhe sañjayati". That in "sattvaṁ guṇāḥ", one experiences
"sukha". In "rajaḥ guṇāḥ", you know, or rather, one, "pramāde sañjayaty uta". In
"sattvaṁ guṇāḥ", one is bound by "sukha". In "rajaḥ guṇāḥ", it is by "karma".
And, you know, you know, "tamas", which is, you know, what is its
characteristic? "jñānam āvṛtya". One's knowledge is covered. What happens?
"pramāde sañjayaty uta". "pramāde" means madness. So, you know, you know,
primarily, here, the defining characteristics are given. So, when one feels
relatively s..., happy. So, really satisfied. When one is in the mode of
goodness. Yes. I know more than others. I will do purer and better than others.
I am happy living this way. So, this is good in one sense that one is not living
sinfully. But it also having a distractive effect in terms of, you know, not
having, you know, been able to, you know, you know, you know, free oneself.
Elevate oneself. You know. You know. You know. You know. Further from the mode
of ignorance. To transcend the whole gamut of material existence. That is not
what is happening. You know. You know. So, now, the, as compared to that karma
is, a person wants more. And more. And more. "rajaḥ karmaṇi bhārata". Because of
that, one person gets caught in karma. So, we discussed "tṛṣṇā". And g...,
"lobha". Attachment of, you know, so, sorry, the characteristic of the mode of,
you know, you know, passion was "rāga" and "tṛṣṇā". "rāga" is for what one has.
"tṛṣṇā" is for what one wants. And that, both of them cause bondage to karma.
And "pramāde sañjayaty uta". So, in ignorance, one becomes bound to madness.
Here, the word, madness does not necessarily mean a person who is, you know,
admitted in the mental asylum. It basically means that a person who is, you
know, you know, terribly in distress. You know. Because of, you know, because of
the, you know, you know, you know, who is acting in self-destructive ways. That
person may sometimes be aware of one's distress. The person may not be aware of
one's own distress. But basically, the actions are in di..., are in distressing
and distractive ways. Acting for one's own tra..., you know, distress. And for
others' distress, also. So, the person may not intend to act distressingly,
distressfully, may not be intending to cause, you know, pain to one's. Generally,
nobody does that. You know. There, you know, there are some people who have
terrible habits. There are people who are called, you know, one, own's cutters.
You know. Somehow, this is, this is perverse idea. That some people, you know,
cut their own body. And when, you know, they take a knife. And then, they cut
their skin. And then, when they feel pain because of the blood coming out. You
know. You know. They feel some relief by that. Actually, the inflicting torture
on the body, this cutting, it can be a form of add..., addiction. Which can, you
know, make people, you know, you know, which may need even psych..., you know,
you know, psychiatric attention sometimes. So, what happens is these people,
they somehow develop the perverse idea that there are so many troubles. And they
need some sensation. Just like, some people want, watch horror movies. Where
they have, whatever anxieties. And worries. And, you know, you know, irritations
in their own lives. They want to forget that. So, most people may want to go and
watch some entertainment. But some people want to go, show, be horrified. They
may want to see something horrible by which they can, you know, you know, you
know, you know, get, forget their, you know, suffering. So, like that,
similarly, you know, so, there is, some people may cut their bodies. You know.
They use a knife. And often, they cut the bodies this, near their, the, in, in
parts which cannot be seen by everyone. And they cut like that. And then, they,
when the pain comes because of the cutting. You know. The intensity of that pain
makes them forget everything else. And that is how they get some sort of kick.
So, he says, oh, now, this is, the, getting that stimulation now. I do not need
anything else. And they just forget everything else. Which seems to be, you
know, you know, you know, quite absurd. And irrationale. But there are, so,
people do it. So, now, Krishna will describe in the next verse, how there is
competition between the modes. Let us look at 14.10.

        rajas tamaś cābhibhūya
        sattvaṁ bhavati bhārata
        rajaḥ sattvaṁ tamaś caiva
        tamaḥ sattvaṁ rajas tathā

You know. So, "rajas tamaś cābhibhūya". That "ca", "abhibhūya". You know. You
know. You know. You know. That for conquering the modes of passion and
ignorance, "abhibhūya", overcoming them. "sattvaṁ bhavati bhārata". Sometimes,
the mood of goodness triumphs. And when it triumphs, what happens? "rajas tamaś
cābhibhūya". Sometimes, "rajaḥ" triumphs. So, co...., overcoming "sattvaṁ" and
"tamaś". And sometimes, "tamaḥ" triumphs. Overcoming "sattvaṁ" and "rajas". You
know. You know. You know. You know. So, in that way, a person starts feeling the
steady. You know. A person starts feeling not steady. But unsteady. Why unsteady?
Because these modes are all acting at different times in different ways. So,
a person may, may be in, we have seen sometimes that picture of a person being
pulled by three lines. A puppet. See it in Prabhupada's Bhagavad Gita, also.
There is this per..., you know, there is moth..., Durga Devi. And she has three
puppet ears. Or maybe three female people, also. They are li..., representing
the three modes. And everybody is being pulled. So, what does it mean? Now, all
of us, we are, you know, these three modes are not, you know, are neither, you
know, discrete, nor static. You know. In terms of how they affect us in our
lives. You know. Three modes are of course discrete in terms of, you know, you
know, you know, you know, their existence. There is a gu..., mode of passion.
There is a mode of ignorance. There is a mode of goodness. These three modes are
there. But in terms of how they influence us, that is not static. Not, these,
Neither static. Nor discrete. Necessarily. No static means it is not that if in
the morning, after I take a bath, I feel myself in the mode of goodness. You
know. You know. I, right until the end of the class, I will, until the end of
the day, throughout, I will be in goodness. You know. Practically speaking,
i..., if we start attending a class. We can see. Maybe, initially, we have
decided. You know. Yes. Hearing the class is important. I have to understand the
philosophy. I have to be clear about understanding these things. So, we are in
the mode of goodness. We are interested. But then, as the class goes on, then
the other modes start pulling us. Then, you know, you know, I, I need to sleep
seven hours. But yesterday night, I slept for six hours, 45 minutes. So, maybe,
I can take a five minute nap. And make up. So, you know, you know, that is the
mode of ignorance talking. And then, other time saying, you know, ok, I am
attending this class. One hour. You know. Or one and a half. Ah, for there are
so many other things to do. When will this get over? I have to do this. I have
to do that. I have to do that. That is the mode of passion speaking. So, we
could practically see that, you know, when we are trying to do some activity,
the other modes are pulling us. So, now, if I am trying to hear a class. And at
that time, the mode of passion starts pulling. And then, ok, we have to do
something. Come on. Go here. Go there. Go do that. Do that. You know. That mode
of passion, you know, creates restlessness. You know. You know. You know. You
know. You know. And how do we overcome that restlessness? You know. Either we,
you know, you know, given to the mode of passion. Or we fight against the mode
of passion. Now, you know, you know, you know, if we are given to the passion,
then we say, ok, you know, if we are in a physical class. Attending a class.
Then, we, it is, unless we are extremely disturbed or something, we will not
walk out of the class. We will just tolerate it. But if we are hearing a class
online. We think, ok, just switch it off. Let me ha..., hear it after some time.
I will do some other things. Or you know, we get a phone call. And then, we use
a phone call as a pres..., pretext to go out. That may be d..., required. Now,
I am not saying that these sort of, you know, interruptions cannot come because
of genuine reasons. It is possible. Definitely. And if there, there are
emergencies. Or, you know, extreme urgent situations, then they have to be dealt
with. No doubt. But the point is, we are just trying to observe how these modes
compete in our own psychology. So, you know, you know, you know, the mode of
ignorance, it may say that, phew, this is tiresome. You know. I thought I had
finished all my studying business when I got out of college. Now, I do not want
to get into this. Exams. And things like that.

I came to spiritual life for fr..., freedom from tension. And these exams bring
more tension. You know. What is this? Spir..., spiritual life? So, this sort of
lethargy, this characteristic of the mode of ignorance. Now, certainly, if we
have the idea of, that spiritual life is a place for relaxation. I want to relax
from everything else. Well, then that is not a proper understanding of spiritual
life. Spiritual life does give us relaxation. But that relaxation comes pu...,
through purification. That relaxation does not come from just a deactivation.
Deactivation means, oh, just do not do any activity. Relax. No. Well, the real
relaxation for the soul is when the soul is fixed in the service of Krishna. You
know. When the soul is purified. And is situated in love of for, in loving, you
know, harmony with Krishna. And doing various services for Krishna's pleasure.
Out of love for Krishna. That is where the soul is actually happy. Truly. So,
that is not deactivation. But purification. Deactivation means, actually, we
just succumb to the mode of ignorance. We just become deactivated. Do not do
anything. That does not lead to much elevation. Or advancement. So, the, you
know, so, these are the different modes which may influence us in different
ways. And, you know, you know, you know, this conflict underlies most other
conflicts that people talk about. You know. One of the biggest conflicts that
people face in life is, you know, indecision. The capa..., indecisiveness,
rather. You know. People, indecision is can, I am unable to decide, you know, in
specific situations. If I do this. Or do that. But indecisiveness is in general
an inability to do, act decisively, should I do this? Or should I do that? So,
you know, if we do not take decisions. Then, life takes decisions for us. We
have to, we, life does not stop for us. We have to move forward in life. You
know. You know. And if there is a cricket match. And there is a last, you know,
last over of the cricket match. And then, say, the opp..., opposing team
requires ten runs to win. Then, the, the captain has to take a decision. Ok.
Should I give the, you know, ball, to this bowler or that bowler for the last
over. So, that sort of decisions just have to be taken. You know. They cannot
avoid taking the decisions. So, this is very obvious when we come to decision
scenarios like sports. Where, you know, the, everything literally has to move
forward. But some, but in our own life, sometimes, you know, we can, you know,
drag things. You know. Should I, ok, should I take this career? Or should I take
this career? Should I take this job? Or should I take this job? Should I marry
this person? Or should I marry that person? Or whatever. There are so many
decisions that we have to take. And we can keep dragging our feets. So, now,
dragging our feet is, you know, generally the characteristic of the mode of
ignorance. Of course, dragging one's feet is definitely not the same as, you
know, you know, thoughtfulness. In thoughtfulness, you know, although there may
not be some external decision coming up. But there is processing of the data.
There is consideration of the choices and their consequences that is there. So,
this, it is based on, you know, mature reasoning. Giving due time for that.
Mature reasoning at a conscious level. And also, at a subconscious level. You
know. You know. Contemplation to understand our, you know, our gut instinct.
Our, you know, you know, deepest feelings. So, you know, that is different. You
know.

Whereas in mode of ignorance, you know, you know, one is inactive. But one is
not even contemplative. So, we could say that the characteristics of the three
moes are, is, you know, you know, goodnesses. Contemplative. And active. Passion
is simply active. But not very contemplative. And ignorance is neither active.
Nor contemplative. So, that is how these three modes are. So, externally
speaking that sometimes, you know, goodness and ignorance may appear very
similar. But there is a difference. You know. Two, two people may be sitting for
a class. And somebody may say, I do not have time for a class. I will go away. I
do not know. I will not come for the class. So, that, it might seem that both
are similar. These two people are, you know, similar. Both are sitting for the
class. But while one is sitting for the class, he is attentively hearing. The other
is just calmly sleeping. In the class. So, you know, both are externally, yes,
both are in the temple. One person has gone out of the temple. The person has
gone out of the temple. Not running to hear the class. Or going away to do so
many other things. That person may be in the mode of passion. So, externally,
goodness and by ignorance may look similar. But internally, they are radically
opposite. You know. So, we see this, you know, generally, we think of these
modes as lateral. As, you know, vertical. You know. There is ignorance. Then,
there is passion. Then, there is goodness. And then, there is transcendence. So,
you know, "ta...". You know. That is definitely true. You know. But in terms of,
you know, you know, you know, you know, the journey, the modes can move up and
down very rapidly. So, you know, it is not necessary that a person male, be, in,
will go to passion to go through to ignorance. You know. We may be chanting Hare
Krishna in the morning. And we may be in goodness. And we start feeling tired.
And then, from goodness, tuck. There is a shortcut to ignorance. So, suddenly,
tuck. We just go to sleep. From, now, we may wonder, you know, we have to do,
now, we go into passion? You know. We can go into passion. You know. And
sometimes, passion is the, passion is a way to protect ourselves from ignorance.
So, for example, if we start feeling very sleepy. Then, we wake up. And so, how
do we wake up? Now, we wake up. The waking is by, best way is to stay awake is
by walking. You know. Guess. Stand up. And start walking. Walk, by walking, what
happens essentially is that we stay protected. You know. You know. We stay calm.
You know. We stay focused. You know. Maybe, not necessarily in terms of being
attentive to the whole chanting of the holy names. But at least, we stay
attentive in terms of focusing on the whole, utter..., at least uttering the
holy name. Because we are walking along. So, and the moun..., mountains are
moving. And we are awake. Some level of awareness and consciousness is better
than just a "tamaḥ guṇāḥ" of sleeping. Being, you know, half asleep. Or being
fully asleep. You know. So, you know, the, what I was saying is that we can go
from, because goodness and ignorance are externally similar, we can go down very
rapidly. Sometimes, having a bit of passion. Just washing one's face. Walking a
little bit. That can help quite a bit in trying to fight off the spell of
ignorance. So, this, in this way, basically, there is a competition between the
modes. And we all have to battle with this competition. And overcome this
competition. And overcome, now, how do we overcome? Actually, you know, you
know, we have to overcome the lower modes with the higher mode. That means, you
know, you know, to understand this simply is like, you know, you know, you know,
if we are at a crossroad with three options. If we have come to a particular
place. And there are, there is of, there is fork. One road goes like this. One
road goes like this. One road goes like this. So, in that fork, which do I
choose? Accordingly, my destination will come. So, and now, imagine a role, in
which, there is a fork at every moment. So, a fork at every moment. You know.
Ev..., every, I am, I am, take one direction over here. Move little ahead.
Again, there are three forks. Again, there are forks. Again, there are forks.
Forks means, basically, you know, there are road forks. In three ways.

You know. One. Two. Three. So, we have to choose. So, our situation is like
that. You know. Continuously, we have to, you know, choose. Should I, will I be
in goodness? Will I be in goodness? Will I be in ignorance? How will I act? And
accordingly, our life will move forward. So, we have to consistently choose the
mode of goodness. And this conflict is going on. And this actually helps us to
make sense of much of the confusion that we experience in our lives. The
confusion in terms of, sometimes, we feel one way. Some, another times, we feel
another way. And we cannot understand why I am feeling, such, changing like this
so rapidly. So, the way to understand this is quite a recognising that,
actually, all this is because of the mod..., you know, modes. So, rather than
getting carried away by the modes, one sta..., stay..., ah, oh, this is so
goodness. This is passion. This is ignorance. Let me choose goodness. And then,
as I choose, the goodness will increase within me. But basically, these modes
and conflict. Now, first, in verses, you know, 6, you know, verses 6, 7, 8,
Krishna has given an introductory characteristic of how the mode binds. Now, you
know, now, after this, after starting about the competition among the various
modes. Conflict among the various modes. Now, Krishna will talk about within
this conflict, see, basically, it is a conflict that is on, continuously going on.
And some mode triumphs. So, which it, when a particular mode triumphs, what is
the psychological condition of a person? That will be described in 11, 12, 13.
You know. So, essentially, what is being described here is the, you know, you
know, sta..., more or less, the first verse, you know, a static characteristic
of how the mode binds. And then, you know, you know, the dynamic characteristic
of how the mode triu..., a particular mode triumphs. Among the competition.
Among the modes. That is described in 11, 12, 13. So, 11th is also describing
the mode of goodness. You know. 12th is des..., like, there was in 6th. 12th is
describing, you know, passion like in 7th. And 13th is describing ignorance like
was described in 8th. But we will see that there is a, some difference between
these two. So, Srila Prabhupada, you know, you know, you know, you know,
conn..., connects the modes with the actions. This will be explored much more in
the later chapters. Especially 17th Chapter.

"By the manifestation of particular activities, it can be understood in what
mode of nature one is situated."

So, by looking at the externals, we can get a, you know, glimpse of the
internal. Not entirely. But we can get some understanding. So, here, now, the
activities will be described. You know. When a particular mode becomes
prominent.

        sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin
        prakāśa upajāyate
        jñānaṁ yadā tadā vidyād
        vivṛddhaṁ sattvam ity uta

You know. "sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin". "sarva-dvāreṣu". That all doors. "dehe
’smin". So, for the body, there are various doors. Which are these doors?

        nava-dvāre pure dehī

We had discussed this in 5.13 in the Bhagavad Gita. So, there are nine, you
know, nine gates to this body. So:

        sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin
        prakāśa upajāyate

You know. You know. "prakāśa upajāyate" means that "prakāśa". That illumination
is there. So, when there is, you know, darkness, then, you know, you know, for
example, if I have to go out of this room. And there is darkness. I may not be
able to make out where the door is. Where the wall is. And even if I go out of
the door, I may not be able to come. What is the, you know, next after the door?
You know. Are there steps? Is there a sliding place? Is there a straight road?
You know. Is there an elevator? What is there after that? If there is no
"prakāśa", then I cannot see anything clearly. But when there is "prakāśa", then
I can see things clearly.

        sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin
        prakāśa upajāyate

Then:

        jñānaṁ yadā tadā vidyād
        vivṛddhaṁ sattvam ity uta

"jñānaṁ yadā tadā vidyād". You know. You know. You know. So, when there is
"jñānaṁ", at that time, you know, know it. So, there is "jñānaṁ". And "vidyād".
The words may seem to be similar over here. But, you know, they are having
different context. That when there is "jñānaṁ". With, you know, when there is
the illumination of knowledge. So, "prakāśa" of "jñānaṁ". So, the, in, you know,
you know, knowledge illuminates in its own way. When I feel some coughing
sensation, I formid just a cough. But then, if I go to a doctor and get myself
diagnosed, then I find that, actually, it is not just a cough. You know. You
know. It is a, some serious issue which I have to deal with. What is that? It
may be some disease. It may be some, maybe, there is some, you know, TV germs
which have infected my chest. Or whatever. So, the "jñānaṁ" leads to "prakāśa".
When there is medical knowledge, then, you know, one can look at the symptoms.
And understand better. Similarly, with respect to this, also. When there is
mode of ign..., when mode, mode of ign..., goodness is there. When one's
pathways are eliminated, that means one understands. See, the senses are the
doors through which our consciousness travels. Consciousness can go one way.
Second way. Third way. Fourth way. And whichever way it goes, the choices bring
consequences. So, when one is able to perceive the consequences. That means
there is light over there. You know. So, illumination is what is important. And
without illumination, there is a, there is, you know, you know, you know,
delusion. There is confusion. And there is, you know, you know, stupefaction.
You know. Person acts like a foolish person. Deluded person. And that person
acts self-destructively. So, when the senses are illumined, that means that a
person knows what should be done. What should not be done. How I should act. And
how I should not act. "jñānaṁ yadā tadā vidyād". So, when there is "jñānaṁ",
then "vivṛddhaṁ sattvam ity uta". That this is the mode of goodness. So, let us
look at, you know, you know, so, Prabhupada writes that, you know, you know, you
know:

"one can see things in the right position, one can hear things in the right
position, and one can taste things in the right position."

And it is an int..., curious word Prabhupada uses. Position. Position means how
that particular object interacts with us. How we choose to deal with that
particular thing. And, you know, you know, what effect we let it to have on us.
You know. Food has to be eaten. You know. So, that is a natural human function.
But in mode of ignorance, you know, a person may eat something. Which, you know,
may be harmful. That person, in the mode of passion, that person may eat
something just because of the taste. And not to think about, you know, you know,
how it is going to affect the health. We will talk more specifically about food
in the various modes in the 17th Chapter. But here, the important point is to
recognise that, you know, you know, you know, you know, there are the three
modes. And when one under..., sees the actions. And understand the position of
those obj..., you know, those act..., those objects or those actions with our
consciousness. This is going to affect me in this way. Then, that is in the mode
of goodness. So, now, let us move forward. You know. You know.

        lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ
        karmaṇām aśamaḥ spṛhā
        rajasy etāni jāyante
        vivṛddhe bharatarṣabha

So, "lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ". "lobhaḥ". "lobhaḥ" is greed. "pravṛttir
ārambhaḥ". "pravṛttir ārambhaḥ" means, you know, "pravṛttir" is action according
to one's inclination. You know. "pravṛttir". You know. "ārambhaḥ" is, "ār...",
"sarvārambha-parityāgī". You know. So, Krishna has used this word "ārambhaḥ" in
various contexts in the Bhagavad Gita. "sarvārambha-parityāgī" comes in the, you
know, Twelfth Chapter with the Bhagavad Gita. When He is talking about, you
know, you know, the qualities that endear a per..., a devotee to Krishna. And:

        yasya sarve samārambhāḥ
        kāma-saṅkalpa-varjitāḥ

In 4.19, also, Krishna has used the word "ārambhāḥ". One, or, so, "ārambhāḥ", in
Hindi, often means, you know, in Hindi, or Marathi, or the other vernacular
languages, it means beginning. To begin. You know. You know. So, "ārambhāḥ" does
not always have the same meaning in sanskrit. "ārambhāḥ" can mean that. But
"ārambhāḥ" also means endeavor. You know. So, there is a, you know:

        yasya sarve samārambhāḥ
        kāma-saṅkalpa-varjitāḥ 

There, when Krishna is talking about in the Fourth, Fourth Chapter. I read the
verse about the karma yogi, who is illumined by knowledge. And so is freed from
sinful reactions. There, He is using the word "ārambhaḥ" in terms of one who is
every endeavor, is purified by the fire of knowledge. You know. And is fr..., be
removed, free from, you know, the con..., you know, contamination of
selfishness. So, like that, here, "ārambhaḥ" refers to endeavor. So, "pravṛttir
ārambhaḥ". "pravṛttir" means action. "ārambhaḥ" means endeavor. The person is
ready to endeavor. Work very hard. "karmaṇām aśamaḥ spṛhā". So, what kind of
endeavor? "karmaṇām". "karmaṇām" is, you know, you know, the, this is fruitive,
fruit..., fruitive activities. Dharma. Artha. Kama. Moksha. So, that kind of
activity. "karma". So, within karma-kanda. You know. You know. "aśamaḥ spṛhā". 
And then, you know, behind all that, there is desire. But what kind of desire?
"aśamaḥ". "aśamaḥ" is that which cannot be satisfied. So, you know, "śamaḥ" and
"damaḥ" are the characteristics of brahmana. And "śamaḥ" means calming down the
mind. Calm down the mind. But "aśamaḥ" means that which cannot be calmed down.
"aśamaḥ spṛhā". "rajasy etāni jāyante". "rajasy". By "rajaḥ guṇāḥ", this is one,
that person is known:

        ... etāni jāyante
        vivṛddhe bharatarṣabha

So, "vivṛddhe bharatarṣabha". You know. You know. Such a person, when the mode
of ign..., you know, "rajaḥ guṇāḥ" increases, mode, the mode of passion
increases, what happens? "vivṛddhe bharatarṣabha". So, these are the
characteristics. Oh, "bharatarṣabha". What all the characteristics here? "lobhaḥ
pravṛttir ārambhaḥ". So, gree..., there is greed. So, "lobhaḥ" is the prominent
characteristic. As we will see later on when Krishna will talk about these
characteristics once again. "lobhaḥ" is a very prominent characteristic. Why?
Because, you know, you know, you know, when the key, you know, the primary char...,
feature thing that happens when one is in the mode of passion is more. More.
More. Now, that more, when it is directed, you know, towards, you know, a
sexually attractive objects. Then, it may, it i..., manifests as lust. When it
is more, the, directed towards, you know, things. Then, it may become greed. So,
but that more. More. More in terms of matter. I have this much. But I want more.
I want more. I more, want more. "lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ". So, you know, you
know, Krishna is describing over here how these three modes affect a person in
terms of, you know, within their internal competition. Previous ver..., pre...,
verse was to, Krishna has used the "vivṛddhaṁ". Here, also, the word "vivṛddhe".
So, you know, "vivṛddhaṁ" means when this becomes strong. When this becomes
predominant. So, at certain times, certain modes become predominant. When a
particular mode becomes predominant, then what happens?

        lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ
        karmaṇām aśamaḥ spṛhā

"karmaṇām aśamaḥ spṛhā". "aśamaḥ". So, insatiable desire. And "rajasy etāni
jāyante". Now, this may lead to a question that, you know, you know, you know,
you know, do these modes create those feelings? You know. How? You know. What,
how exactly does it happen? You know. That, is it that the person is greedy by
default? By, by nature that person is greedy? By disposition? Or by imposition
of the modes that person becomes greedy. So, are the modes a matter of
disposition? Are the modes a matter of imposition? You know. Disposition means
in it, inclination. Imposition means something which is external. External
pressure. So, actually, you know, you know, it is both. It is a matter of
disposition. As well as imposition. Not exactly imposition in terms of a
fatalistic force. It is not that irresistible force is there. You know. You
know. But, you know, you know, you know, certain people are by their, you know,
by defining nature, based on their past karma, more greedy than others. That
this sort of diversity is always there in human society. But beyond that, you
know, you know, you know, there i..., there are some people who, who are placed
in circumstances. Or who choose circumstances that provoke greed within them.
Or, or that means if, you know, a person just keep watching a lot of
advertisements. Or, say, watches TV which involves describe, description of huge
amount of prosperity. Materially. You know. Because of that, people start
thinking, oh, this is wonderful. This is the way I want to live. And by, this is
the, and then, that gets, fuels greed more. And more. And more. And more. So,
desire for more and more, that is how it increases. So:

        lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ
        karmaṇām aśamaḥ spṛhā
        rajasy etāni jāyante
        vivṛddhe bharatarṣabha

So, they are, you know, you know, our vivṛddhe. Understand from the point of
view of lust, also. You know. You know. You know. There is some level of lust
that is natural biologically, we could say. You know. The male-female
attraction. And within that, also, there, you know, you know, there is, some
people have a higher sex drive. Some people have a lower sex drive. You know.
But the point is that, whatever be the sex drive, you know, the, of the person.
That person can either increase it. Or decrease it. And today's whole social,
sociocultural environment is meant to increase it more. And more. And more. Now,
when it increases more and more. The result of that is people live in a co..,
state of artificial sexual stimulation. And perpetual dissatisfaction because of
that. So, that is not natural. That, so, that is not just something which is a
disposition. Is it an imposition? Well, it is something which is chosen by a
person. And once a person makes a choice, then there is imposition. See, we are
forced to act as we choose to desire. We are forced to act as we choose to
desire. What does it mean? We have the choice of desiring. But once we ma...,
choose the desire. Ok. This is the, this is what I want to do. Then, the
modes stake up. And tuck. Then, after that, it becomes very difficult to resist
it. So, imagine that there are, you know, earlier had given the example of a
road with three forks. So, that would seem to say that, we alone have, we alone
choose things. Ok. We choose goodness. We choose passion. We choose ignorance.
That is at one level true. But now, let us consider another example. Which is a
little more, you know, subtle. Which illustrates the point, you know, somewhat
better. The point is, you know, you know, that, imagine that there are, so,
river with different currents in that river. So, one current is, you know, going
this way. One current is going this way. Another current is going this way. So,
you know, you know, now, a boat person who is a, trying to maneuver the boat.
That person can choose which current to get into. But once a person chooses the
current, that means the, some, some, some part of the river. This happens
sometimes. There are multiple waves. At multiple layers. And multiple parts of
the rivers. So, you know, you know, some, in some cases, the current is like
this. You know. Then, the, you know, water is moving like this. Another place
is, the current is going like this. Third place, the current is going like this.
So, now, you know, depending on which current, the boat person, you know,
chooses. Once a particular current is chosen, then the waves will take that
person in that direction. So, there is some amount of choice in terms of, you
know, you know, which current to place oneself in. But once one has placed
oneself in a particular current, then tuck. One is taken in that direction.
Whoosh. This one. It is very difficult to resist after that. So, like that, we
are forced to act as we choose to desire. You know. We are forced to act as we
choose to desire. So, now, you know, we can, can we choose our desires? We say
that, now, doesn't the mode determine what kind of desires also I will have? No.
The modes do not determine our specific desires. You know. You know. The modes,
you know, affect us in terms of, you know, which desires may be presented before
us. But it is not necessary that they affect us en..., they shape our desires
entirely. You know. They determine our desires entirely. You know. They are,
they are contributory factory. They are not decisive factors. Ultimately, we do
have free will. So, a person who has been for example habituated to meat-eating
throughout one's life. And not just habituated because of one's attra..., own
attraction to the meat-eating. But habituated, also, because that is the food
that people have always been eating. In their culture. In their tradition. In
their family. You know. If that is the case, that that is how people have always
been eating, then what happens?

Then, that is what people eat, eventually. You know. You know. You know. And
then, do not even think about it. You know. You know. So, then, is that person,
does this person really have a choice? In terms of whether to eat vegetarian
food? Or non-vegetarian food? We cou..., we could say that, yes, tech..., you
know, technically, as that person always has the choice. But that may not come
in the framework of thought, only. Why should I not eat him..., veget...,
non-vegetarian food? That is all. You know. We all have been eating. And that is
how we will keep eating. You know. So, to come out of that framework, one needs
some input from somewhere else. So, somebody meets a vegetarian. Somebody reads
something about vegetarianism. So, then, or, somebody, a person gets exposed to,
oh, what kind of brutality happens when animals are killed? Then, by that, that
person recognises. And then, that person raises up. Chooses a better option.
Instead of choosing that particular option. You know. So, in this way, a person
can make choices. It is not necessary. We can choose our desires. It is not
that we will be able to choose an entirely new desire about which we have never
heard. There may be a gradual, there may be a, a range within which we can
choose. You know. Even within meat. When that person is addicted to meat. It is
not that that person has to eat a specific kind of meat itself. That person may
choose pork. Or beef. Or whatever. You know. Different kinds of mea..., meat are
there. You know. You know. So, depending on how a person chooses to execute the
desire. After that, that person gets addicted. So, we can all choose desires
based on our intelligence. Based on our knowledge. Based on culture. And based
on our free will. So, there are many factors. It is not an exhaustive list. This
is just an indicative list. You know. But the point over here is that we do have
free will. And we, it is also true that once we make a choice, then that free
will almost, you know, disappears. Does not disappear entirely at anytime. We
can always cha..., make changes. But certain actions have consequences. And
those consequences cannot be changed. You know. You know. You know. You know.
And some consequences, actually, the, all actions have consequences. But certain
actions have massive consequences. And then, therefore, one has to, you know,
you know, be car..., most, more cautious while making these major decisions in
life. So, the basic point of our discussion right now is that, a certain modes
have certain characteristics. That means, like going back to the waves example
You know. Ok. These waves go, are a little bit more, you know, you know, this
current is a little bit calmer current. This current is a wa..., turbulent
current. And this current is like idle. It will, just keep mov..., moving round.
And round. And round. And round. And, so, then, I have to choose which current I
want to go into. So, now, we may say, if somebody is going, charges like this.
You know. This is calm. This is, you know, turbulent. And this is very violent.
You know. This is more disturbing. And this is more violent. Then, you know,
obviously, somebody will choose a calm, calm, that person will choose a calm
current. Yes, that way, we may say, the charge is very obvious. But, you know,
things are not so clear when all these currents are inside us. And they have
already affected us. So, they affect our perception. For a person who is in the
mode of passion, life in the mode of goodness may not look very attractive. You
know. That person in the mode of passion. You know. Answering, you know, maybe,
send, texting people. And responding to emails. Answering to cellphones. And
doing so many things. If that person is taken to a calm, serene beach. You know.
It is boring over here. You will check first seat, people take a seat, there is
no range for the internet. What do I do now? Start feeling, you know, agitated
just by that. You know. When people go to a peaceful place, you know, to relax.
But often, you know, the, the irony is so much that that which is causing them
agitation, when they are freed from that, that freedom causes them agitation.
So, the endless messages. And calls that are coming, that is what is causing
me agitation.

But when I go to a place when that is not there. That agitation is, I will be
freed from that agitation because the network is not there over there. Then,
what happens? There are still, oh, I do not have any connection. And that causes
me agitation. So, this, if we think about it, what it indicates is that the mode
of passion will make us agitated whatever situation we are in. So, it is not the
cellphone and its messages that are the cause of agitation. It is as long as I
am in the mode of passion, whether I am in an area where there is network. Or
whether area where there is no network, I will be agitated. You know. By, if I
change myself for the mode of goodness. Then, wherever I a..., I am, I will not
become agitated. Of course, this does not mean that our, you know, you know,
disposition can survive in all positions. In certain places are in the mode of
passion. If we are going to those places, we will be affected by the mode of
passion. We cannot avoid that. Therefore, we have to be careful in our choices.
That, you know, you know, you know, as devotees, we try to avoid places which
are too much in the mode of passion, the ignorance. Of course, we cannot avoid
entirely. But we try to avoid external stimulations, which can, you know, lead
to certain internal reactions. In terms of emotions, and then, they lead to
certain actions. So, you know, "lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ". Now, in the mode,
today, we see, society is so much in the mode of passion. You know. There is a
whole for..., form of addiction. Which we discussed earlier. It is called
"workaholism". "workaholism" means people just become workaholics. Work. Work.
Work. Work. Work. 24 hours a day. Work. Work. Work. Work. Work. Do nothing, but
work. And that sort of behavior can be very damaging for a person. Very
damaging. Because, you know, you know, there is no balance. Not even, the,
wonder, person does not have time for spiritual life. Person does not have, you
know, time for other aspects of material life, also. Person does not have time
for practicing, you know, you know, you know, you know, for being with one's
family. For doing other basic activities, also. Just work. Unive...,
unidimensional existence person has. That is very harmful for, you know,
holistic living. Even at a material level. What to speak of at a spiritual
level? Now, you know, in, so, this kind of workaholism. And it is not a small
thing. The problem is other kinds of, you know, addictions, is that, it can be,
it, they are generally, you know, you know, they are generally harmful. Harmful.
And it is visible that they are harmful. A person who is alcoholic, you know,
there might be some, some, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
glamor in becoming alcoholic. You know. Cool. Let us drink. You know. We all
drink. It is more on. It is fashionable. It is cool. People think like that. But
then, if people start doing excess of that. Then, we understand, you know, so,
people have this idea drink. But do not become drunk. You know. Drink. But do
not become drunk. Now, that is as pre..., impractical an advice as can, as a
person can get. Because it is no, no matter that person does not self-control.
But that if drinking becomes an escape way, then, when one really is in trouble,
and needs an escape, at that time, one will escape along that way. And one will
not be able to understand how far I am going along that way. And will go much
further than what one intends to. That is how people become trapped. But as
compared to, say, alcoholism and workaholism, the problem is, that, that is, you
know, highly glamorised in today's society. Oh. You know. This person. You know.
You know. He has not taken a leave for the last seven years. You know. Every
single day. Working so hard. This person works for 14 hours a day. 16 hours a
day. Now, you know, you know, actually speaking, this sort of unidimensional
obsession with work is, you know, is not something which has to be glamorised.

It simply indicates that the person is con..., is very viciously gripped by the
mode of passion. Very strongly. Viciously gripped by the mode of passion. And he
is not able to come out of it. So, you know, now, of course, there may be
situations. Where there are project deadlines. And there are, you know,
emergencies. There person has to work hard. And we may ourselves, you know, we
may ourselves choose the mode of passion at particular times. When we have to
get things done. We may choose it. So, I want to do things fast. And I will do
it this day. That is fine. You know. Now, it is not that I think, ok, in my
mental panel, there is this goodness. Passion. Ignorance. Not that I
spirit..., press a button. Now, passion button. Now, goodness button. Now,
transcendence, now, ignorance button. Not like that. There is no mental panel
like that inside us. But the point is, you know, you know, that we all, you
know, go into certain behavioral modes at different times. And sometimes, you
know, passion is required. But the, if that is, becomes a normal way of
functioning, then that can take a toll on a psychologically. It can take a toll
on an emotionally. It can take a toll on us in terms of our relationships. And
our balance in life. So, this workaholism is a very common form of addiction
which is there in today's society. And it is also in one sense glamorised.
Because, you know, people, you can get awards. You can get spurs. You can get
salary raises. And that way, one can work. And the problem is that, with
workaholism, the mode of passion is, one is never satisfied with one, with what
one is presented, the, doing that right now. You know. You know. Say, in
devotional service, we say, we should stay busy. We should stay busy. You know,
If we stay busy. If we stay engaged, then we will not fall into maya. That is
true. But there is a difference bet..., you know, Prabhupada was busy. But
Prabhupada was never passionate. You know. We are passionate. But we are not
busy. Often. What does it mean? I, do this. Do this. Do this. Do this. Do this.
We will do a lot. But en..., in doing nothing much. You know. Prabhu..., we, we
can productive. Maybe, we can busy and productive without being passionate. And
we can be passionate without being productive. You know. Like a, there is a fan.
The fan, you know, it moves a lot. But it does not get anywhere. You know.
Moving. Moving. Moving. Moving. Moving. You know. If we keep a fan on for whole
day. You know. If that fan, you know, that fan's motion, whatever energy was
required for the motion of the fan. If that wa..., energy was used to move a car
wheel, the car could have gone a substantial amount of distance in that much
energy. A fan moves round. Round. Round. Round. Round. Round. You know. You
know. It, but it does not go anywhere. So, at least, the fan serves other
functio..., some other function of, you know, you know, getting, you know, a
circulating air. But when our mind, when it moves like a fan, so, so, so, one
round. And round. This. This. This. This. This. This. This. This. This. Just
goes round. And round. And round. And round. And gets nowhere. So, often, you
know, our thoughts are like that. And when our thoughts are like that, then our
actions are, you know, uncoordinated and, you know, you know, you know, you
know, incompletely executed. It means, oh, little bit of this. Then, little bit
of that. Little bit of that. Little bit of that. And yes, we can, you know, bite
into many pies. Little bit. Little bit at different times. But if there is also
a plan according to. Ok. Little bit of this work. Little bit of this work.
Little bit of this work. But if I just get into things without thinking much.
And then, whatever I feel like, I do now. Whatever I feel like, I do now.
Whatever I feel like, I do now. Then, I will not have any balance in my life.
And that can be very harmful. So, this mode of passion, we can see it very
evidently in today's society. In terms of how people are caught. Dominated. By
this ethos of extremely imbalanced lifestyle. In terms of working too much. So,
workaholism. "vivṛddhe bharatarṣabha". Now, Srila Prabhupada writes in the
purport:

"There is no end to sense gratification."

You know. You know. So, "There is no end". No matter how much one has. One
always wants more. That is the meaning of "aśamaḥ". So, like, it was, so, what
is that? Yeah. "aśamaḥ spṛhā". That the desire never ends. Then, after that,
now, Krishna will describe the mode of ignorance.

        aprakāśo ’pravṛttiś ca
        pramādo moha eva ca
        tamasy etāni jāyante
        vivṛddhe kuru-nandana

You know. So, here, Krishna is describing the mode of ignorance as opposed. Now,
if we look at the words, the word "prakāśaḥ" had been used for, you know, the
mode of goodness.

        sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin
        prakāśa upajāyate

And the word "pravṛttiḥ" had been used for the mode of passion. "lobhaḥ
pravṛttir ārambhaḥ". But now, Krishna is here using the word "aprakāśo
’pravṛttiś ca". That means there is neither the illumination of goodness, nor is
there the action of passion. And what is there? There is simply immobilisation.
So, "pramādo moha eva ca". There is illusion. And there is intoxication.
Madness. You know. "pramādaḥ", intoxic...:

        tamasy etāni jāyante
        vivṛddhe kuru-nandana

You know. You know. "vivṛddhe kuru-nandana". You know. You know. You know. So,
Krishna is using different words to refer to Arjuna here. "kuru-nandana".
"bharatarṣabha". You know. So, He is telling that, yes, you are all these great,
you know, you have these great connections. You are an illustrious person. But
understand that these modes are formidable. And "vivṛddhe", they can overpower
anyone. They can overpower even you. You know. "vivṛddhe kuru-nandana". So, now,
you know, here, now, when Krishna is talking about the mode of ignorance. You
know. He, the, earlier, it was "pramādālasya-nidrābhis". But now, here is,
"pramādo moha eva ca". So, He, the, there is, now, "nidrā" is not mentioned.
Because, you know, we are not talking about, you know, now, the necessary bodily
function of sleep. We are talking about unnecessary and undesirable aggravation
of a particular mode. Within the comptetion among the three modes, when one
particular mode becomes dominant, then that shakes up the person. And that makes
that person act in, you know, you know, in undesirable ways. Of course, in
goodness, the action may be relatively speaking better. It may be desirable in
some ways. That, even that keeps one in bondage. But in passion and ignorance,
it is much worse. So, "tamasy etāni jāyante". So, there is "pramādaḥ" when
"tamasy" is more. "tamaḥ guṇāḥ" is more. Then, what happens? At that time, there
is "pramādaḥ" and "mohaḥ". What is "pramādaḥ" and "mohaḥ"? "pramādaḥ" is, you
know, you know, you know, ignorance. So, "pramādaḥ" as, as is madness. "mohaḥ".
So, there is, there are two form, then, there is sadism. And masochism.
Masochism is, you know, sadism means to cause pain to others. And by, see,
causing pain to others, ones gets pleasure oneself. And, you know, masochism is,
one gets, you know, one causes pain to oneself. And one gets pain. They are
talking about cutting. Now, that is masochism. You know. One cuts oneself. When
one gets pain. There is, there is some people who do self-flagellation. You
know. Whip oneself. Whip oneself. Whip oneself. And through that, one gets some
pleasure. So, especially, you know, then there is, see, in the mo..., mode of
passion, there is male-female attraction. But, you know, you know, you know,
when the mode of passion and mode of ignorance get combined, then even sexuality
gets perverted in various different ways. And sometime..., and when people start
engaging in various kinds of unnatural forms of sex. And, you know, when there
is a, you know, there is sometimes, you know, people beat each other. And they
do all sort of things. And they think that is, that sort of thing is pleasure.
You know. So, the, the, so, that is actually, where this, you know, sort of,
this whole obsession with, you know, playing different kinds of roles. And
doing different kinds of things, this somehow extracts some pleasure from the
body. You know. That is, you know, you know, so, normally, sex is in the mode of
passion. But this sort of, all sorts of distorted expressions of sexuality,
that, there is largely in the mode of ignorance. So, you know, now, here, what
is happening? That "pramādo moha eva ca". There is madness. So, addictions are
an example of this "pramādaḥ". "mohaḥ" is illusion. Now, "mohaḥ", we could say
that, you know, actually, is there for all living beings. Yes. There is the,
that is definitely true. All of us are in "mohaḥ". I am not the body. I am the
soul. And we have forgotten that. And we are thinking I am the body. So, that
is the "mohaḥ" which all of us are in. But here, in ignorance, often, there is
not only just the "mohaḥ" about one's s..., spiritual identity. But there is
even "mohaḥ" about one's material capacity. You know. Somebody may be a
poverty-stricken person. Somebody may be, you know, weakly. And that person
thinks, you know, I am going to be the next world wrestling champion. And that
person starts, you know, trying. You know. I can figh..., beat anyone. I can
fight with anyone. So, that is "mohaḥ". So, there is not only illusion about,
you know, you know, you know, there is illusion about one's own material
capacities, also.

So, that sort of thing is, especially, we see it in drunkards. But we see, can
see it in other people, also. "tamasy etāni jāyante". You know. You know. You
know. "tamasy". "tamasy" means in the mode of ignorance. "etāni jāyante". That
this is born of the mode of ignorance. And "vivṛddhe kuru-nandana". So, after
describing this, we, Krishna now describes in the next verse about the different
kinds of, you know, you know, you know, deaths that people go through. That
means, after describing that, ok, different people live in different modes.
This is the way the characteristic, the mode, that was 6, 7, 8. Now, 11, 12, 13
is within the competition among the modes, different people are influenced
differently. You know. The modes, you know, you know, when a what, particular
mode becomes dominant, this is the characteristic. Now, Krishna will describe,
ok, when a person is a particular characteristic, when that person dies, what
happens? Why? Because they are on battlefield. And death is an important, you
know, inevitable, you know, unli..., a pro..., probable happening that is going
to happen there. And also, you know, the importance of death has been talked
earlier in Eighth Chapter. So, Krishna will talk about how this will lead to a
post-mortem, a po..., you know, post death destination. That we will discuss in
our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna. 
