Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vcr2P90IBMU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=o6U3zFHfg2o65qMSqRDTDlIl2_x8MTU0ODQ4OTU4M0AxNTQ4NDAzMTgz&event=video_description&v=vcr2P90IBMU&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_121_-_Bhagavad_Gita_13.20-13.28_-_How_the_purusha_gets_caught_in_prakrti_and_how_he_can_get_out_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the Thirteenth Chapter. You know. We are going to now discuss "prakṛtiṁ"
and "puruṣaṁ". Each compri..., you know, the, which discussion will comprise the
answers to the last two questions of Arjuna. So, let us look at these two. You
know. This is the overview of the chapter. You know. So, Arjuna had asked
questions about "kṣetraṁ". "kṣetra-jñam". "jñānaṁ". "jñeyaṁ". And "puruṣaṁ". And
"prakṛtiṁ". So, till now, you know, the whole item, "kṣetraṁ". "kṣetra-jñam".
And "jñānaṁ". And "jñeyaṁ" had been answer..., accept..., addressed. Now,
"prakṛtiṁ" and "puruṣaṁ" will be addressed. So, let us look at this discussion.
You know. You know. You know.

        prakṛtiṁ puruṣaṁ caiva
        viddhy anādī ubhāv api
        vikārāṁś ca guṇāṁś caiva
        viddhi prakṛti-sambhavān

So, "prakṛtiṁ puruṣaṁ caiva". That there is "prakṛtiṁ". And there is "puruṣaṁ".
You know. We will look at what these terms mean. You know. "viddhy anādī ubhāv
api". Both of them are "anādī". Know that both of them, "anādī" is
beginningless. "ubhāv". You know. Both of them are "anādī". "vikārāṁś ca guṇāṁś
caiva". And, you know, "vikārān". "vikārān" refers to s..., changes. And
"guṇāṁś". The "guṇāṁś" refer to the three modes of material nature. "viddhi".
Know these to be "prakṛti-sambhavān". "prakṛti-sambhavān". "prakṛti-sambhavān"
refers to they are born of material nature. So, essentially, you know, this
verse is making two points. First is that both "prakṛtiṁ" and "puruṣaṁ" are
eternal. Second is that the changes that we see in ma..., you know, you know,
material nature, they are born from matter. They are "prakṛti-sambhavān". You
know. You know. So, "prakṛtiṁ" and "puruṣaṁ" can be broadly classified as matter
and spirit. So, as we know, in spirit, there is variety. There is, you know, you
know, there is the soul. And there is the Supersoul. So, there are, you know,
there are both of them. Which are come, come, come in the category of "puruṣaṁ".
So, we will see in the Fifteenth Chapter, Krishna will be differentiated from
the ordinary "puruṣaṁ" by the designation of Purushottama. You know. He is the
supreme "puruṣaṁ". You know. You know. So, now, you know, you know, when Krishna
talks about, you know, you know, the "prakṛtiṁ" and "puruṣaṁ", what is He doing?
Arjuna has asked Him, what, what are these? Now, "prakṛtiṁ" and "puruṣaṁ" are
standard, you know, terms. Which, you know, form the center with their, the
heart of all discussions in sankhya. You know. So, as we have discussed earlier,
sankhya and jñāna are very related to each other. You know. The path of "jñāna"
yoga, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, uses the analysis of
sankhya quite extensively. You know. And in the Bhagavad Gita, in the Fifth
Chapter, also, we see how, you know, sankhya and yoga were, you know, sorry,
sankhya and "jñāna" were put together by Krishna. You know. You know. As almost
in..., in..., as intelli..., in..., interchangeable.

        sāṅkhya-yogau pṛthag bālāḥ
        pravadanti na paṇḍitāḥ

        ekaṁ sāṅkhyaṁ ca yogaṁ ca
        yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati

        yat sāṅkhyaiḥ prāpyate sthānaṁ
        tad yogair api gamyate

You know. You know. You know. So, what Krishna is telling in these verses is,
this is, you know, 5.4 and 5. 5.3-4. That section. Where Krishna is telling
essentially that, you know, that sankhya and yoga, they are co..., same in terms
of the ultimate destination that both give. So, you know, you know, they make
convergent in their, con..., they may be divergent in their content. But they
are convergent in their intent. Their content means what the path is. What it
comprises of, they may be divergent. But they are, in their, as far as their
intent is concerned, concerned, the ultimate goal is to seek out the Absolute
Truth. So, in that sense, they are convergent in their intent. So, here, Krishna
uses the word sankhya to refer to "jñāna". The process of "jñāna". Analysis.
Metaphysical analysis which involves speculation. And then, you know, division
of matter into its elements. And ultimately to go beyond matter. So, in sankhya,
"prakṛtiṁ" and "puruṣaṁ" are the, you know, central pieces of all discussions.
So, sankhya refer..., you know, so, "prakṛtiṁ" refers to that which is
insentient. That which is unconscious. That which is not intrinsically active.
Whereas "puruṣaṁ" refers that which is conscious. That which is living. That
which is, you know, the active principle. So, in sankhya, the, all the
interactions are, everything that happens is basically an interaction of
"prakṛtiṁ" and "puruṣaṁ". That is how it happens. And in some further
developments of this line of thought, "prakṛtiṁ" is associated with, you know,
you know, devi. With "Pārvatī". And, you know, you know, you know, "puruṣaṁ" is
associated with Shiva. So, basically, then the whole of material nature becomes
a, an interplay between "prakṛtiṁ" and "puruṣaṁ". You know. All that happens in
material existence. So, it is interaction between Shiva and "Pārvatī". You know.
So, that way, you know, we know "Pārvatī" is nondifferent from Durga. Durga is
the goddess in charge of the material nature. And Shiva is Visvanath. He is the,
you know, he is the overall in charge of material nature. You know. You know.
And material existence. So, of course, the Supreme Lord is not just in charge of
one "viśva". He is Ananta Koti Brahmanda Nayaka. Vishnu is the, Mahavishnu is
the source of all of existence. So, anyway, Krishna is not talking in terms of,
you know, personalities over here. Krishna is talking in terms of concepts.
That is why He does not bring in, you know, Shiva. Or Durga. Or anything like
that in the discussion over here. He focuses here on concepts. So, in terms of
concept, He is saying "puruṣaṁ" and "prakṛtiṁ", both are eternal. What does it
mean? You know. We generally say, material, material things are temporary. Yes.
Material things are temporary. But the material thing is not temporary. What is
the difference between things and thing? You know. Things, things refer to the
specific things. Ok. I have a mic over here. I have a laptop over here. I am
sitting on a chair. All of you are probably sitting on sofas. Or chairs. So,
whatever. So, these things are temporary. But the material thing, when we talk
about the ma..., matter itself, the substratum of all of existence, that is an
energy of God. And matter itself as a thing is not temporary. It is eternal. It
may be sometimes, be manifested. And sometimes not be manifested. Just like we
have a bui..., giant building. The building itself is not eternal. In the sense
that, the building will be constructed at a par..., you know, some, some time.
And it will be demolished at some time. But beyond this construction,
demolition, the, the building itself, you know, is eternal. In terms of its
components. You know. Whatever is ma..., whatever it is made up of, that is
going to exist forever. There is, we have in physics, also, the law of
conservation of energy. The things are not going to change as far as their
essential, you know, you know, essential components are concerned. The essence
of, you know, substance is concerned. That is going to go on. So, in that
sense, in, it, "prakṛtiṁ" is eternal. Although there are, specific forms of
"prakṛtiṁ" are temporary. So, what causes, you know, you know, you know, you
know, you know, you know, what causes a misery to us is because we get attached
to the things. We get to the, attached to the forms. And the tastes. And the
things like that. And that is what causes bondage to, from, bondage. In
contrast, when, now, you know, attachment to spirit. Spirit is eternal. You
know. The svarupa of the soul is eternal. Krishna's form is eternal. And
attraction to our, that can bring eternal happiness. So, moving forward, you
know, now, the next point that Krishna makes in this verse is:

        vikārāṁś ca guṇāṁś caiva
        viddhi prakṛti-sambhavān

So, whatever changes happen, they are coming from "prakṛtiṁ". What does that
mean that the changes are coming from "prakṛtiṁ"? You know. That simply means
that they are happening in the arena of "prakṛtiṁ". Just they are lined, they
are, previou..., previous class. We discussed about the example, who, person
watching a, you know, video. So, now, the video itself, you know, if a person is
watching a movie, say in a movie theater. Or a video in a video projector. You
know. So, at that time, whatever is happening on the video screen, that has
nothing to do directly with the person. With the spectators. So, you know,
whatever is changing over there is within the arena of the celluloid screen. So,
that is, "vik...", similarly to:

        vikārāṁś ca guṇāṁś caiva
        viddhi prakṛti-sambhavān

So, the "guṇāṁś", you know, you know, the "guṇāṁś" are like, just like in, there
are three fundamental colors. There may be RGB. RYB. Whatever. They may be
diffe..., you know. Red, Green, Blue. Or Red. Yellow. Blue. Depending on, you
know, what is the focus. Is it artistic? Or is it digital technology? But they
are three fundamental colors. And whatever we see on, you know, on a computer
screen, or on a movie, you know, it is all coming from those three colors. You
know. There are three kinds of basic colors. Which are, you know, you know,
which are generated. And based on the way they are combined. A person may see a,
you know, you know, you know, beautiful sunset. Or a, you know, ghastly,
disaster scene after a natural calamity. Or we may see a spectular night sky. Or
we may see a, you know, you know, you know, brutal cold-blooded crime. Whatever.
So, my thing, which we, all so, which involves so many different imaginary,
images. And they involve so many radically different emotional responses. They
can be evoked just by those three colors. You know. And therein, brought about
in combination. So, like that, everything that we see in this material world is,
you know, comprised of the three modes. "guṇāṁś". So, everything comes out. So,
we may see a beautiful-looking form. We may see an attractive-looking object.
You know. Whatever it is. So, all these come from the three modes. And just as
the three colors, when projected from, you know, the, you know, the, you know,
from the, you know, you know, projector. They create all these illusions. So,
like that, for the three modes create all the sense objects. And three modes
themselves are, you know, they are material. You know. Prabhupada always said,
three modes of material nature. So, they are material themselves. So:

        vikārāṁś ca guṇāṁś caiva
        viddhi prakṛti-sambhavān

So, we have discussed earlier how the "vikārān", the, refers to change. The
"vikārān" word has come several times. First, you know, Krishna used the word
"vikārān" in 13.4 where He says, "vikārāṁ". "vi...", you know. You know. "yad
kṣetraṁ yad...":

        tat kṣetraṁ yac ca yādṛk ca
        yad-vikāri yataś ca yat
        sa ca yo yat-prabhāvaś ca
        tat samāsena me śṛṇu

So, I will explain what is the "vikārā" to you. And then, 13.7, also. Krishna,
when, in 13.6, He enlists the 24 elements of material nature. And when He talks
about what are the "vikāra".

        icchā dveṣaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ
        saṅghātaś cetanā dhṛtiḥ
        etat kṣetraṁ samāsena
        sa-vikāram udāhṛtam

"sa-vikāram udāhṛtam". So, what are the "vikāra"s of "kṣetraṁ"?

        icchā dveṣaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ
        saṅghātaś cetanā dhṛtiḥ

So, happine..., we are not going into all of the list. Because we had discussed
that earlier. But happiness. Distress. You know. Attachment. Aversion.  These
are the "vikāra". So, you know, as I said, depending on, you know, what is the
particular kind of image that is portrayed on a visu..., on a video. We will
experience as I, you know, "sukha" or "duḥkhā". If it is a ghastly murder scene,
we will feel, we will feel rec..., we will feel recoiled on seeing that. And,
you know, we, if, there is a beautiful imagery of a spectaculous sunrise, then
we feel attract..., attracted by seeing that. So, that, this will, all this is
the "vikārān" of the "kṣetraṁ". And the "vikārān" of the "kṣetraṁ" produces
certain reactions. What are those reactions? Those are the "icchā-dveṣa".
"sukhaṁ". "duḥkhaṁ". So, now, in this verse, Krishna is talking about, firstly,
that "puruṣaṁ" and "prakṛtiṁ" are eternal. But the changes are produced by
"prakṛtiṁ". Now, then, the question will come up. Ok. The question changes are
progressive, are "prakṛtiṁ". Then, is it "prakṛtiṁ" that is experiencing
emotions? Who is experiencing emotions? And how? So, that is discussed in the
next verse. You know. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada emph..., before that,
let us see. And Prabhupada mentions the point in the purport that, you know, so:

"we should know it with certainty from the descriptions of these few verses that
all transformations and influences of material nature by the three modes are
also productions of material nature."

So, "we should know it with certainty". You know. You know. You know. Now,
moving forward. You know:

        kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve
        hetuḥ prakṛtir ucyate
        puruṣaḥ sukha-duḥkhānāṁ
        bhoktṛtve hetur ucyate

So, "kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve". You know. So, here, this verse is, you know,
enigmatic verse. There is similar verse in the area, in the "Bhāgavatam", also.
You know. Let us look at what this verse means. "kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve".
"kartṛtve" means, you know, in the matter of creation as Prabhupada translates.
So, "hetuḥ prakṛtir ucyate". "hetuḥ" means the instrument or the cause. So, as
far as cause and effects are concerned, material nature is the cause. But as far
as enjoyment is concerned that the "puruṣaḥ" is the cause. "puruṣaḥ", you know,
so, let us try to understand this more clearly. See, you know, there are, you
know, you know, you know, so, you know, there are two different things over here
now.

        kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve
        hetuḥ prakṛtir ucyate

So, "kārya" and "kāraṇa" refer to cause and effect. Now, it, generally, the word
"hetuḥ" can also refer to cause. So, then, it becomes, you know, so, mat...,
mat..., material nature is the cause of all cause and effects. And the, you
know, the enjoying mentality, "bhoktṛtve", is the cause of "sukha" and "duḥkhā"
for the "puruṣaḥ". So, the "puruṣaḥ" is, enjoying mentality is the cause of
"sukha" and "duḥkhā". So, the word, in the word cause comes twice. It may lead
to little bit confusion in terms of understanding. What do we mean by them?
Material nat..., the "prakṛtir" is the cause of material, all cause and effects.
You know. You know. You know. So, it, actually, we could u..., instead of, see,
the word cause, we could use as the, as a substratum. As the basic arena. The
ultimate cause. You know. You know. If we have a storyline going on, you know,
or again, going back to the movie loo..., movie example itself. If there is a
particular storyline going on in the movie. So, you know, you know, when the
person wants to watch the movie, that desire to watch the movie, "bhoktṛtve",
leads to "puruṣaḥ sukha-duḥkhānāṁ". You know. There will be some happiness. And
there will be some distress. Now, if the person decides I do not want to watch
the movie. That person does not watch the movie. Then, there will be neither
happiness. Nor distress. So, the happiness and distress come because the person
desires to watch the movie. Similarly, you know, what happens here is that one
experiences happiness and distress in terms of, you know, you know, you know,
you know, one's, you know, you know, one's enjoying mentality. "bhoktṛtve". So,
you know, this, if the mo..., movie itself is going on. And if there are no
spectators watching it, then there will be no emotions. Or we can consider a
more graphic example. If there are two people. You know. They are, one of them
is watching the movie. Another person is not watching the movie. Another person
is doing something else. So, then, the movie will have certain effects on the
first person who is watching the movie. But it will have no effects on the other
person. Because say, if that per..., other person is blind. Or as an eye, some
eye operation. Because of which the eyes cannot see anything. Then, the person,
you know, may be looking at the same screen. But may not feel anything at that
time. So, "bhoktṛtve". If there is enjoying mentality, causes the enjoying
mentality. That person starts watching the movie. And because of that, the
enjoyment and distress come up. So, now, even if there is no observer, there are
certain things which are obse..., happening on the movie screen. So, those
things will happen. What is the cause of that? That cause is basically
"prakṛtir". You know. So:

        kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve
        hetuḥ prakṛtir ucyate

That means that because of the very presence of the person, who is trying to
observe the movie, of, of movie that happ..., emotions come about in that
person. But irrespective of that person's presence, there is this, you know, you
know, some, the events that are happening on the movie screen. And the events
that happen on the movie screen are primarily responsible for the, you know,
changes that happen. On the, you know, you know, screen, in terms of whatever is
depicted. So, the, you know, you know, you know, projection from the variation
on, or the movie screen, that is the basic reason for whatever is happening on
the screen. So, in, so, similarly, in terms of pra..., you know, in terms of
material nature, the, you know, you know, things are going to happen in material
nature. You know. But our enjoyment or distress depends on how much we identify
with it. You know. So, whatever happens in material nature, you know, say, if,
you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
you know, you know, let, if we look at spi..., purely at material nature itself,
then the seasons come. The seasons change. So, now, certain seasons are
favorable for certain creatures. Certain seasons are unfavorable for certain
creatures. So, say, when it becomes, you know, you know, extremely cold. Certain
chan..., seasons, certain creatures may go into hibernation. You know. They may
just go underground. And they may just disappear. So, when they disappear from
the, now, there are certain other creatures, you know, which eat those animals.
Which eat and live based on that. So, now, if they eat and live like that, then
what happens? If they are eating and living like that. They cannot eat and live
like that because, you know, you know, you know, you know, they do not get any
food over there. So, the onset of certain changes within material nature, they
will have different effects. So, if a storm is coming in one place. And the
storm gets diverted to another place. So, now, the, all the, the coming of the
storms is happening within the arena of material nature. But, you know, you
know, it is the soul who has placed, you know, oneself in the ma..., arena of
material nature. Beause of the enjoying mentality. Because of it, the soul
experiences leisure and pain. So, if these examples seem a little distant for
many of us, we live in our one settings. So, we may not be able to immediately
think about floods and, you know, seasonal changes. You know. Simple thing is,
say, you know, there is a cricket match between India and Pakistan. So, then,
you know, suppose, India wins. Now, why is there "sukha"? Because, you know, you
know, we identify with the Indian team. Something is happening on, on the, you
know, you know, TV screen. Which is based on something that is happening on a
sports ground. But that has an emotional effect on us. Why is that? Because
there is "bhoktṛtve". So, this is with respect to a movie screen. So, something
which is, you know, with respect to a cricket match. But, you know, irrespective
of what happens in material nature, you know, it does not have to affect us
emotionally. It affects us because of "bhoktṛtve". So, here, Krishna is clearly
differentiating between matter and spirit. To help us understand how the soul
has become entangled. So, the soul becomes entangled because of "bhoktṛtve". You
know. You know. Now, Prabhupada explains about how there are 8.400.000 species.
And then, Prabhupada quotes the famous, you know, you know, the verse from the
"Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad":

        dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyaḥ

So, "dvā suparṇā". There are two birds. And they are "sayujā sakhāyaḥ". The two
birds are in the body. And they are moving around in the body. So, Prabhupada,
you know, now, Prabhupada explains how "kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve", he gives an
example:

"Once placed in some particular kind of body, he comes under the control of
nature because the body, being matter, acts according to the laws of nature."

You know.

"At that time, the living entity has no power to change that law. Suppose an
entity is put into the body of a dog. As soon as he is put into the body of a
dog, he must act like a dog."

"must act like a dog" means that, you know, the dog, the soul in a dog's body
cannot meow like a cat. The soul in a dog's body cannot fly like a bird. So, you
know, w..., that is, you know:

        kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve
        hetuḥ prakṛtir ucyate

So, what the person can do. What the person cannot do, that is determined by the
body, in which the person is put. So, you know, the functions of the body are
largely determined by material nature. What is possible. What is not possible.
But, you know, the consequences, in terms of emotional responses of those
actions, they are caused by "bhoktṛtve". "bhoktṛtve". Because the soul wanted to
enjoy. That is how the soul has got into a, you know, particular body now. So,
now, you know, you know, you know, a soul in a human body, when one sees s...,
stool. One just, is recoiled, one is recoiled by that sight. One run..., wants
to move away from it. Or flush it away. Whatever. But a hog, when this is, see,
when hog sees that same sight, the hog rushes towards it. Why is that? Because
there is, you know, "bho...", there is the "bhoktṛtve" over there. So, that
"bhoktṛtve", that enjoying mentality, which the hog has got, because of which,
that, it finds that particular food attractive. The human being does not find
that attractive. So, the "kārya", you know, so, whatever happens in the material
nature, "kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve", substratum for everything that happens is
matter. You know. So, "prakṛtir" is the substratum. Or, on which everything in
material nature happens. And, you know, you know, the, all the panorama of
emotions that we experience, you know, from pleasure to pain. From excitement
to, you know, e..., excitemen..., excitement to irritation to fear. All the
panorama of emotions that we make, experience, all of them are because of this
fundamental substratum. That is "bhoktṛtve". Because the soul has got into the
desire to enjoy. Now, you know, Krishna will make this "bhokt...", elaborate
this "bhoktṛtve" in the next verse further. This, one of the most important
verses. Some acharyas have called this as the "mahāvākyā". The bija of "ākyā" of
the Bhagavad Gita, us, jnana section.

        puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi
        bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān
        kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya
        sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

So, "puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi". "puruṣaḥ". So, the "puruṣaḥ" is the soul.
"prakṛti-stho hi". Becomes situated in material nature. "bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān
guṇān". And, you know, "bhuṅkte". Desires to enjoy. "prakṛti-jān guṇān". The
modes that are born of material nature. And then, what happens? "kāraṇaṁ
guṇa-saṅgo ’sya". "kāraṇaṁ". "kāraṇaṁ" is the cause. "guṇa-saṅgo ’sya". Because
of the association with the modes, "sad-asad-yoni-janmasu". "sad-asad". That
means there is good. And there is bad. "yoni-janmasu". "puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho
hi". So, the soul becomes situated in material nature because of "bhuṅkte". So,
the word "bhuṅkte" has more or less the same meaning as "bhoktṛtve". "bhoktṛtve"
is to enjoy. "bhuṅkte" is also to enjoy. Same essential meaning. So, "puruṣaḥ
prakṛti-stho hi". The soul becomes situated in material nature. "stho hi" is
situated. Why? "bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān". "bhu...", "bhuṅk...". Because the
soul desires to enjoy what? "prakṛti-jān guṇān". The products of material
nature in the form of the three modes. You know. It is not that if, you know,
mate..., if the colors are just, you know, kept arbitrarily, then they may not
be, they may be ok. You know. If we just have, you know, if there is a, you
know, there are multiple colors. You know. Sometimes, in a, you know, computer
program, there will not be, there will be a whole panorama of colors. Maybe
hundred. Five hundred. One thousand colors. Hun..., nobody, people are not going
to rush to look at, just look at those colors. But if there are, those colors
are made into some beautiful images, then people are eager to look at those
images. So, "prakṛti-jān guṇān". So, fro..., from material nature, the basics,
basic components of material nature is itself not very attractive. Earth. Water.
Fire. Air. Ether are not at all, not all, there is nothing irresistibly
attractive about earth, water, fire, air, ether. But when the same are made into
a beautiful form, you know, between, into some beautiful objects. You know.
When, as I said, there is a sunrise. That is sattvic. Or there is, you know,
there is the form of the opposite sex. Which would be raja..., which is a
rajasic object. Or that may be alcohol. Which is tamasic. You know. So, all of
these, they become attractive. And "prakṛti-jān guṇān". When then ones, desires
to enjoy, there is "prakṛti-jān guṇān". Then, the result of that is, then
"kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya". So, first, there is "bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān".
There is the desire to enjoy. And then, because of that, there is "saṅgaḥ".
"guṇa-saṅgaḥ". Because of that, you know, there is association with the three
modes. And because of that, what happens? "sad-asad-yoni-janmasu". "yoni".
"yoni" is the wombs. Or the species. So, the Bhagavad Gita uses the word for
both. You know. You know. "yoni". You know. You know. You know. In a gen...,
speci..., in a, in one sense, refers to the womb. But different, you know,
living entities have different kinds of wombs. Some may not exactly have womb.
There may be eggs, also. You know. But in general, the word refers to species
over here.  So, "sad-asad-yoni-janmasu". So, one will take birth in different
species. This verse will be elaborated on, in 14th Chapter. You know. 18th
verse. Where Krishna will explain that, you know, how it, the
"sad-asad-yoni-janmasu".

        ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā
        madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ
        jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā
        adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ

You know. So, in this way, those who are situated in goodness will move upwards.
Those who are in passion will stay where they are. Those who are in ignorance
will go downwards. So, that is the point which Krishna makes in this verse. And,
you know, you know, or rather, Krishna hints over there. That depending on the
way we are associating with the three modes, accordingly,
"sad-asad-yoni-janmasu". One will meet with good and bad in various species.
"sad-asad-yoni-janmasu". "kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya". Now, when we look at this
further, what is the implication of this?

        puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi
        bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān

That, you know, there is "bhuṅkte". There is desire to enjoy. You know. And what
does the desire to enjoy result in? It results in "bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān".
You know. It results with, you know, so, previous verse has said, there is
"sukha-duḥkhā". "sukha-duḥkhā". That is definitely true. But now, here Krishna
is talking about, in more expansive terms. It is not just that the desire to
enjoy will lead to happiness and distress. It will lead, even to transmigration
to different kinds of species. Or different species. Where there will be entire,
where there will be some time more misery. And sometimes less misery. You know.
When one is watching a movie. That itself may lead, you know, you know, to, you
know, certain pleasure. And certain pain. Experiences of pleasure and pain. But
based on the kind of movie that a person has watched, the person, you can
continue in a sense, say that, ok, the person, say, likes, you know, horror
scenes. And then, there may be, be just an en..., normal mainstream movie. There
might be just one or two horror scenes. You know. One. Or, but then, the person
likes that. Then, the person chooses. And, you know, nowadays, there are
multiplexers. Where there are many theater movies available. Or there is
internet as well. Where all kinds o..., everything is available at one place. Or
at various places. But basically, on that virtual sys..., you know, cyberspace.
So, then, the person who likes the horror scenes, that person then just clicks
on the horror scenes. And then, that person may just get into a place where
there are, are, there are, you know, hundred mov..., horror mov..., hundred or
thousand horror mov..., horror, ten thousand horror movies available. And that
person get caught in that, completely. So, there is initially that experience of
horror. So, like that, we, when the soul wants to enjoy, the soul, you know,
soul then may gets into certain kinds of experiences. "sukha" and "duḥkhā". But
based on what ki..., specific kind of enjoying mentality the soul has, then
the soul goes into a next specy. In a different specy. Where the soul gets
different kinds of enjoyment. So, you know, there is a development of thought
from this previous verse to this verse, you know, you know, you know, that in
general "sukha" and "duḥkhā" come over, comes out "bhoktṛtve". But then, the
"sukha" and "duḥkhā" lead, the, the "bhoktṛtve" also leads to, so, different
kinds of species where there is different kinds of experiences. So, as we know,
our body is, our, given to us based on the kind of desires that we have. So, if
we have more the desires to enjoy separate from, enjoy in a particular way, then
we get a body that is sui..., you know, suited for that kind of enjoyment. That
is what is mentioned in this verse. That "kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya". "saṅgaḥ"
refers to association or attachment. So, association brings attachment. And
attachment leads to further association. So, "guṇa-saṅgo ’sya". Because of
attachment, you know, to the modes, what results is? "sad-asad-yoni-janmasu".
You know. You know. Now, Prabhupada explains in the purport that, you know:

"As long as he is captivated by this false manifestation, he has to continue
transmigrating from one body to another."

So, "As long as he is captivated". You know. That means as long as the
"bhoktṛtve" is there. As long as the "bhuṅkte" is there. One will have to
continue on in material existence. So, just like, as long as a person wants to
enjoy watching movie, that person will have to, ok, go, that basic, you know,
captivation within the realm of illusion will go on. You know. You know. You
know. So, then, Prabhupada makes over here, you know:

"That change can be effected only by hearing from authoritative sources."

What is the change? Change in terms of giving up the "bhoktṛtve" or "bhuṅkte".

"The living entity, if he submits to this hearing process, will lose his
long-cherished desire to dominate material nature,"

"long-cherished desire to dominate material nature,". And once one gives up that
desire, then what happens?

"and gradually and proportionately, as he reduces his long desire to dominate,
he comes to enjoy spiritual happiness."

You know. You know. You know. So, you know, you know, you know, so, profound
sentence. "long-cherished desire to dominate material nature,".
"long-cherished". For how long is it? It is, you know, for the sake of, you
know, it is for the sake of, you know, it has been for a long, long time. It is
almost like "anādī". We do not know when actually it started. It is almost
beginningless. So, "long-cherished desire". Long, "long-cherished desire". It
has been going on for a long, long time. "and gradually and proportionately, as
he reduces his long desire to dominate,". So, the, Prabhupada uses significant
words. "gradually and proportionately". So, we cannot, we cannot expect to get
rid of our enjoying mentality immediately. It will take time. But "gradually and
proportionately". "ye yathā māṁ prapadyante". As, you know, living surrenders to
me, Krishna rewards accordingly. So, then after this, now, why is this verse
called as the ma..., "bija vākyā". Or the "bija". You know. In the, you know,
15th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna will give the metaphor of the
upside-down tree to describe material existence. You know. So, you know, when he
uses the metaphor of the upside-down tree, the important point there is to talk
about, you know, the, to talk about the, you know, material existence in terms
of a tree. So, now, every tree has a seed. From which, it grows off. So, like
that, the whole tree of material existence has grown from the enjoying mentality
of the soul. You know. So, that "bhuṅ...", "bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān". That
"bhuṅkte" is the seed. And from that seed, ultimately, the whole tree grows. So,
that tree of material existence, it has, you know, you know, it has, needs water
of nourishment. So, that water is the three modes of material nature. So, the
see..., seed is introduced in 13th Chapter. The water that nourishes the tree is
the three modes that is explained in the 14th Chapter. The 15th Chapter talks
about, you know, the tree itself in terms of, you know, what its branches are.
And how it is to b..., how it needs to be cut down with detachment. There, we will
be able to see that:

        asaṅga-śastreṇa dṛḍhena chittvā

In 15.4, Krishna will describe that, you know, you know, 15.3 and 4, Krishna
will describe that this tree, one has to actually use, so, here, it was
"saṅgaḥ". And there, it will be "asaṅga". You know. "kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya".
The, because of "saṅgaḥ". Because of attachment, one is becoming bound. And
"asaṅga". Because of detachment, one can become free. That is what will be
talked about over there. Then, in 16th Chapter, the upper and the lower parts of
the tree are described. The 16th Chapter is "The Divine and Demoniac Natures".
So, they are the two extremes of the tree. They are described over here, in the
Six..., in the, in the 16th Chapter. And then, after that, 17th Chapter
describes the intermediate parts. Ok. What are the people who do not, you know,
who are not explicitly devoted to God according to scripture. Nor are they
braisingly defiant of God and scripture? What about them? That is talked about
in the 17th Chapter. And then, the summary of everything is given in the 18th
Chapter. So, essentially, you know, this verse is a seed which will lead to the
development of thought in the subsequent verses. Subsequent chas..., chapters
and sections of the Gita. So, now, after describing this "puruṣaḥ" who is, so,
who is subjected, who is sentenced to go through various species.
"sad-asad-yoni-janmasu". Now, Krishna talks about another kind of "puruṣaḥ". So:

        upadraṣṭānumantā ca
        bhartā bhoktā maheśvaraḥ
        paramātmeti cāpy ukto
        dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ

"upadraṣṭānumantā ca". So, "upadraṣṭā" is the overseer. "anumantā" is permitter.
So, the overseer and the permitter. You know, so, the, that is another soul. We
will see how that works out. So, you know, that "bhartā bhoktā maheśvaraḥ". He
is the maintainer. He is the enjoyer. "maheśvaraḥ" is the supreme, you know,
controller. The great controller. And then, such a person is called as
"paramātmeti cāpy ukto". You know. So, "paramā...", this is known as
"paramātma". This is the known as the Supersoul. So, actually, the word
"paramātma" has been used by Krishna several times in the Bhagavad Gita. But
specifically, you know, you know, you know, explaining what the "paramātma" is.
That has been, or saying that this is the "paramātma". This happens for the
first time in the Gita. The word "paramātma" has been used several times. For
example, in the Sixth Chapter, Krishna uses the word that. In 6.7, He says that,
you know, you know, you know:

        jitātmanaḥ praśāntasya
        paramātmā samāhitaḥ
        śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu
        tathā mānāpamānayoḥ

He says, one who has controlled the mind, "jitātmanaḥ praśāntasya". What happens
to such a person? "paramātmā samāhitaḥ". Such a person has actually attained the
"paramātmā". So, the word "paramātmā" has been used. But here, it is, the, here,
the "paramātmā" is specifically mentioned. In terms of this is called the
"paramātmā". Who is the "paramātmā"? What are the defining characteristics? He
is the overseer. The permitter. The enjoyer. The maintainer. The con..., you
know, controller. You know. You know. The great controller. And then, you know,
and what is mentioned about it? "dehe ’smin". So, also in the body. But "puruṣaḥ
paraḥ". This is a "puruṣaḥ", who is "paraḥ". Who is transcendental. You know.
"dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ". This is a person who is, you know, this is a, you
know, the Supersoul who is transcendental to material existence. And that is how
He is, you know, you know, you know, He is the, different from the soul. So, if
we look at the thread of thought that is going on, Krishna is talking about
several things. "paraḥ". And He is "īśvaraḥ". So, "upadraṣṭā". "anumantā". All
these characteristics are described, they clearly do not apply to the soul. you
know. We are not in and ourselves, we are not the overseers. And permitters. You
know. If we were, then we could do whatever we wanted to do. But actually, we
depend. We are controlled. We depend on something beyond ourselves for the sake
of our existence. You know. You know. You know. "upadraṣṭānumantā ca". So,
overseer. And permitter. "bhartā bhoktā maheśvaraḥ". "bhartā" is the maintainer.
You know. "bhartā". So, actually, one has not just alone, so, this is a
different kind soul that is being referred to. Different kind of "puruṣaḥ". And
that is the "paramātmā". So, again, if we look at the previous verse, that
person, the per..., what has been talked about in the previous verse is, the
person who wants to enjoy. And the person gets caught in "prakṛti-stho hi". But
here is, "paraḥ". He is transcendental. That was "prakṛti-stho hi". This is
"upadraṣṭānumantā". Overseer. The permitter. This is not caught up in anything.
That person wa..., that "puruṣaḥ" was that "sad-asad-yoni-janmasu". That person
is sub..., subjected to, you know, the, you know, the s..., birth in various
species. But this "puruṣaḥ" is "maheśvaraḥ". So, there are two different
"puruṣaḥ"s. So, here, also, actually, you know, the, the contrast is very clear.
Because as it was in 13.2 and 3. But it is even more clear over here. 13.2 was
talking about, you know, you know, that, you know:

        etad yo vetti taṁ prāhuḥ
        kṣetra-jña iti tad-vidaḥ

13.1 was que..., Arjuna's question about, the six questions. Among them, the
question was "kṣetram". And "kṣetra-jñam". So, 13.2, Arjuna answered that,
actually, this is, you know, the one who knows the body is the "kṣetra-jñam".
And 13.3 says there is another knower who knows all bodies. So, you know, the
mayavadis may try to interpret that, actually, that same knower is also the
knower of all bodies. We discussed how that is not a, you know, that is not an
intelligible intepretation. But here, it becomes even more clear. Krishna is
talking in the same continuity of flow, of flow of thought. And He has said that
now, I am going to describe "prakṛtir". And "puruṣaḥ". And He has described
"prakṛtir". Then, the discussion has shifted to "puruṣaḥ". And when He is
describing the "puruṣaḥ". What is He doing? He is making very clear over here
that there is one "puruṣaḥ" which is "bhuṅk...", "prakṛti-stho hi". And there is
another "puruṣaḥ" which is "maheśvaraḥ". So, there are two different kinds of
"puruṣaḥ". This is one of the most direct verses which refers to the "paramātmā"
in the Bhagavad Gita. 13.23. There are others, also. 18.61 is there. 15.15 is
there. You know. You know. The 18.67 is. 61 is:

        īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati
        bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni
        yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

That the Lord is situated in the hearts of all living beings. And is, you know,
you know, directing the wanderings of all living beings accordingly. And then,
15.15 is:

        sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo
        mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca
        vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
        vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham

So, there, you know, each of these verses, they are talking about the Supersoul.
But the, you know, but the fo..., foc..., focus, the main point which is this,
kind of wade through each of these verses is different. In, you know, you know,
15.15, it is that I am that womb..., Supersoul. So, in these verses, 13.23 and
18.61, Krishna is, you know, you know, referring to the Supersoul in the third
verses. Just informating, yes, there is another "puruṣaḥ" who is there in the
body. He is not telling directly I am that "puruṣaḥ". But in 15.15, He makes it
very clear. I am that. I am that, you know, being who is situated in the hearts
of all living beings. So, I am that. You know. You know. Now, of course, Krishna
has made this, you know, communicated this, you know, equality of Himself and
the Supersoul in 6.31, also.

        sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ yo māṁ
        bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥ
        sarvathā vartamāno ’pi
        sa yogī mayi vartate

        sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ yo māṁ
        bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥ

One who understands the "ekatvam", between "sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ" and "māṁ", one
who understand that, that Supersoul is situated in the heart of all living
beings. And Me. One who understands both of us are same, that person is, you
know:

        sarvathā vartamāno ’pi
        sa yogī mayi vartate

Such a person is, just "yogī" will be situated in Me. You know. Pe..., always.
At all situations. You know. You know. Say, this is the situation of unshakable
enlightenment. To understand, you know, the oneness between the all-pervading
being. And Me. So, that has been conveyed earlier, also. You know. Now, here,
when we are looking at the flow of the Gita. So, 15.51 emphasis that it is I who
am situated in all living beings. You know. Heart. 18.61 focuses on how He is
guiding. You know. Whoever, whatever is happening in our life. Whatever
wanderings are happening. Going here. Going there. All these wanderings are
guided by the Supersoul. You know. That is this, so, the, you know,
identification of Krishna is conveyed in, you know, of the, with the Supersoul
is conveyed in the, you know, 15.15. The identity. Not identification. The
iden..., you know, the identity of Krishna and the Supersoul are conveyed in
15.15. The, you know, you know, you know, the nature of the Supersoul to guide,
the, you know, the role of the Supersoul as a guide is conveyed more in terms of
traveling. In 15..., in 18.61. And here, primarily, the focus is on conveying
the transcendence of the Supersoul. That is the Supersoul is, if we just look at
all the attributes, it is, you know, here, "upadraṣṭānumantā". Overseer.
Permitter. We could, this, specifically, the guiding aspect is not talked about
over here. There is no specific word which says, guides. You know. So, of
course, we have to, you know, we have to understand the role of the Supersoul.
We will have to look all the aspects. And, you know, combine to get a proper
understanding. But within the flow of the Gita, here, Krishna is giving
primarily an analytical understanding of these six elements. "jñānaṁ". "jñeyaṁ".
"pur...", "puruṣaṁ". "prakṛtiṁ". "kṣetraṁ". "kṣetra-jñam". So, now, in terms of
"puruṣaḥ". When He is giving analytical understanding, He is telling that, ok,
there is one "puruṣaḥ" which is under material nature. Another "puruṣaḥ" that is
beyond material nature. So, this verse focuses primarily on conveying the
transcendence of the material nat..., you know, of the Supersoul. So, you know,
you know, Prabhupada explains over here, you know, you know, you know, you know:

"The Lord is always eager to take him back to the spiritual energy,"

Who is he? The living entity. But the:

"misuse of independence is the cause of his material strife in the conditioned
nature."

"misuse of independence", that is the cause. So, Prabhupada now speaks in terms
of the, what is Supersoul is convey..., conveying:

"“Just give it up and turn your faith toward Me. Then you will be happy,” He
says."

So, this the ultimate purpose of the presence of the Supersoul. So, Prabhupada,
as we know, gives always a, you know, understanding of the Gita verses in terms
of their devotional conclusions. So, Prabhupada, you know, conveys that how the
transcendence of the Supersoul is there. But along with that, there is a
concern, also. And the Supersoul is present to help the soul come back to Him.
Now, after describing this, you know, you know, Krishna will describe now
further that how one can know, you know, what is the importance of knowing all
this. So, now, this is another summary verse. Which concludes what has been
discussed previously.

        ya evaṁ vetti puruṣaṁ
        prakṛtiṁ ca guṇaiḥ saha
        sarvathā vartamāno ’pi
        na sa bhūyo ’bhijāyate

So, "ya evaṁ vetti puruṣaṁ". So, one who comes to know, you know, one who comes
to know what? "prakṛt...", "puruṣaṁ" and "prakṛtiṁ". You know. So, one who
understands "puruṣaṁ". "prakṛtiṁ". And "ca guṇaiḥ saha". Along with the modes.
Then, "sarvathā vartamāno ’pi". In all situations. "na sa bhūyo ’bhijāyate".
Such a person will not take birth again. So, the point being conveyed over here
is "na sa bhūyo ’bhijāyate". One will not take birth again. Why will one not
take birth again? Because one will understand that, you know, you know, real
life is beyond material existence. Why? That real life is actually
transcendental. "na sa bhūyo ’bhijāyate". You know. The, just as, one may
understand that, ok, this is, whatever I am observing and getting observed, this
is a movie. But beyond that, I have a real life. There must, so, am I, real life
is actually, if I truly understand what, how, if one know..., if one's real
life would much more exciting than the movie, one understand that, you know, I
will stop watching the movie. So, like that, once a person understands, oh, I
am a soul. And I have a real life in the spiritual arena which is far more
exciting and fulfilling than the life here. Then, one gets, one turns away. And
then, one focuses on that real life. So, like that, "na sa bhūyo ’bhijāyate".
Such a person will not take birth again. "ya...":

        ya evaṁ vetti puruṣaṁ
        prakṛtiṁ ca guṇaiḥ saha

One who understands the "puruṣaṁ", "prakṛtiṁ". And then, within "prakṛtiṁ". You
know. "prak...", Krishna adds the point of modes, also. Because the modes are
what? You know. Produced the various substances that attract us. So, is, Krishna
says that "sarvathā vartamāno ’pi". If one is situated properly in this
understanding, then whatever a person may be doing, that does not matter. So,
"sarvathā vartamāno ’pi" im..., implication of that could be that even if a
person is fighting a war, you know, you know, the, you know, war itself may seem
intima..., an entangling acitivity. But if one has a proper philosophical
understanding of what was, how, what is happening, then such a person will not
become entangled. "na sa bhūyo ’bhijāyate". So, you know, Prabhupada writes what
is the purpose of knowledge. You know.

"The purpose of knowledge is to understand distinctly that the living entity has
by chance fallen into this material existence."

And then, we have to revert back to the spiritual existence. So, of the essence
and purpose of knowledge is this to understand that we have entangled in matter.
And we have to become, disentangle ourselves from matter. You know. Now, Krishna
will talk about means by which we can come out of the entanglement of matter.
So, in this verse, He will talk about three means. And then, the next verse, He
will talk about one more mean. One more method. So:

        dhyānenātmani paśyanti
        kecid ātmānam ātmanā
        anye sāṅkhyena yogena
        karma-yogena cāpare

So, "dhyānenātmani paśyanti". "dhyānena". You know. You know. You know.
"dhyānena" means by meditation. "ātmani paśyanti". Once, one perceives the inner
reality. One perceives the self. "kecid ātmānam ātmanā". "kecid". Some people.
"ātmānam ātmanā". So, here, the word "ātma" comes thrice. "ātmani". "ātmānam".
And "ātmanā". So, in all the three "ātma"s refer to, you know, three different
things. The first "ātma" refers to the self. The second "ātma" refers to the
Supersoul. Supersoul. And the third "ātma" refers to the mind. So, Prabhupada
does not translate, use the word mind directly in the translation. But he says,
uses the word through medi..., you know, uses the meditation. So, what is it
saying? That through meditation, by directing the mind inwards, so, through
meditation is "dhyānena". Then, by direct, what is it, what does the meditation
involve? "ātmanā". In meditation, basically, the whole focus is the mind. So,
one is trying to, you know, concentrate and direct the mind. So, "ātmanā". So,
through meditation. By concentrating and directing the mind, you know, some
"kecid", some people, "paśyanti". What will they be able to see? "ātmani".
Within the soul, even one's inner world. In the inner landscape, what will we
see? "ātmānam". "ātmānam" is the Supersoul. So, you know, you know, essentially,
the point being made is that one method of perceiving the Supersoul, perceiving,
the of illumining the inner territory is "dhyānena". By meditation. In
meditation, we turn the mind inwards. And we f..., observe the illu..., you
know, reality. And then, we will see the "ātma". And we will see the
"paramātmā". "ātmani". "ātmānam". So, in our inner territory, we will see the
Supersoul. And the soul. Basically, inner territory will become illumined by,
you know, "dhyānena". This meditation refers to, what has been being talked
about in Sixth Chapter of the Gita. Dhyana yoga. And it all culminates in:

        yoginām api sarveṣāṁ
        mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

That the topmost yogi is one who sees Me. Now, "anye sāṅkhyena yogena". There
are others who may do this by sankhya yoga. So, they, by analysis of material
elements, they say, ok, there are 24 elements. I am none of them. Con...,
consciousness is not present in any of them. So, when then one go beyond the 24
elements to 25th element. And then, finally, one comes to the 26th element. You
know. You know. "karma-yogena cāpare". "karma-yogena cāpare". And some people
may use karma yoga. Essentially, Krishna has talked about these three methods in
this chapt..., in the Bhagavad Gita itself. The first few chapters. From Second
to Fifth talk about, you know, karma yoga. And they contrast it with sankhya
yoga. And then, He talks about, you know, jnana yoga in the, you know, Sixth
Chapter. And of course, now, this section of the Gita is also talking about, you
know, jnana yoga. So, Krishna is telling that these are the different methods by
which people can perceive the Supersoul. You know. Now, this, these verses in a
general informational sense. After describing this, Prabhupada, you know, now,
Prabhupada uses a very significant word in the last line of this. You know.

"who try to satisfy the"

Lord:

"by childish activities."

You know. Now, we may wonder, Prabhupada is here referring to the hatha yoga
system. You know. So, why is hatha yoga being called as "childish activities"?
You know. We have discussed earlier how the ashtanga yoga process, you know, you
know, the initial stages. You know. Where the yoga is fo..., focusing primarily
on physical gymnastics. It is often referred to as, you know, hatha yoga. When
it i..., it focuses more on inner exploration through meditation, it is called
as dhyana yoga. But overall, the three terms refer to the, can refer to the same
thing. Hatha yoga. Ashtanga yoga. Dhyana yoga. Often, they refer to the same
process of yoga. You know. So, but Prabhupada is, when uses the word hatha yoga
here, he is referring to the initial stages. Now, a child sometimes, children
sometimes play. And they say, I can do something which you cannot do. You know.
If, you know, one child does sheer salsa. You know. I can su..., I can balance
myself on the heel. Oh, I can do it. How do you do that? Now, the, all the other
children become very impressed. Oh, you are able to do that. So, like that, many
people, when they see yogis, either doing physical gymnastics or some other
mystic feets. Produce some ash. Or something like that. You know. The peop...,
people, in general, become impressed by that. But this, they are getting overly
impressed by doing, by the capacity to do something which others cannot do. What
is this? It is ultimately childish. So, by childish activities, one cannot
really, you know, the, we cannot satisfy the Lord by childish activities. So,
but still, you know, the, if one moves beyond such childishness. That means one
moves beyond trying to, going, get..., getting enamored by the yogic siddhis.
And when one searches for the Supersoul within. So, even in the path of yoga,
the, there are distractions. Like on all paths, also. But here, the major
distraction is that, o..., one when has siddhis, one may get popularity. One may
get infatuated, you know, by one's capacity to do those things which other
cannot do. And that is basically childish infatuation. It is not eternal. It is
not going to lead to anything eternal, also. So, that is why Prabhupada is using
that childish activities over here. Now, after this, Krishna will recommend the
bhakti process in terms of hearing.

        anye tv evam ajānantaḥ
        śrutvānyebhya upāsate
        te ’pi cātitaranty eva
        mṛtyuṁ śruti-parāyaṇāḥ

"anye tv evam ajānantaḥ". You know. You know. Others who do not know all this.
"śrutvānyebhya upāsate". You know. By hearing from others, they start
worshipping. Or they do not know all this. So, from hearing from others, they
start worshipping. "upāsate". "te ’pi". Even they. "cātitaranty eva". They will
also be, go beyond. "mṛtyuṁ śruti-parāyaṇāḥ". They will go beyond death by being
"śruti-parāyaṇāḥ". By being devot..., dedicated to hearing. You know. You know.
You know. So, by being dedicated to hearing. "śruti-parāyaṇāḥ". They will go
beyond matter. So, it is a very beautiful phrase, do, verse. "śruti-parāyaṇāḥ".
"śruti-parāyaṇāḥ" means that, you know, the word is often used
"nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇāḥ". "nār...", you know, so, "nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇāḥ", those who
are completely devoted to "nārāyaṇa". Then, there is another, in the Bhagavad
Gita, it, the "nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇāḥ" comes in the "Bhāgavatam".
"kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ". Those are given themselves to g..., lust and, you know,
you know, greed. That will come in the 16th Chapter of the Gita. When Krishna is
talking, talking about the demoniac nature. Now, here, Krishna uses the word,
you know, you know, you know, you know, k..., "śruti-parāyaṇāḥ". Those who love
hearing. Those who love hearing, what happens to such people? That they, they
"śruti". "śruti" is hearing. In here, "śruti" does not necessarily refer to
"śruti" scriptures. Krishna has talked about going beyond the "śruti".

        śruti-vipratipannā te
        yadā sthāsyati niścalā
        samādhāv acalā buddhis
        tadā yogam avāpsyasi

And you know, you know, "śruti", you know, so, there, Krishna has said in 52nd
and 53th verses of the, you know, Eighteen..., youy know, Second Chapter that
those who have actually situated in His, strongly in His transcendental
path, whatever they hear from the "śruti" literature. If it is about karma
kanda, that will not disturb them. Because they understand that there is a
higher reality. Because "śruti" can specifically refer to, you know, in one
sense, in one sense, it can refer to, you know, these "śruti" scriptures which
talk about karma kanda. You know. You know. But in another sense, the word
"śruti" can refer to the facult..., to the, you know, function of hearing. And
especially, it can refer to "sravanam". In terms of hearing about Krishna. So,
here, the effect of this "śruti" is to get, to go beyond material existence. So,
this is definitely not referring to the "sra...", "śruti" of karma kanda. It is
talking about, you know, you know, you know, you know, "śruti" in terms of the
"sravanam". So, "śruti-parāyaṇāḥ". One who becomes attached to hearing. What
happens to such a person? Just un..., you know, such a person, just by hearing,
so, Kri..., Krishna has talked about three categories of people in the previous
verse. "kecid". "kecid". "kecid". And now, He says "anye". There is a fourth
category of people. "anye tv evam ajānantaḥ". They do not know all these
complications about what is "prakṛtiṁ". What is "puruṣaṁ". And the
technicalities of all this. "ajānantaḥ". But "śrutvā". They hear. "anyebhyaḥ".
So, the word "anye" comes twice. And the, it is not the same thing. The first
"anye" is in contrast with the earlier "anye". Earlier, it is "kecid". "kecid".
"kecid". Some people practice...,, pract..., practiced dhyana yoga. Some people
practice jnana yoga. Some practice karma yoga. But there are others who pra...,
do this hearing. And within this hearing, they are, hear from others. So, these
are, those refer to spiritual authorities. So, first "anye" refers to others.
Apart from the three v..., earlier. The second "anye", "śrutvānyebhya upāsate",
the second "anye" refers to those who are spiritual authorities. And from, they
hear. "śrutvānyebhya upāsate". After hearing, they start doing "upāsana". Now,
"upāsana" is, you know, cent..., it, centrally a feature of bhakti. So, that
means, it is not just hearing. Hearing. And there is transformation that is
happening. The transformation is that the person is becoming devoted to the
transcendental reality. Starting to worship that supreme reality. "śrutvānyebhya
upāsate". And "te ’pi". They also, "cātitaranty eva". "cātitaranty eva". They
will go beyond "mṛtyum". "mṛtyum". So, you know, you know, "taranti". Krishna
has used this earlier, also, in 7.14. "mām". You know. "mama māyā duratyayā".

        daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī
        mama māyā duratyayā
        mām eva ye prapadyante
        māyām etāṁ taranti te

That those who hear about this, you know, they, those who surrender to me, they
will go beyond "māyā". "taranti". And here, also, the wor..., similar word is
there. "ātitaranty eva". One will go beyond. So, what s..., will happen by
hearing? "upāsate". So, when one hears about the, the Supersoul, when becomes
devoted to the Supersoul, one starts worshipping the Supersoul. And by that, one
goes beyond material existence. One goes beyond "mṛtyuṁ". And Prabhupada talks
about hearing in terms of chanting the Hare Krishna maha mantra. And in terms
of, you know, fo..., following the scriptural authorities. So, you know, you
know, you know, you know, Prabhupada is writing:

"This hearing process is very important."

And Prabhupada says:

"if the common man simply hears from authoritative sources he can progress,"

And then, he quo..., talks about the Hare Krishna maha mantra. And, you know:

"Although the common man is often not as capable as so-called philosophers,
faithful hearing from an authoritative person will help one transcend this
material existence and go back to Godhead, back to home."

So, here, even if a person is "ajānantaḥ". You know. Sometimes, the 13th
Chapter's technicalities may, you know, intimidate us. You know. What is this
"jñeyaṁ"? And what is this "jñānaṁ"? I thought Bhagavad, Bhagavad, I thought,
you know, Krishna Consciousness is very simple, chant Hare Krishna. Dance. And
go back to Godhead. What are all these technical categories? So, even in the
"jñāna" section, Krishna is reassuring that no, even if one is "ajānantaḥ". One
hears. And then, one starts worshipping the, about the supreme reality. About
which we have heard. Then, by that, one can attain the supreme destination. One
can go beyond the cycle of birth and death. So, in the next section, we will
discuss about how, putting it all together. The "Jnana Chakshu".

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
