Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LmfrMnHyTRg
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_125_-_Bhagavad_Gita_14.14-14.18_-_The_modes_and_reincarnation_-_progressive_and_regressive_trajectories_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=yms6ViOPQIKQSNwCoUc8jJvmLSt8MTU0ODQ4OTY3OEAxNTQ4NDAzMjc4&event=video_description&v=LmfrMnHyTRg

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the Fourth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. You know. We discussed in the
previous section about how the mo..., modes are, are, can be understood from
their cha..., diff..., you know, characteristics which manifest when they, you
know, when one mode, subor..., you know, su..., when one mode predominates over
other modes. So, now, after this, Krishna will describe, you know, the, we have
discussed until 13. Now, we are discussing, now, verses 14 to 18. Effect of
conditioning by the modes. You know. So, 14, you know, 15 talks about the
long-term effect. In terms of what happens after death. The post death
destination. Then, 16th verse, He talks about the medium-term effect. In 17th
verse talks about the immediate effect. Then, 18th verse talks about the overall
direction of the post-mortem journey. You know. You know. You know. Let us look
at this discussion now.

        yadā sattve pravṛddhe tu
        pralayaṁ yāti deha-bhṛt
        tadottama-vidāṁ lokān
        amalān pratipadyate

So, "yadā sattve pravṛddhe tu". At the time. "yadā". At which time? Whenever.
"sattve pravṛddhe tu". "sattve" is "pravṛddhe", is the earlier, the word, there
was used, was "vivṛddhaṁ". Here, "pravṛddhe". Both mean the same thing. When
"sattve" is stronger. At that time, "pralayaṁ yāti deha-bhṛt". "pralayaṁ" means,
you know, death. "pralayaṁ" can mean destruction. It can refer to the final
destruction. At, of the universe that happens. You know. Final universal
destruction that happens at the, you know, you know, end of the lifetime of
Brahma. So, the word "pralayaṁ" can refer to death. The word "pralayaṁ" can also
refer to various other things. So, in the Bhagavad Gita, the word "pralayaṁ" is
used to refer to death. You know. It is, you know, used to refer again in the
16th Chapter, also.

        cintām aparimeyāṁ ca
        pralayāntām upāśritāḥ

So, you know, in 16.11 and 12, Krishna talks the..., about those peop..., the
ungodly, demoniac people, who make sense gratification as the only goal of their
lives. For those people, you know, you know, you know, you know, "pralayāntām
upāśritāḥ". Until the moment of death, there will be "cintām". There will be
anxiety. So, there, also, the word is used. "pralaya" for death. So, here, also.
"pralayaṁ yāti deha-bhṛt". So, those who are "deha-bhṛt". The embodied souls. If
they die when the mode of goodness is prominent. Then, what happens?
        
        tadottama-vidāṁ lokān
        amalān pratipadyate

So, "pratipadyate", they will attain. What will they attain? You know. The
"amalān" planets. The spotless planets of the "uttama-vidām". "uttama-vidām" is
those who are the knowers. You know. "vidā". "vidām" is to, "vidām" is to know.
"uttama" is, you know, that which is above "tama". So, that which is a higher,
you know, state of knowledge. So, those, you know, auspicious planets, those
pure planets, with, where the, you know, where the knows, the knowers of, you
know, the kno..., the knowers live. "uttama-vidām". The knows, knowers of the
higher knowledge live. They, that, that those "lokā"s will be attained. So,
earlier, Krishna has described that, "prakāśaḥ". He has used the word "prakāśaḥ"
to characterise the mode of goodness, you know, twice. First, in His initial
description in 16.6. And again, in another description, in 16.11. So, those who
live in knowledge in this life, they gain further knowledge after this life.
That is how it is. We live in knowledge. We will gain further knowledge by that.
So, "uttama-vidām lokān". "uttama-vidām lokān". "amalān pratipadyate". So, this
can refer to the svarga. It can, actually, it refers to even higher "lokā"s,
also. Above the svarga "lokā"s. This does not refer to liberation clearly.
Because Krishna will talk about liberation later on. After desc... describing
the analysis of the three modes. You know. You know. You know. You know. You
know. But if we live in goodness, then we attain the destination, you know, as a
destination, those places which are in goodness. Now, our, our svarga "lokā" is
in goodness? You know. Relatively speaking, we could say yes. As compared to the
earthly planetary system. Where often people live without any, you know,
reference to scripture. The, you know, the svarga "lok...", the, these people in
svarga "lokā" are definitely, you know, more in goodness. They definitely accept
the authority of Vishnu. They accept the authority of the Vedas. You know. But
even if they do not, not necessarily accept the, you know, accept the, you know,
you know, pro..., pro..., pure, process of, to pure devotional service. The
process of devotional service. And the goal of pure love. They will not acc...,
you know, you know, they may not be aspiring for that immediately. They are
devotees. They may not be pure devotees. But they are definitely devotionally
minded. And they are more, you know, theistic. They saw, saw, you know, the
acceptance of scripture authority. The acceptance of devotion to Vishnu. That
itself is indicative of their goodness. So, that devatas are definitely in
goodness as compared to the earthly planetary system. But other devatas are in
goodness as compared to transcendence? No. You know. Devatas are not so much in
goodness as compared to transcendence. You know. Sorry. Not even in then,
com..., as compared to the, you know, life, say, Brahmaloka. Or Patsata,
Satya "lokā". Janaloka. Tapa "lokā". The upper planetary systems. Where
people perform austerities. And where, you know, in, there are no, in, say, Tapa
"lokā". Janaloka. It is not that people are drinking Soma Rasa. And, you
know, you know, enjoying with apsaras. In, so, there the, you know, you know,
life is much more focused on austerity. Much more focused on liberation.  Much
more focused on transcendence. So, that will be much more goodness. So, we
should not think of goodness as just one homogeneus, you know, attitude.

You know. Even within goodness, also, there are levels. So, there are, there are
goodness which is much more towards passion. Then, there is goodness which is
much more closer to transcendence. And then, there is intermediate goodness,
also. So, if we consider goodness not as a homogeneity. But as a sp..., spectrum
within a, within an overall, you know, you know, you know, within an overall
shade of, you know, purity. As it is "amalān". "prakāśaḥ". It is lang..., of
knowledge and purity. You know. Within that, you know, with that, you know,
common setting, there is the spectrum over there. So, it is, so, "uttama-vidām".
So, if people live in goodness, then they attain these "uttama-vidām lokān". So,
even those in svarga are not necessarily always considered "uttama-vidām". You
know. You know. Because, you know, they are also caught in the pursuit of sense
gratification. You know. So, so, living in goodness can take one to svarga. It
can take one higher to than svarga, also. It depends on the level of goodness
that one has cultivated. You know. Now, after describing this, "amalān
pratipadyate". You know. Then, after that describes that what happens when one
lives in the modes of passion and ignorance. That is talked about in the next
verse. You know. You know. You know. You know.

        rajasi pralayaṁ gatvā
        karma-saṅgiṣu jāyate
        tathā pralīnas tamasi
        mūḍha-yoniṣu jāyate

"rajasi pralayaṁ gatvā". "rajasi". When there is a mode of passion. "pralayaṁ
gatvā". If one dies in the mode of passion, you know, then, what happens?
"karma-saṅgiṣu jāyate". "karma-saṅgiṣu". That those who are attached to fruitive
work. That means those who are materialistic. If one dies in the mode of
passion. Then, one is reborn here. You know. In, you know, you know,
"karma-saṅgiṣu". In attachment to fruitive action. "tathā pralīnas tamasi". And
if one dies in the mode of ignorance, then "mūḍha-yoniṣu jāyate".
"mūḍha-yoniṣu". So, "karma-saṅgiṣu" refers to the earthly planetary system
primarily. Here, people are attached to doing fruitive work. And "mūḍha-yoniṣu".
So, "mūḍha-yoniṣu", you know, you know, we see a parallel structure over here.
"jāyate", "jāyate" is there in, you know, B and D. And "yoniṣu", "saṅgiṣu" is,
you know, similar sounding. And "karma" and "mūḍha" are almost words that have
the same levels of sus..., same number of syllables. So, we see, there are many
places where the Gi..., Gita. Charac..., the Gita, characteristic of Bhagavad
Gita, the poetry characteristics do come out. You know. So, the "karma-saṅgiṣu
jāyate". And "mūḍha-yoniṣu jāyate". So, "mūḍha-yoniṣu" refers to, "mūḍha" is, as
we know, it can refer to a foul. Or it can refer to a, you know, donkey. So, a
donkey, you know, "mūḍha-yoniṣu". You know. So, those who live in animal like
species. Those who are, those who are, animal, animal, the, basically, the word
species. Those who are foul, the foulish species. That is the animals. That
means if one lives in ignorance, then one attains the lower species. So, here,
what Krishna is essentially telling is that, you know, you know, you know, you
know, if we live in passion, then we come back. You know. Take birth here again.
So, sometimes, you know, people ask this question that, you know, today, you
know, it is said that, you know, if the number of souls is fixed, then why is
the population increa..., how do we understand the increase of population? You
know. So, actually, that is not very difficult to understand. Because, you know,
firstly, the increase in population is a very relative conception. You know. We
really do not have clear population, or estimates of, or fo..., thousands of
years ago. You know. Several thousands, years ago. You know. The, the whole idea
of discovery of, you know, new lands. Which was a medieval concept. When they
say, America was discovered. Or Euro..., or India was discovered. You know. So,
this whole concept of discovery of new lands, that is based on the idea that
those lands, you know, were unknown to the, you know, European one. You know.
And that is why they were said to be, you know, you know, discovered. But there,
people were always living. And very few esti..., tribal estimates can be had
about, say, how many native Americans were staying in, you know, America. Before
the, you know, white schema, or for, what was the population of India before,
say, Alexander came, or before so, even 3000, 4000 years ago, it is very
difficult to tail. So, first of all, you know, we can, the whole idea of
population measuring is, you know, very difficult, you know, to go beyond, you
know, to reliably g..., you know, talk ab..., to talk about in a reliable sense
for, you know, several thousand years ago. You know.

So, even if somebody does not accept the Vedic, you know, understanding that
there is one world rule, you know, in the Vedic culture all over the world. At
that ti..., you know, even if one does not accept that. Still, the point remains
that our ten..., conception of history is very i..., limited. So, to say that
the world population has increased far more than ever before. That is a, you
know, substantial, you know, you know, leap of faith. And inference that is
based on leap of faith. Which is not necessary for everyone, you know, to take.
You know. There can be intelligence scepticism about it. Now, you know, you
know, regarding the increase in population in recent times, you know, we
understand, you know, the whole concept of reincrease in population is because
of the idea that population is, you know, limited to the earth. You know. Earth.
Life is limited to the earth. And population is limited to the earth. But no.
You know. If we have, if we decide to de..., make the, to measure the population
of Mumbai by looking at the crowds at a, you know, you know, at the, say, the
CST railway station. At a railway, railway station. Then, what will happen is,
you know, at, if we take the, you know, you know, be..., if we observe the CST
station, say, between 8 to 11 in the morning. Rush hours. Traffic hours. And
people are going to work. Or maybe 5 to 10. 5 to 8. 9. Something. If I, thing.
And the evening. Then, again, we will say, oh, there is a population explosion
over here. And maybe, even we go at, you know, 1 o'clock. 2 o'clock. 3 o'clock.
You know. If I know the clo..., there is a, more, it seems there is a population
decrease over there. But what is happening, what we are talking was population
increase. Or population decreases. Very relative, you know, to, you know, it is
limited to a particular area. And it is limited to a f..., particular time. But
if we look from the broader perspective, all that has happened is, the
population that was here, the population that was at various place, f..., other
particular time, it comes here. And then, it moves away from here. So, you know,
you know, you know, we understand that life exists, that the souls exist in
different species. And the souls exist in various planets. And because they
exist in different species and in various planets, therefore the souls do have,
you know, you know, the souls do have the, you know, you know, the, you know,
capacity to live at various places. And in ta..., you know, in certain
conditions. For certain durations. The number of souls at one particular place
may be more. And the number of souls at other places may be less. So, this can
pe..., easily happen. And it is, intoxi..., signify, it is, it is not contrary
to the Vedic understanding of how population dynamics works. So, now, today,
people are living prominently in the mode of passion. And passion combined with
ignorance. So, you know, people who are living the human forms, you know, you
know, because they are not getting elevated, they may continue, they do not go
to the high, they are not living so much in goodness. So, they do not go to
higher, they have, high, or higher. And they live in passion, they may continue
to live over here. Now, of course, if they live in passion combined with
ignorance. Or they live largely in ignorance, then they will definitely go down.
You know. You know. So, passion is also a spectrum. You know. When the ksatriyas
live, the righteous ksatriyas, are they in passion? Yes, they are in passion.
But they are in the upper exi..., if we consider special, passion to be a
spectrum that they are in the upper side of passion. And, you know, you know,
and people who, in the name of passion, or, or to fulfill their passion and
desires, start acting in, you know, you know, violation of scripture. And act
sinfully. Then, they are moving towards ignorance. And that is extremely
undesirable. So, that will be, you know, on the lower side of the spectrum. And
that will go towards ignorance, also. So, if people live in passion with some
level of dharma, that may enable them to take birth again in the hu..., human
form.

So, and there will be some animal species who are coming up to the human form.
So, you know, it is very difficult for us with our limited perspective, the
universe, to know why the population is increasing at a particular place. Or
why it is decreasing at a particular place. And whether it is actually
increasing or decreasing also can be a matter of debate. You know. You know. If
we really take substantially long time durations. So, either way, the important
point is to recognise that, li..., you know, life is there everywhere. And there
are principles according to which, we get our future destinations. So, you know,
if we live in ignorance, we go down to the lower species. And if we live in
passion, then we are, take, we take bath again. So, then, Prabhupada talks
about, here, reverse transmigration. Reverse transmigration means, so:

"Some people have the impression that when the soul reaches the platform of
human life it never goes down again."

You know. You know. You know. You know. The, so, what has happened is, how does
this may, conception come about? You know. You know. You know. There are people
who, you know, try to, by their own intellect, integrate different religious
systems. So, in Christianity, also, in the Bible, also, there are references to
reincarnation. Even the Bible, as it is now. You know. There is a whole history
of why, you know, there are no explicit references to reincarnation, right now.
You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. I talked about in my book. In
"Reincarnation". And basically, they were, you know, you know, there was a
European emperor. You know. When initially, during the Roman empire, European
empire, Roman empire, you know, so, you know, you know, the Christianity was
prosecuted. And then, around the Fourth Century, you know, you know, with the
Roman Empire, which had earlier been prosecuting Christians, you know, when the
Roman Empire came to a political collapse due to the mo..., moral collapse among
its people. Then, in order to re..., gain political stability. And in order to,
you know, have some moral, you know, you know, structure for that purpose, the
Roman Empiror, you know, choo..., adopted Christianity as its official religion.
You know. And when that happened, you know, they adopted Christan principles.
But his purpose was not so much spiritual, it was political purpose. Which are
pro..., adjusting and in, others who were involved in this, you know, in
acceptance of Christianity as the mainstream religion, so, at that time, and
from that time onwards, the doctrines were, you know, you know, you know,
adjust..., were changed. So, that, you know, people could, you know, you know,
be more submi..., more, more submissive and obedient to the king. So, the idea
was that if people are told, there are many lifetimes, then they will not, you
know, you know, follow, you know, you know, the rules of God, which in turn
meant the rules of the king, strictly. You know. You know. You know. So, give
them life. One lifetime. Or give them hell. That was, what was the slogan that
came about over time. And that is how eventually, you know, you know, you know,
eventually, things collapsed. You know. And, you know, Christian..., the, in
references to incarnation, whatever there, they were purged out. Now, like any
scholar rel..., issue, based on, you know, pratyaksa. Anuman. This is, there is,
these are a, multiple versions of what actually happened. But the important
point is that even with the, you know, you know, Bible as it is, you know, it,
or incarnation is not intrinsically incompatible with the Bible. With the
biblical world view. And there is references which do support it. But you know,
what, what we are discussing right now is that, you know, you know, you know,
you know, you know, the, you know, you know, or, or, Chri..., mainstream
Christian..., you know, Christianity, as it exists today, does not accept
reincarnation. So, when the, you know, you know, Christians came to India. When
the Britishers came to India. And established their rule. And along with them,
Christian missionaries also came. And then, many other thinkers also came. So,
they, so when, some western thinkers. And some Indian thinkers. They tried to
integrate whatever they saw good Christianity. And whatever they saw good in the
tradition Indian religion. And based on this integration, you know, they tried
to, you know, you know, you know, come up with, they tried to come up with, you
know, their own ideas of thought. So, one of the ideas which they brought
together is the concept of reincarnation is very good. You know. You know. That
is, you know, God is kind. Because God gives us many chances.

He does not, you know, you know, you know, He does not, you know, decide based
on only one chance. Yes. If you know, if cannot do it in this lifetime, the next
lifetime also is there. So, it, it, you know, actually harmonises with the idea
of a merciful God. Otherwise, if God just gives us one chance. And if we do not
accept that chance, then he sends us to hell forever. That is a, you know, you
know, difficult concept to digest for most people. It does not, people, He does,
a very harsh. And judgemental God. Not at all a merciful God. So, they try to
integrate this idea of Christia..., of, of mul..., multiple lifetimes. But they
felt that the idea of hu..., animals, you know, having souls was repulsive to
their sensibilities. Why was it so repulsive? Because, you know, they felt that,
you know, you see dogs. You see hogs. You see, you know, they do not have any
sense at all. How can a soul go that way? How can a soul, who was a, how can a
soul, how can human being become like that? Their consciousness is so different.
Their thinking is so different. Their whole mentality is different. They cannot
have that. So, prior to that, also, although, you know, you know, in the Bible.
In the old testament, there are references to the soul's present even in, you
know, birds and animals. And especially, in animals, that is why it is said that
one should eat fruits and, you know, roots, but not, you know, one, there are
le..., references which say that, you know, animals also have souls. And that is
why fruits and, you know, herbs and recommnended as food. But still, in spite of
that, the result was, you know, that people continued to have their own, you
know, you know, ideas of how to integrate. So, the, so, prior to this, in
Christianity, there was a Christian thinker, "Thomas Aquinas". You know. Very,
you know, respected sch..., scholar in biblical history. Second probably, only
to, Saint, you know, Saint Augustine. You know. But, anyway, whatever he, he
was. So, he came up with the idea that there are three kinds of souls. He said,
there are, there are human souls. There are animal souls. And there are plant
souls. So, He said, human souls are rationale. Animals souls are sentient. And,
you know, you know, plant souls are, basically, called them as vegetable souls.
So, he said that, these differe..., there are these differences in the souls
itself. You know. So, it is not that there is one kind of soul in all living
beings. The souls themselves are different. And his idea was that only human
souls are eternal. All the other souls, they are created. And they are destoyed.
You know. You know. They do not exist forever. You know. And, you know, you
know, you know, you know, now, of course, some of them will not have the idea
that, that, now, it is, the souls are created. So, the Christians, thinkers have
redefined eternal. Eternal means existing forever. But they say, ok, existing
forever from the point of creation. Not before this. So, actually, there is, you
know, in, you know, when we talk about, you know, you know, you know,
reincarnation. We have to understand two different concepts. There is
preexistence. And then, there is after-life. So, if on an X axis, we consider,
say, there is this patch from L to from, say, from B to D. So, B is birth. And D
is death. So, that patch is our current life. So, if in this patch from B to D,
The area before this will be our, you know, will be pre-existence. And then,
what comes after D is after-life. So, after death is after-life. What comes
before birth is pre-existence.

So, now, Chri..., the materialistic world view is that, there is only this life.
And there is nothing else. That is all. Now, the Christian understanding is
that, ok, there is this life. And for those who accept the redeeming grace of
Jesus, then for them, there is li..., after-life, also. For others, you know,
there is hell. So, that means, from now onwards, the soul is eternal. And some
souls can attain eternal destination in their, in their conception of the
kingdom of God. Others will go to hell. You know. So, they accept after-life.
But not pre-existence. So, now, that is why they say that when the man and woman
come together, a new soul is created at that time. The souls are created. But
they are not destroyed. Something like that. Their idea is. So, anyway, the
point is that the concept of pre..., you know, after-life is there in Chri...,
you know, in Chris..., so many Christian doctrine, you know, Christian, you
know, a field nominations. You know. You know. When, you know, for only this,
you know, for only human souls. So, it, there are human souls. The, so, they
can beat, they can, they have after-life. And they can attain eternal life at
the kingdom of God. In the kingdom of God. But the animal souls, that is the,
you know, sentient souls. And the vegetable souls. Vegetative souls. You know.
They cannot attain. So, faculty for rationale inquiry is what distinguishes
human beings. And that is what enables them to connect with God. So, here, we
see, what has unfortunately happened is that there is a conflation of the body.
And the soul. Conflation means, you know, you know, mixing up. That the body and
the soul, they have been both, you know, tied together, you know, in an
unfortunate way. In a messy way. So, what does cause this tying up of the body
and the soul? It is the misconception that is driven by the idea that only the
soul, that, you know, the sou..., that the, you know, soul cannot exist without
the body. And the soul and the body are inextriplic..., inextricably connected
with each other. Inextricably connected with each other. What does it mean
inextricably connected? They say that, they, there is a, you know, the Vedic
understanding is the soul and body, actually, there is just a chance
combination. There is no essential intrinsic connection between the soul and the
body. You know. You know. You know. But, you know, you know, you know, you know,
you know, there is an intrinsic connection, you know, between the soul and the
Lord. That is eternal. But there is, as far as the body is concerned, we have
got a body according to our past karma. There is this difference between the
body and the soul which is very prominent in the Vedic culture. Whereas it is
very negligent, it i..., it is not so much there in the, you know, Vedic, you
know, Ve..., in the non-Vedic, especially, the Christian world view. So, because
of this, when something cast, tries to integrate the ideas of, you know,
Christianity, and, you know, Hinduism. You now. So, they came up with the idea
that reincarnation is always progressive. It is not regressive. So, progressive
means, ok, you know, there are souls in the animal spe..., plant species. There
are souls in the animal species. Souls in the human species. Souls can move
upwards from the animal species. From the plant species. Animal species to the
human species. They called that as progressive reincarnation. And regressive
reincarnation is when the soul moves down from the, you know, you know, animal
species, you know, from the human species to the lower species. So, their idea
was that, pro..., so, reincarnation is progressive. But not regressive. So,
now, what is the brill..., reasoning for this idea? Actually, if we see in the
scripture, there are many references. With, there is a story of Jadbharat. Where
from a human specy, that person goes down to a lower specy. So, that is
regressive reincarnation. Now, you know, there, in mo..., most past life
memories, you know, people have remembered their previous lives as human beings.
Nobody has remembered the previous life as animals. So, this is also used as,
sometimes, as rationalisation. As a defense for this.

But the point is that, you know, the who..., scales of reference, the frames of
reference for human and lower species are so great. The differences in the
frames of references i so great. That in the transition, me..., practically,
memories are, are most likely to be entirely wiped out. So, even in a normal,
you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, journey from this
life to the next life, the memory does not remain for long. So, mo..., in most
cases, the memory gets wiped out. In some cases, the memory remains. So, what to
speak of in the cases where people are, you know, you know, going from one specy
to another. So, the pe..., wipe out of the memory is natural. Because there is a
complete difference in the way of thinking. You know. When a hog is attracted to
food. And the hog is attracted to, you know, you know, you know, you know, 
stool. At that time, it is not that the hog is act..., attracted only to, you
know, that, you know, even the hog will have, remember something from the human
life. And think, oh, in the human life, I thought this is abominable. Now, I am
attracted. I am attracted to it. How is this? You know. The hog cannot have a
cognitive dissonance like that. Hog cannot have a, you know, you know, cognitive
dissonance, dissonance refers to deep inter..., disagreement within. What should
I do? What is the right? You know. It just acts according to its instinct. So,
because the whole, you know, attitude, frame of reference, paradigm is
completely shifted for the soul from one specy to another, that is why there is
no much remem..., there is not, remembrance is wiped out from one specy to
another. So, we cannot hold that as a, you know, you know, so, so, absence of
proof is not proof of absence. So, absence of proof is not proof of absence.
What does that mean? That just because there is no empirical proof of past life
memories, you know, from lower specy, other non-human species, that does not
mean that that is not a possibility at all. So, you know, you know, you know,
you know, you know, beyond that, we also recognise that, you know, you know, you
know, there is the further possibi..., you know, recognition that, you know,
this is, ultimately, the, what is the transmigration based on. It is based on
the premise of free will. And the facilitation of the desires of the soul. So,
because it is based on the understanding the soul has free will. And the soul
can choose. What kind, what do I want to do? So, if there is a choose in the
human's body. Chooses to enjoy in animalistic ways, then, you know, you know,
facilitating that desire is what is, you know, is the way nature will work. So,
we, we can say that, you know, there is a logical, log..., there is a logical
coherence to the understanding that reincarnation can be progressive as well as
regressive. Progressive means, it can go from lower species. To human specy. But
from the human specy, also, it can go down. You know. Now, so, you know, you
know, you know, you know, the whole idea is that there is, you know, you know,
the whole process of reincarnation is, meant to facilitate the soul to act
according to its desires. So, the soul who has lived passionately will get a
f..., next body. Which is more suited for living in passion. The soul who has
lived in ignorance, will get a body that is more suited to living in ignorance.

So, it is not, you know, you know, you know, it is not anything barbaric or
something. That idea is often laughed at, oh you will become a dog. You will
become a cow. You will become a lizard. It means how ridiculous this idea is.
No. It is not ridiculous. Once we understand why there are all these species.
You know. Again, the whole, the reductionistic concepts of, you know, you know,
of, you know, the other means, there is, of the Abrahamic religions, where they
accept, you know, only human souls as, you know, capable of liberation. You
know. Then, or attaining God. Then, the purpose of diversity in nature, you
know, there is no clear purpose. You know. The, the whole of the natural world,
in terms of the flora and the phone. The animals. And the planets. It just
becomes an incidental backdrop. You know. You know. It just becomes an
incidental backdrop for the central drama of Christian redemption. That, you
know, Chri..., you know, central drama is, the purpose of existence is what?
That Jesus will come and redeem everyone. And that is all, that this is the
purpose of existence. And beyond that, you know, you know, there is no other
purpose. So, why are all the other animals and plans existing? Oh, they just
exist within nature. And that is all that there is to it. They all exist in
nature. And, you know, their existence itself does not have much purpose. Now,
they may say that, ok, through their existence, also, God's glory is proclaimed.
Through the singing of the birds. The sweet s..., chirping of the birds. Through
the majesty of the animals in nature. So that, also, we can understand the glorie
of God. Yes. That is true. You know. You know. At one level, that is definitely
true. You know. You know. But at another level, we also have to recognise that
life in and of itself is not eternal. You know. That here, everything is
temporary. And there is a struggle for existence. And actually, you know, to, in
many ways, because the Christian world view was so dismissive of the animal
world. Of the non-human world. So, when Darwin came up with his theory of
evolution. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, he sort of brought
human's world, hu..., he brought the human species down for mahai pedestal. He
knocked humanity of its specialness. You know. You know. But how did he do that?
See, actually, the Vedic world view spiritualises all life. The Vedic world view
spiritualises all life means, you know, that it, way, you know, it recognises
that all living beings are spiritual. You know. It recognises that, you know,
all living beings, you know, you know, are, ha..., you know, you know, whatever
form of life is there, there is soul over there. So, it spiritualises all.
Whereas the, you know, the Abrahamic world view, the Christian world view, you
know, but along with that, the other, you know, you know, you know, jew, the
jew, you know, the judaic world view. And the islamic world view is similar. So,
there, what happens is, here, there is the, you know, the Vedic world view
spiritualises all living beings. In the Christian world view, only human beings
are spiritualised. And all the other, you know, species are, you know,
despiritualised. That is why there is a radical difference between humans and
lower species. Only humans have eternal souls. Others do not have eternal souls.
So, it is almost like, you know, it is basically, the soul is also made concept,
instead of material concept only. When it is, they, they have souls. But the
souls are temporary. Then, what kind of soul is that? What is that actually? It
is just some material conception. So, that means, you know, there is a f..., if
we consider the, oh, that, ok, the con..., Vedic world view, you know, there are
souls. And they can go through various species. Then, in the Christian world
view, there is just as this huge, you know, you know, chasm. Huge break between
the human world and the non-human world. Humans have souls. Non-human world does
not have souls. So, this break, you know, this is, there are many similarities
between animals and humans, also.

Prabhupada would say, you know, that, you know, if our bod..., our bod..., you
know, you know, we feel pain. They feel pain. We grow old. They grow old. And we
get diseased. They get diseased. You know. They love the, we love the, our
children. They love their children. There are so many similarities in terms of
behavior. And in terms of consciousness. In terms of his special response to
natural things. So, you know, based on this idea of similarity, how does
Darwin's, you know, theory of evolution and, you know, re..., remove this
difference? This big chasm between the non..., human and the non-human world?
You know. Tuck. It is removed by saying that, even humans do not have souls. So,
all human bo..., all human beings, it despiritualises all living beings. So, the
Christian world view. And the western world view. And the current materialistic
world view, they are very close to each other in that sense. So, the Christian
world view created an artificial, artificial, you know, you know, break between
any logical, artificial, unsustainable break between humans and non-humans. And
that break was bridged, it should be bridged in truth by recognising, by
recognising the spirituality of all living beings. But instead, when that bridge
is, you know, bridged by, you know, the despiritualising all living beings. That
is unfortunate. So, what is required is not respiri..., you know,
despiritualisation. But respiritualisation. Despiritualisation means, the
current idea is that there is no sou..., concept of soul at all. So, neither
humans. Nor, you know, non-humans. And no..., nobody has any soul in it. So,
that is a, you know, complete misunderstandings. You know. So, the reincarnation
is, can be progressive. It can be regressive. It all depends on how, what
desires we cultivate. What modes we allow to influence upon us. You know. So,
Prabhupada, you know, mod..., uses this verse to establish this point that we
can go through various species. You know. You know. Oth..., the:

"Otherwise, there is no guarantee that the human being will again attain to the
human status."

In fact, the scriptures, you know, you know, often talk about, you know, you
know, you know, how, you know, you know, we need to be careful. Otherwise, if we
are not careful, then we can lose the human form of life. And we will lose the
human form of life. That is a great misfortune. You know. You know. You know.
So, that, you know, misfortune, quo..., we quote it when we live in the mode of
ignorance. And to the extent, we live in the higher modes, then we avoid that
misfortune. So, now, Krishna starts giving the, you know, intermediate results
of living in the various modes.

        karmaṇaḥ sukṛtasyāhuḥ
        sāttvikaṁ nirmalaṁ phalam
        rajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham
        ajñānaṁ tamasaḥ phalam

So, "karmaṇaḥ sukṛtasyāhuḥ". So, "karmaṇaḥ", you know, "karma" is of
"sukṛtasyāhuḥ". "sukṛti". So, one does good "karma". "sāttvikaṁ". When one is in
the mode of goodness. You know. You know. The work that one is, does is, is
"sukṛti". It is pious. And its result is "phalam". What is the "phalam"?
"nirmalaṁ phalam". You know. "nirmalaṁ" means purification. You know. So, one
attains purification by, because of action in the mode of, you know, goodness.
The "karma" is "sukṛti". And the "phalam" is "nirmalaṁ". "rajasas tu phalaṁ
duḥkham". Whereas one live in love, when is in "raja guṇāḥ", then the "phalaṁ"
is "duḥkham". And then, one, you know, lives in "tama guṇāḥ". You know. "ajñānaṁ
tamasaḥ phalam". The "phalam" of "tama guṇāḥ" is "ajñānaṁ". You know. You know.
You know. So, now, this is talking of, in terms of even in this lifetime, also,
say, it, the pre..., in the next lifetime, what will happen is that one will go
either to upward planetary system. Or stay in the same planetary system. Or go
down to lower s..., planetary system. Or lower species. So, you know, that is
what will happen after death. More or, but even in this lifetime, if one lives
in goodness, you know, that what will happen is. "amalān". "nirmalaṁ". It is
used the word. So, the word "amalān" was used earlier. You know. For "amalān
pratipadyate". In 14.14. The word was used that one who lives in the mode of
goodness attains an "amalān pratipadyate". One attain an auspicious destination.
But here it is said that what to speak of one who living in, who lives in
goodness. Even one who lives in, you know, you know, passion. Or ignorance. You
know. Whichever way one lives, one, there is an effect, even which can be seen
in this lifetime, also. So, if one lives in ignorance, that means one regularly,
one regularly drinks, then what happens is, the drink, you know, not only ruins
one's liver. The drink actually pickles one's brains, also. The person loses,
you know, capacity for clear thinking. And the person now rui..., you know,
people ruin themselves by that. So, "ajñānaṁ tamasaḥ phalam". "tamasaḥ phalam".
The "phalam" of the mode of ignorance is that one goes into deeper ignorance.
When we live in ignorance, when, then, by that, we go into deeper ignorance. And
that deeper ignorance makes us, you know, further act in ignorance. And then,
it makes us go further into deeper, you know, greater ignorance. Like that.
"rajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham". Now, this is significant. That if one lives in the
mode of passion, the result of that is "duḥkham". The result of that is also
"duḥkham". "rajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham". You know. You know. Thereby, "raja
guṇāḥ", one lives in, one, you know, actually, "phalaṁ duḥkham". You know. You
know. You know. "rajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham". One lives in ignorance by that.
"rajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham". You know. And when one lives in ignorance in this
way, one does not make much spiritual advancement. You know. You know. And
sorry, if one lives in ignorance, then definitely, there is no question of
spiritual advancement. Even if one lives in passion. There is not much
spiritual, you know, question of spiritual advancement. Generally, the, we, we
saw earlier how "raja guṇāḥ" refers to, say, the male-female attraction. Now,
this male-female attraction, what is the result of this attraction? It
ultimately leads to "duḥkham". Because it increases the bodily consciousne...,
consciousness, in both males and females. And when there is, bodily
consciousness increases, that leads to bondage. That leads to suffering. So,
"rajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham". And similarly, it is not just with respect to the
male-female attraction.

In the mode of passion, no matter what one has, one is never satisfied. One
wants more. And more. And more. Because the idea is the pleasure is out there.
You know. In something material. The pleasure is out there in that car. The
pleasure is out there in that, say, new cellphone. The pleasure is the, out
there in the new iPad. The pleasure is out there in that, that, that thing. And
when I get that, then I will become happy. But if, even if I get that, nothing
happens. I do not get anything by that. That is why it is, you know, you know,
you know, you know, said to be in the mode of passion. You know. You know. You
know. So, Prabhupada writes that when the person has to do anything in the
material world, that requires tremendous endeavor. And that endeavor lea...,
itself leads to misery. And then, you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada uses
simple reasoning that, you know, why animal killing is in the mode of ignorance.
You know. You know. You know. You know. So:

"In human society, if one kills a man he has to be hanged. That is the law of
the state. Because of ignorance, people do not perceive that there is a complete
state controlled by the Supreme Lord."

And:

"Every living creature is a son of the Supreme Lord, and He does not tolerate
even an ant’s being killed."

And then, he says especially killing the animals, it is a, among the animals,
killing the, you know, the cows i..., nd eating their flash is the most sinful.
So, he quotes from the "Ṛg Veda 9.46.4". You know. You know. That, you know, so:

        gobhiḥ prīṇita-matsaram

"gobhiḥ", that if somebody actually, you know, "prīṇita". "prīṇita". "prīṇita".
prīṇita-matsaram". "prīṇita-mat...", "prīṇita". You know. "prīṇita-matsaram".
So, "gobhiḥ prīṇita-matsaram". Prabhupada is saying that, if somebody kills a
cow, then that is the most sinful of all people. Most sinful form of killing.
So:

"A civilization which guides the citizens to become animals in their next lives
is certainly not a human civilization."

When we say, nobody is guiding people to become animals, you know, people do not
even believe in the next life. So, what to speak of believing that they will
become animals in the next life? It is not a question of what one believes. It
is a question of how one lives. You know. You know. Question is not just what
one believes. The question is how one lives. So, you know, you know, people may
or not believe in the next li..., in next life. And what they will give, they
become in the next life if it, they live, if they are cultivating certain kind
of desires. If they are living with a particular kind of mentality. Then, that
will lead to a particular destin..., particular destination, naturally. So, our
conception will determine our destination. And, you know, that is how life goes
on. You know. You know. You know. So, actually, there has to be, you know, the
recognition that one has to purify oneself. One has to protect oneself. One has
to elevate oneself. You know. So, you know, otherwise, this civilisation is
civilisation of ma..., eco..., you know, is misleading civilisation. So, we had
discussed how, you know, the Isopanishad calls, you know, Iso..., kill...,
"ātma-hanaḥ". "janāḥ". The killer of the soul. And Prabhupada calls modern
civilisation as the soul killing civilisation. The soul killing civilisation.
You know. You know. And then, you know, when, we see, Prabhupada, he is talking
about these three modes in a very broad generic term. And he is saying that, you
know, you know:

"It is a very dangerous age,"

Why? Because people are just being misled. 

"and all nations should take care to provide the easiest process, Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, to save humanity from the greatest danger."

So, you know, we need this process. And it is not just for, you know, one
individual. Two individuals. It is for all nations. That is, Prabhupada is
talking from broad, global perspective. That, you know, it is responsibility of,
you know, all nations to guide their citizen towards spiritual elevation. And
not to let them become spiritually degraded. Now, Krishna talks about, you know,
when one say, we could say, immediate result.

        sattvāt sañjāyate jñānaṁ
        rajaso lobha eva ca
        pramāda-mohau tamaso
        bhavato ’jñānam eva ca

"sattvāt sañjāyate". So, from the mode of goodness comes knowledge. You know.
You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. "sattvāt
sañjāyate jñānaṁ". So, you know, the mode of goodness leads to knowledge. Now,
it is signi..., sign..., in, sign..., significant here. Krishna also does not
say that "abhyasat sañjāyate jñānaṁ". It is not just merely by study that
knowledge comes about. Study is, you know, that people think that, oh, if I have
to become knowledgeable, I have to study a lot. Read a lot of books. Memorise a
lot of things. Then, I become learned. That is one aspect. That is not the only
thing, it, that is involved in learning. Actually, learning involves, you know,
especially, learning in terms of learning spiritual knowledge is a matter of,
you know, not just, you know, as, say, you know, you know, not just some
ingestion of certain facts. And figures. But it is a realignment of our view. It
is a harmonisation of our look, thinking. And living with reality. And that is
never easy. "sattvāt sañjāyate jñānaṁ". That, from "sattvā guṇāḥ", "jñānaṁ"
comes. "rajaso lobha eva ca". That from the mode of ign..., passion, you know,
comes greed. So, if we want, you know, knowledge, then we have to live in mode
of goodness. So, Krishna is, you know, telling, actually, we will also see that
when we are very agitated. You know. Disturbed about something. Somehow, if we
can, if we go to a temple, we try to sincerely pray to Krishna. We try to, you
know, you know, maybe read some passage which calms us down. Then, by that, what
happens is calmness. Calmness. Calmness. Calmness. So, so, things, some clarity
comes. Now, there, may be, just might be a transcendental experience. Or even if
somebody is not involved in devotional processes directly, one can have a karmic
experience. People call this epiphany. Epiphany means it is like a realisation.
Epiphany. Oh, suddenly, I understand. Oh, it is like this. I have never thought
about it, this like that. "sattvāt sañjāyate jñānaṁ". You know. You know. That
in the mode of goodness, people get illuminated. And, you know, we, we were,
also, we will see that, you know, some, we, may, if we are in passion, if we try
to put ourselves in goodness, suddenly, things become clear. Oh, it was like
this. I have never thought it was like this. And now, I understand why it is
like this. Ok. Ok. Ok. Now, it is clear. "sattvāt sañjāyate jñānaṁ". And in
"rajaso lobha eva ca". In the mode of passion, you know, there is gree...,
greed. There is, sorry, you know, there is "lobha". Greed. You know. So, in the
mode of passion, one is never satisfied with one, one has. So, you know, you
know, then, beyond that, there is "pramāda-mohau tamaso". So, "tamasaḥ guṇāḥ" is
characterised by "pramāda" and "mohau". And its result is "ajñānaṁ". Now, we are
talking even of short-term consequences. You know. As soon as we come in the
mode of passion, the result is agitation. Dissatisfaction. Hankering. Greed.
More. More. More. More. More. More. More. So, Prabhupada writes in the purport
that, you know, you know, you know:

"One can see that even if one has enough money and adequate arrangements for
sense gratification, there is neither happiness nor peace of mind. That is not
possible, because one is situated in the mode of passion. If one wants happiness
at all, his money will not help him; he has to elevate himself to the mode of
goodness by practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness."

It is very significant what Srila Prabhupada is telling. That, you know, you
know, you know, if one is in, in living in the mode of passion. Then, you know,
increasing money, you know, one's monetary possessions, you know, you know,
one's bank account, that will not make one happy. Although, that is what one
most strongly believes will make one happy. Why i..., why is not? If one
believes, that will make one happy, why will it not make one happy? Because one
is in the mode of passion. See, the modes, they shape our thinking. And, you
know, when we are in the mode of passion, we will always be seeing what we do
not have. So, if I have a, a car, but somebody else has got a much mo..., better
car. Then, naturally, I will not be, oh, I have a car. I cannot see that. For I
see, oh, that person has such a better car. Such is, you know, you know, more
expensive car than me. Then, I want that. Now, my, I am going, passion tells me,
get it. Get it. Get it. Get is. When I get it, then do I become happy by that?
Yes. I become temporarily happy. But because I am in the mode of passion, my
vision immediately goes to what I do not have. And then, it will be, oh, that
person has got even more fashionable car. A more modern car. A more contemporary
version. A more sch..., cool, you know, cool car. And I will want that. And I
will want that. And there is no end to this. So, because of this, in the mode of
passion, one cannot, you know, be satisfied. Because the mode of passion forces
us to see that which we do not ha..., you know, just look at things that we do
not have. You know. And there will always be some things which we do not have.
And the mode of passion will, you know, revet our vision to those things. And
will keep us dissatisfied. Therefore, you know, you know, now, this does not
mean that we, a devotee cannot have any material ambitions. No. That is not the
point. The, there should not be disproportionate material ambitions. By which, a
devotee has no time left for spiritual life. But, you know, the important point
is, one has to balance, one has to balance one's material and one's spiritual
life. And thereby, move forward. You know. You know. So, when we move forward in
our spiritual life. You know. By keeping our spiritual life focused. Then, along
with that, we do our material duties as competently as possible. And if by
Krishna's grace, wealth comes, we accept that wealth. And we use it, you know,
in a proper way. You know. You know. You know. You know. But, the, so, it is not
that a devotee has to give up wealth. But a devotee has to give up the illusion
that wealth can make one happy. So, you know, you know, Prabhupada says that:

"When one is engaged in the mode of passion, not only is he mentally unhappy,
but his profession and occupation are also very troublesome."

So, why is mental happiness? Because more. More. More. That is there. And
profession, occupation are also very troublesome. Why? Because one is engaged in
ugra-karma. You know. One cannot work in a balanced way. One has to, as I said,
works sixteen hours. Eighteen hours. Work, you know, becomes work. Workaholic.
When one becomes a workaholic, like that, that is extremely undesirable. So, you
know, and the profession and occupation are also very troublesome. So, you know,
now, this, all this is miserable. So, just as, you know, just as, "tu phalaṁ
duḥkham". Then, Krishna will give some, you know, generic descriptions of what
happens when.

        ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā
        madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ
        jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā
        adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ

So, "ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā". You know. You know. You know. "ūrdhvaṁ".
Even one, when, i..., if one stays in goodness, one will go upwards. One who is
in passion, one will stay where it is. You know. "madhye tiṣṭhanti". Will stay
in the middle planetary systems. And "jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā". If one has got
the, so, Krishna calls, actually, the mode, He does not even refer to the mode
of ignorance as mode of ignorance. He says, "jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti". "jaghanya"
means abominable. "jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā". If one is situated in the mode of
ignorance, then "adho gacchanti". One will go down. Those who are living in the
mode of ignorance, they will go down. You know. So, this is a verse which
describes, at, again that, you know, this was very categorically, you know,
refuting the idea of reincarnation only being progressive. Reincarnation can be
regressive, also. It can, one can go down, also. To the lower species. Now, what
does up refer to? You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know.
The up refer, can refer to multiple things. You know. The up can refer to, you
know, you know, you know, more elevated consciousness. The up can refer to a
higher "lokā"s. So, it can refer to, you know, there are higher "lokā"s. And
there are, within the human specy, also, there can be, you know, these who are
situated in the more, you know, divine consciousness than what we are. But, you
know, the, what, it, down can refer to is, that it can refer to the lower
planets. And it can refer to the lower species. "adho gacchanti". So, it can
refer to the lower sp..., you know, lower "lokā"s where people go when they
have, they are living tamasically. And it can also refer to the lower species.
The lower species have been talked about earlier when "mūḍha-yoniṣu jāyate" was
mentioned. So, the, you know, you know, you know, there are different
destination that are possible for the souls. When a person, you know, lives
accordingly. And that is why Prabhupada writes:

"The result of developing ignorance is very, very risky."

"very, very risky". Why? Because, you know, actually, it is very dangerous, you
know, to lose the human form. We do not know when we will get the human form
again. And when we will have the opportunity to liberate ourselves from the
cycle of birth and death. You know. "jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā". And Prabhupada
again makes it clear:

"Their future is very dark."

You know. You know. You know. So, now, now, after this, Krishna will talk about
transcendence. Transcendence. So, trans..., until now, He has talked about
destination within the modes. Now, He will talk about, how can one transcend the
modes? You know.

        nānyaṁ guṇebhyaḥ kartāraṁ
        yadā draṣṭānupaśyati
        guṇebhyaś ca paraṁ vetti
        mad-bhāvaṁ so ’dhigacchati

So, you know, when one understands, "nānyaṁ guṇebhyaḥ kartāraṁ". When one
understands that, actually, there is no "kartā" apart from the "guṇāḥ"s. "yadā
draṣṭānupaśyati". "draṣṭā" is the seer. When one is, "anupaśyati" is to see
systematically. See them, you know, see truly. See with scriptural guidance. So,
then, you know, so, one is to understand that, actually, whatever actions are
happening, they are actions happening because of the modes. And then, one
understands also further, you know, you know, "guṇebhyaś ca paraṁ vetti". One
understands "paraṁ vetti". That beyond, you know, beyond the "guṇāḥ"s, you know,
there is a transcendental being. This refers to the Supreme Lord. And
"mad-bhāvaṁ so ’dhigacchati". "so ’dhigacchati". One will attain My spiritual
nature. You know. You know. So, here, after describing the three modes, Krishna
is now introducing "mad-bhāvaṁ". Me. Or My nature. He has used "mad-bhāvaṁ"
earlier in the beginning. You know. In, so, 14.2. You know. You know. 14.1. And
14.1..., 1-2. When He was talking about transcendental destin..., of the
spiritual destination. That is used word "mad-bhāvaṁ". The, so, who will attain
the transcendental nature? If we consider the modes to be like ropes. That are
binding a person. Then, you know, how does one become free from the ropes?
F...., you know, so, if somebody is dancing like a puppet. You know. These ropes
have not just made a person, you know, imm..., immobilised. But that per..., the
ropes are like the strings of a puppet. Which are, you know, you know, you know,
you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
you know, which are making a person, you know, pull, and pull around and dance.
And ge..., dance according to its tunes. So, at that time, the, you know, the,
so, how the modes, it is important to understand they are not like a, they are
not like a prisoner's shackles. The modes are like a puppeteer's strings. You
know. Prisoner's shackles, they make the, you know, they make the person
immobilised. The, they make the person incapable of doing anything at all. But,
you know, the modes are not like prisoner's shackles. The modes are like a
puppeteer, puppeteer's strings. You know. Puppeteer's strings, they, you know,
they make the puppet dance. Go he...., move here, rai..., the, what, raise the
height, hand up. Lift the left hand up. Move this way. Move that way. So, one
dances around. So, the modes, similarly, we do, we do not feel that we are
imprisoned because we are moving around. And we are moving around quite
actively, also. Especially, in the mode of passion, one is so active. So, if we,
if we look at a person who in jail. We may feel that per..., you know, pity for
the person. Oh, that person has been imprisoned. But if I mean, a person is an
addict, then we do not feel pity like that. Why? Because we do not see the, see
the shackles. We do not see the, you know, you know, you know, prison bars. And
because we do not see the prison bars. So, we stay trapped. But when we, you
know, we could loo..., if one could understand the way the person is living, one
can understand, these are the addictions, you know, the addictive desires, they
are not like prisoner's shackles. They are like the puppeteer's strings. So, as
puppeteer's strings, they make us go here. Go there. Go there. You know. You
know. You know. You know. And they make us, you know, they bind us. They bind
us. So, we have to protect ourselves. How do we protect ourselves? By, first of
all, recognising that, ok, these are not my desires. These are not my desires.
These are the dictations of the modes.

When suddenly, you know, you know, the person, male sees an attractive female.
Or a female sees an attractive male. And immediately, there is captivation. One
understand, you know, this is, this is not actually me. I am a soul. This is
just a, this male-female attraction is biological. It is, it is actually coming,
you know, it is biological. And psychological. It is simply coming from the
modes. I will not get carried away by this. I will not get captivated by this.
So, one when once understands this, you know, then one gets the impetus to free
oneself. And so, after one gets the impetus to free oneself, then one will, you
know, ok, you know, you know, if I am in prison for, I, how can I free myself?
Firstly, I understand that I am in prison. That I am shackled. But these are
puppeteer's strings. Not prisoner's shackles. So, it is difficult to understand,
also. But after one understands, like I give, if I had been tied up, then I will
ask somebody who is free, please free me. So, like that, "guṇebhyaś ca paraṁ
vetti". When one understands that, ok, there is a transcendental, you know,
there is a, somebody who is beyond the modes. And that person can free me from
the modes. Then, we take shelter of that person. So, when we kno..., know that I
am in prison. And when we know that there is somebody who is not in prison. Who
is free. You know. Then, you know, we, you know, we can reinve..., we can break
free from the influence of the modes. And attain the spiritual nature. So, that
is the process to liberation. And this process will be liberated, discussed
further in the future verses. So, we will continue in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
