Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tGfkncVsJWI
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the 18th Chapter. We are discussing how karma-yoga gradually elevates through
jnana-yoga to bhakti-yoga. And within the arrangement of karma-yoga, we are
discussin varnashram. You know. How the system of varnashram involves, you know,
you know, you know, gradual spiritualisation of one's material activities. So,
we discussed the qualities of a "brāhmaṇa" in the previous class. Let us
move forward. And discuss the qualities of a "kṣatriya". Yeah. So, 18.43:

        śauryaṁ tejo dhṛtir dākṣyaṁ
        yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam
        dānam īśvara-bhāvaś ca
        kṣātraṁ karma svabhāva-jam

So, "śauryaṁ tejo dhṛtir dākṣyaṁ". You know. You know. You know. Here, we see
"śauryaṁ". These are the qualities. "kṣātraṁ karma svabhāva-jam". "kṣātraṁ
karma". The previous verse was "brahma-karma". Now, it is "kṣātraṁ karma".
"svabhāva-jam". This is born of their nature. So, what are these qualities? Let
us look at them one by one. "śauryaṁ". "śauryaṁ", you know, you know, basically
le..., refers to heroism. Courageousness. Chivalry. Where a person, you know,
you know, is ready to do adventurous things. And is ready to take up great risks
to do those adventurous things. So, "kṣatriya" are, you know, as the word
"kshatat trayate iti kshatriya" indicates that they are meant to protect others.
And for the sake of protecting others, they ha..., ha..., you know, often have
to put their lives into risk. You know. And they are ready to do that. In fact,
they are happy to do that. Because, you know, everybody in life, you know, needs
some source of excitement. Some sort of stimu..., some sort of stimulation. Some
source of, you know, satisfaction. Now, different people, so, those are
brahminically inclined, those are intellectuals, they get it by studying new
books. Understanding new concepts. Learning new things. In terms of, you know,
things which give intellectual titillation. And stimulation. And se..., the,
gratification. You know. And similarly, "kṣatriyas", they have, this is, ad...,
adventure. Another quality, we will see, "yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam". We will
discuss this. "yuddhe". "yuddhe" means fir..., battle. "cāpy apalāyanam".
"apalāyanam" means not running away. You know. You know. So, different people
have their different sources of stimulation. And we need to understand, you
know, that these stimulations are not necessarily in terms of right or wrong.
You know. They can be made right or wrong. You know. We can say that some are
material. Some are spiritual. Say, a devotee, when the devotee is remembering
Krishna gets spiritual stimulation. That is correct. But that does not mean
that we can suddenly and completely relish only devotional stimulations. So, we
are at the material level of consciousness. Material level, you know, material
level, there is goodness. Passion. Ignorance. And above that, there is
transcendence. So, the soul delights in everlasting and ever new spiritual
stimulations with Krishna. So, the devotee remembers Krishna. The devotee sees
Krishna. The devotee touches Krishna. Devotee serves Krishna in various ways.
And all this, you know, brings spiritual stimulations. That are a source of
great satisfaction. Or in fact, the Supreme satisfaction. The greatest
satisfaction. But, you know, you know, until we come to the spiritual level of
consciousness, we all need some kind of, you know, stimulation. Excitement.
Satisfaction. And we get it through different things depending on our
propensities. So, "yuddhe". So, "śauryaṁ". So, "śauryaṁ" is heroism. So, by
taking out, you know, you know, you know, taking out means, by fighting against,
you know, evil. By fighting against those who are, do misdeeds. And, you know,
you know, you know, in that way, winning. You know. In that way, protecting the
innocent. Protecting those who may be victimised others. People get a sense of
satisfaction. And that is the sense of, you know, you know, that is how they get
the self-worth. And their satisfaction. So, you know, that is what is ta..., you
know, talked about over here. Now, this is not, this is not necessarily a wrong
thing. You know. This is, even may say, that, that, that is what the stuff,
which movies are made up of. Which, you know, you know, in which there is a
macron hero who is, ought to be beat the bad guys. And that is, you know,
attractive to people.

So, is that necessarily materialistic? It is not necessarily. If it is within
the precincts of dharma. That means, you know, the hero protects people
according to the principles of dharma. So, then, that sort of protection is
essential. Because this world is a pla..., place of danger. And is a place where
there are evil people. Who are out to do evil things. So, "śauryaṁ tejo". "tejo"
means power. You know. So, "kṣatriyas", you know, you know, they would have
formidable power. You know. May, we may see bows. And arrows. And we may have
some small bows. And arrows. Which fo..., children use for playing nowadays.
However, the bows and arrows that "kṣat...", the "kṣatriyas" would use in their
wars. You know. They would be very heavy. Very strong. And not very easy to use.
Because, you know, for the "kṣatr...", arrow to have sufficient power so that it
will go along distance. And actually the penetrate the body of an opponent, it
requires to be, it discharged with great force. And to discharge with that much
force, the "kṣatriya" has to have that much power to pull the string. And even
the, you know, you know, string has to have adequate power. You know. Ad...,
adequately s..., adequate strength so that when it is pulled back. And then,
released, it will shoot the arrow. So, same with the weapons. So, nowadays, when
we use, you know, you know, say, machine guns. Or bombs. Or cannons. You know.
Or even weapons o..., of mass destruction. The physical strength of the, you
know, warring factions does not play much of a role. Although, in face to face
combat, in hand to hand combat, or terran combat, it plays a significant role.
But the point is, the "kṣatriyas" have to be strong. So, you know, that is the
idea of "kṣatriyas". "śauryaṁ tejo dhṛtir dākṣyaṁ". "dhṛtir" means
determination. So, actually, determination is required for everyone. You know.
For all varanas. But especially, you know, in this world to get things done is
not easy. "kṣatriyas" are essentially means to, you know, not just do things.
But to get things done. "īśvara", "bhāvaḥ", it is said that "brāhmaṇas" deal
with ideas. "kṣatriyas" deal with people. "vaiśyas" deal with animals. And
"śūdras" deal with things. So, you know, you know, you know, dealing with things
is "śūdras". Dealing with animals is "vaiśyas". Dealing with, you know, human
bei..., people is "kṣatriyas"' role. And dealing with ideas, concepts,
principles, you know, that is the realm of the "brāhmaṇas". Of course, this is
not a watertight division. Everybody has to deal with everyone else. Even the
"kṣatriyas" deal with ideas. And even the "śūdras" deal with people. And, you
know, but the point is, primarily, we are talking about, the focus of the thrust
of each person's occupation is different. So, for this purpose, you know, to get
things done is quite difficult. Have to delegate. To manage. So, one of the
other qualities would be "īśvara", "bhāvaḥ". "īśvara", "bhāvaḥ". Now, normally,
you know, so, "dānam īśvara-bhāvaś ca". Now, "īśvara", "bhāvaḥ" may be seen
negatively. You know. The idea that I am the "īśvara". You know. So, we often
say that the idea that I am God, I am the controller, I am the enjoyer, that is
what has got us to the material world. And that is what keeps us in the material
world. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, that is considered normally
to be undesirable treat.

And yet, Krishna talks it over here, you know, in more or less a positive light.
He is describing the qualities of each varana. And He is, is He talking about
those qualities in a desirable sense. That these are good qualities which people
in each varana should cultivate. And therein, He is saying that, the
"kṣatriyas" should have "īśvara", "bhāvaḥ". So, what does it mean? You know.
Actually, in this world, you know, somebody has to take the role of an "īśvara".
You know. Somebody has to, the, where, if things are, have to be done, there has
to be some controller. So, if a prote..., if a project involves a team. And the
team involves a ten people working. Or there may be some bigger projects. In
which, all five thousand people working. So, now, there has to be some
controller. Who will direct. And guide. And supervise. That is a functional
necessity. Every kingdom need some governing authority. There has to be a king.
Or some other governing authority like that. So, somebody has to take up the
"īśvara", "bhāvaḥ". Or that the role of a controller. You know. So, and that
person, if that per..., has the "īśvara", "bhāvaḥ". That means, here, "īśvara",
"bhāvaḥ" just does not mean the mentality. It also means the ability. In one
sense, "īśvara", "bhāvaḥ" is there in everyone. Who would not want, like to have
another people who are dancing at one's back and call? And, you know, are ready
to obey everything that one says? So, you know, that is not the essence of
"īśvara", "bhāvaḥ". "īśv...", "īśvara", "bhāvaḥ" as is recommended over here is
that we all understand that ultimately, we are under the Supreme Lord. The
Supreme Lord is the supreme controller. And He is the parameshvara. But to get
His will done in this world, He needs agents. And some of those agents are also
"īśvara"s. You know. That means, you know, whatever is to be done over here, it
is done through agents. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, even when
Krishna's will is to be done in this world, there have to be competent people
who do it. So, that is how "kṣatriyas" comes into the role. So, those
"kṣatr...", those people who have the capacity, the ability to manage. Delegate.
Lead. They, if they become godly, then they will become "īśvara"s in the service
of the supreme "īśvara". So, it is not wrong to be heroic as long as our
heso..., as our heroism is not independent of Krishna's supreme heroism. You
know. We see in the Ramayana that Lord "Rāma" is the supreme hero. But "Hanumān"
is also extraordinary hero. So, you know, you know, in fact, the "Sundara
Kāṇḍa", which is considered to be among the most beautiful, one of the, you
know, the, the, beautiful sto..., most beautiful "Kāṇḍa" of the Ramayana, it is
largely focusing on "Hanumān". In fact, you know, "Rāma" is mentioned, he is
only right sight, slightly, you know, in the beginning. And at the end. But it
is entirely about the exp..., exploits of Lord "Rāma". Of "Hanumān". So,
although, Lord "Rāma" is not present, still, He is present. In the "Sundara
Kāṇḍa". You know. That means, He is present in the heart of "Hanumān". And He is
present inf the heart of Sita. So, "Hanumān" is also a hero. And he is also
a great hero. You know. People talk about being human. You know. Bhaktas talk
about not just being human. They are about being "Hanumān". You know. What does
that mean? To develop the "Hanumān" spirit. That the "Hanumān", being, the
"Hanumān" spirit is to love and serve. And, and act wonderfully in the service
of the Supreme Lord. So, "kṣatriyas" are like that. You know. So, "śauryaṁ tejo
dhṛtir dākṣyaṁ". "dākṣyaṁ" means expertise. So, expertise in various things.

When, you know, war has to be fought, then how the forces should be arranged.
You know. How the military phalanxes should be arranged. What strategy should be
used. Ok. I have this many forces. And yet, I have to attack an enemy which has,
you know, may, more forces. Better weapons. Then, how do I master? Strategise?
So, all this is very important to discuss. So, "dākṣyaṁ". That is expertise.
"śauryaṁ tejo dhṛtir dākṣyaṁ". Then, you know, "yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam". You
know.  "apalāyanam" means never running away. You know. You know. "kṣatriyas"
are so hero..., are said to be so heroic that when they go out to fight in the
war, either they go to fight to win. Or they then go to fight to, you know, die.
And they are confident that if we die in a "Dharma-yuddha" then we will attain
heaven. You know. So, "yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam". "apalāyanam". One is not afraid
to, you know, one does not run away from the war. And then, you know, you know,
"dānam īśvara-bhāvaś ca". So, "dānam" is an extremely point of "kṣatriyas".
Actually, it is an important function of everyone. You know. You know. In the,
especially, in the householder order. Krishna has talked about this "dānam"
earlier in the 17th Chapter. When He talked about "dānam" in the three modes.
But along with that, He has talked about in the 16th Chapter, also. When He
talks about, you know, you know, you know, you know, "abhayaṁ
sattva-saṁśuddhir". When He describes godly qualities. At that time, He
describes "dānam" as a quality. A godly activity. And that especially pertains
"kṣatriyas". So, you know, the, so that, there, it pertains to grihastas. So,
"dānam", "dānam" is, you know, the capa..., the inclination to give charity. So,
the idea is that, you know, the "kṣatr...", the "kṣatriya" collects taxes. And,
you know, they collect, the "kṣatriya" builds the national treasury. And people
who are in need, the "kṣatriya" gives charity to them. So:

        dānam īśvara-bhāvaś ca
        kṣātraṁ karma svabhāva-jam

"kṣātraṁ karma". This is all "kṣatriya" karma. You know. You know. This is how
the "kṣatriyas" work. So, these are the desirable qualities of a "kṣatriya". And we, if we look at the life of, you know, the "kṣatriyas", like Arjuna. Or
"Parikṣit". Or even the way Krishna lived. You know. We see these qualities the
"kṣatriyas" display in their functioning. You know. So, now, let us look at the
qualities of "vaiśyas". You know. And "śūdras", also. So, 

        kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ
        vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam
        paricaryātmakaṁ karma
        śūdrasyāpi svabhāva-jam

So, you know, Krishna is descibing in two lines, you know, A and B, the
qualities of a "kṣatriya". Sorry, of a "vaiśya". And then, C and D, He is
describing the qualities of a "śūdra". So, "kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ". "kṛṣi" is
agriculture. "go-rakṣya" is cow protection. "vāṇijyaṁ" is trade. Or business.
These are the activities of a "kṣatriya". Sorry. Of a "vaiśya". So, you know,
essentially, you know, "vaiśyas", you know, are the, if we compare the, so, we
remember the com..., you know, comparison to social body. The "śūdras" are
considered to be the feet. The "vaiśyas" are considered to be the stomach. The
"kṣatriyas" are considered to be the arms. And the "brāhmaṇas" are considered to
be the head. So, in this way, all these are important. In terms of how they
contribute to society. Every one of them contributes in a different way. And
every contribution is significant. You know. Because every comfy...,
contribution helps a person to move closer to Krishna. You know. You know. You
know. Now, when a person moves closer to Krishna, you know, you know, through,
if that person is of course doing "bhagavad arpit karma". That means that person
is working for the Supreme Lord. We will dis..., see about "bhagavad arpit karma" a
little later. But the idea here is that every person according to one's nature
can contribute to society as well as progress towards transcendence. So, there
is, you know, you know, the varnashram arranges for material cooperation. You
know. And it also spiri..., fill, its, felicitates, you know, sorry,
facilitates, not felicitates, facilitates spiritual advancement. So,
"kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ". You know. "kṛṣi" is agriculture. "go-rakṣya" is cow
protection. You know. One, you know, some Bhagavad Gita's translate, you know,
this, you know, some, or some western scholars, when they translated the
Bhagavad Gita, they translated "go-rakṣya" as, you know, cattle rearing. But
Prabhupada insisted that we cannot translate this cattle rearing. It is cow
protection. Cattle rearing is often used so that, you know, you know, it
indicates, you know, that, the cattle are reared. So that eventually, they will
be slaughtered. But that is never done in the Vedic culture. Actually, you know,
this, now, from a financial point of view, you know, any investment that, you
know, does not give good returns, that should be abandoned. So, for example, if
a business person starts a business. And then, it does not give profit. It
starts giving losses. So, what would the business person do? Just abandon it.
Then, we start another business. Just give off that business. So, you know, you
know, that money-minded mentality is, to some extent, natural. But it can become
undesirable if, if it dominates a person's consciousness. And that person starts
thinking of everything in terms of money. So, to prevent this domination of the
consciousness with money, to prev..., prevent a unidimensional viewing of
everything in monetary terms. The "vaiśyas" are ordained to, you know, do
certain activities even if they do not seem to be financially viable. So, a cow,
when it is, she is giving milk, is considered to be productive. But when the
cow stops giving milk, you know, she may not seem, be financially productive
anymore. You know. So, at that time, it might be a temptation to slaughter it.
Or to se..., ki..., send it to a butcher. To sell it to a butcher. To slaughter
it. Slaughtered. And that should not be done.

The "kṣa...", "vaiśyas" should consider that the cow is like a member of our
family. The cow, that is why the word is often used, "go mata". The cow is like
a mother. And even if the mother becomes old, the mother is given milk. You
know. In the moth..., if, now, if mother's fee..., breastfeed their children
with their own milk. The mother's love the child. So, you know, you know, we
take care of the elders. Similarly, one should take care of the elderly cows,
also. You know. You know. Now, some sceptics argue that, now, India, you know,
has so many cows which people try to protect. And then, there are so many people
who are starving over there. So, some sceptics, they, who want to, some sce...,
you know, they, they want India to widely adopt, you know, you know, a
meat-centered diet. And to take, you know, cow, cow flesh. They say that if
India does not eat the cows, then the cows will eat India. That is how they try
to play around with words. And provoke, you know, people. You know. Into, you
know, cow slaughter. And they try to say that, in fact, there is a ho..., of
phrase in English called holy cow. You know, holy, this is, that means if
somebody has an irrationale affection for something which, you know, you know,
something which is considered to be very valuable. You know. So sacred that it
just cannot be questioned. Then, that is called as a holy cow. That is the
phrase that is used. So, you know, so, for example, we could say that evolution
is the holy cow of materialistic science. That means, it is scienti...,
materialist scientists, especially atheists, you know, they just consider the
evolution is true. Come what may. You know. Come what may. You know. You know.
They just think that, you know, this is what it must be. You know. That, you
know, you know, you know, you know, holy cow, as I said, it means that whatever
happens. They feel that, actually, you know, this must be correct. However, this
is now, the notation that, you know, the trad..., in traditional Vedic culture
is there about holy co..., about cows. You know. Cows are considered holy
because they are dear to Krishna. And Krishna is the Supreme Lord. You know. It
is not just because of their financial value. You know. If scie..., people are
of different, okay, if you want to, love milk. Buffalos give milk than cows.
Yes. The, it may be true. But Krishna is "Gopāla". He is not "Bhenspala". You
know. Krishna loves bufallos, also. Krishna loves all living beings.
"surudam sarva-bhutanam". But He is a person. And as a person, He has certain
affections. You know. Why does Krishna wear a peacock feather? Why does not some
other fear? Why, why does Krishna play a flute? Why not other, other instrument?
You know. Krishna is a person. He will do whatever He likes to do. And His
choices are sweet. They are supremely independent. And at the same time, they
are supremely sweet, alsother, other instrument? You know. Krishna is a person.
He will do whatever He likes to do. And His choices are sweet. They are
supremely independent. And at the same time, they are supremely sweet, also. So,
Krishna loves cows. And that is why Vedic culture exalts cows. But even if we
look at it, from a, from i..., rationate, financial perspective, you know, you
know, actually, if, you know, society is agrarian, is based on agricul..., is
centered on agriculture, then actually speaking, the cow can benefit a lot of
people. So, cow gives dung. And cow urine. So, cow urine can be used, you
know, as a treatment in any medicines. As a treat..., as a medicine, you know,
you know, in and of itself. You know. And as a medicine, is element for many
things, also. You know. You know.

And similarly, the, you know, cow dung is a very valuable source of manual. It
i..., it can be used for fertilisation of, you know, g..., fire, of ground. And
more importantly, it can be used as fuel. You know. It is an invaluable source
of fuel. In fact, in these days, when people are considered, concerned about
the environmental costs of fossil fuels. Fossil fuels. You know. They have oil.
And pet..., petroleum. And things like that. Which are drained from, which are
sucked out from the earth. You know. That itself causes a lot of environmental
harm. And then, when they are transported over millions of, you know, malls. At
times to, where they are going to be consumed. That transportion costs so much.
And that transportation leads to so much pollution, also. And eventually, the
fuel is used. At that time, the fuel, also, sends out toxic fumes. Which also
cause pollution. So, you know, when the environmental cost of fossil fuels is so
high. When there is already a widespread network, you know, of use of
alternative fuels. That means there is use of, you know, you know, cow dung as
a fuel source. And why should that be disapproved or discouraged? In fact, that
is a, in many, you know, the cow dung fuel is a, is what is mostly used in urban
areas. Sorry. In rural areas for cooking. And it is extremely u..., valuable.
And useful. So, even if we look at it from the financial perspective, you know,
you know, it is not true that, you know, Indians need to eat cows. You know. To
survive. Rather, actually, it is because Indians are eating cows. That is why,
you know, survival is becoming difficult. You know. Why? Because, actually, if
we see, India was prosperous generation after generation. After generation for
millennia. You know. Right from Alexander. In the third ce..., third-fourth
century, BC, there was so many invaders who have come to India. What was the
reason for invaders to come? You know. Invaders do not come to poor areas.
Invaders want money. And that is why they loot. You know. They attack. And, you
know, try to loot wealthy areas. So, where did India get its wealth from? You
know. You know. The, often, when the invaders would come. The cities would be
devastated. They would be plundered. And yet, within a few years, the cities
would again, or at the most a few decides, the cities would become the centers
of poverty, you know, centers of prosperity. You know. Why? The cities were the
centers of prosperity. But the cities were not the sources of prosperity. The
sources of prosperity were the villages. And that source of prosperity came from
the "kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ". From, you know, the, especially cow protection.
And from agritua..., agriculture. So, India is a prospe..., was a prosperous
land. And even now, it can be prosperous if it has its priorities right. You
know. If India has abanedoned natural resources, it has a very, in many, most
parts, it is a conducive climate. And now, what we are talking about India, at
now, becau..., why are we talking only about India? The principles of the
Bhagavad Gita apply all over the world. And not just all over the world. It
apply all over the universe. Not just all over the universe, all of existence.
Which consists of many un..., universes. But, you know, we are talking about
India because as f..., as far as our rea..., historical memory goes back, you
know, our means human historical memory goes back from the perspective of
modern history, then, you know, you know, India is the land where Vedic culture
has been present, you know, for several millennia.

So, the Vedic culture that was there, you know, the prosperity was there
because, the, the, of the cooperation between the different varanas. And
"go-rakṣya". And "kṛṣi". They were, they were the sources of prosperity. So, in
today's, you know, you know, economy, agriculture is, you know, largely
trivialised. And other occupations are glamorised. And actually, there is no
reason to trivialise agriculture. Because it is the source of food for everyone.
And that is why it is very important that agriculture be given its adequate
importance in the economy. Social economic structures. And in the priorities of
people. You know. You know. You know. So, "vaiśyas" were respected people. Now,
if we see the books like "Gopal Champu". Which describe, "Gopal Champu" is
written by Jiva Goswami. And this describes the life of the vrajavasis. And of
course, the, Vrindavan is transcendental. But at the same time, you know, in
books like this, we also see glimpses of "vaiśya" culture. So, the "vaiśyas"
were also very God-centered. And they were also, were havi..., very, having a
lot of respect for "brāhmaṇas". But they were also very diligent in their
duties. Even Krishna would go out to herd the cows. So, the idea is that even
the "vaiśyas" take care of, you know, playing their part in brahminical cult...,
in culture. Now, brahminical culture means not that it is, you know, its ent...,
culture is meant, meant for the "brāhmaṇas". Or was only, you know, you know,
participated in by the "brāhmaṇas". No. It is a brahminical culture. When we use
the word, it refers to a culture that is guided by the "brāhmaṇas". So, they are
not the sole, you know, power centers. But they are the sources of moral and
spiritual authority. And through them, the whole, you know, s..., culture, you
know, so, whole society, you know, is, stays on a path of morality. And
spirituality. So, that is brahminical culture. "kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ". So,
"vāṇijyaṁ" also means, now, that one takes a proper profit. But not
disproportionate profit where one makes a huge amount of money, where other
people starve. So, the, so, "kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ". And then, after that, you
know, "paricaryātmakaṁ karma". "paricaryātmakaṁ karma" means serving others. You
know. you know. You know. That is the propensity, that is the, you know, you
know, you know, that is the role of the "śūdras". Now, why is it, so to serving
others? Because, actually, a wide gamut of operations can, or, or activities,
and professions, occupations, can be included in the "vaiśya" activities.
In the "śūdra" activities. But their basic role is that they are assisting other
varanas. And, you know, even a "śūdra" is not a, necessarily a, you know, value
judgement. Or something undesirable. You know. If certain people have certain
propensities, they act according to those propensities. So, that is the way
society lives. And society progresses. So, it is not necessarily any way wrong.
The idea is, here, it is not a matter of wrongness. Or rightness. It is a matter
of appropriateness. According to individual nature. So, you know, you know, now,
some people also have the ideas that, actually, you know, women do not have any
independent varana. Women simply, where do, "brāhmaṇa", "kṣatriya", "vaiśya",
"śūdra", where do women fit in over here? You know. The idea is that women are
just having the same varana as their husbands. Now, this, actually, if anyway,
wonder, if think of it from a logical point of view, it does not make sense. You
know. Because "guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ". It is not "janma karma". So, th..., the
husband may have one nature. The wife may have another nature. So, if they have
different natures, then one has to individually see. There, sometimes, the wife
may be more brahminical. And the husband may be more, you know, more of a
"vaiśya" nature. Some time, it may be opposite, also.

So, the idea here is not to label people as belonging to certain varanas. It is
to customise professions according to predilections. Customise professions, you
know, you know, according to predilections. Predilections means one's own
inclinations. One's own tendencies. So, you know, even from the logical point of
view, the husband and the wife are two separate souls. They have had their own
past, different kinds of karma. And they have been brought up, and born, and
brought up, you know, and then, they are now uniting. So, it is not, it can, it
is not that both will necessarily have the same varana. So, the id..., you know,
in the Vedic culture, it would be best where a person would marry within the
same varana. Because then, the likelihood of having compatibility would be
greater. You know. So, h..., that is true. But it is not that automatically, it
is not that the woman is like an appendix to the man. And the woman
automatically has the same varana as the man. No. The woman may have a different
varana. But in general, marriages within the same varanas are encouraged. So
that there is a greater, you know, likelihood of compatibility. So, now, you
know, after discussing about these different varanas, let us go on to, you know,
you know, the discussion about how all this can be spiritualised. So, 18.45:

        sve sve karmaṇy abhirataḥ
        saṁsiddhiṁ labhate naraḥ
        sva-karma-nirataḥ siddhiṁ
        yathā vindati tac chṛṇu

So, "sve sve karmaṇy abhirataḥ". By doing one's own karma, "abhirataḥ".
"abhirataḥ" means to be engaged. Or to be following. To be, the word "rataḥ"
means to be absorbed. So, "sve sve karmaṇy". "sve sve" means one's own karma.
You know. So, this will refer to what has been talked about in the previous
three verses. "brāhmaṇa". "kṣatriya". "vaiśya". "śūdra". So, whatever is one's
karma, one acts according to that. "saṁsiddhiṁ labhate naraḥ". A human being can
attain perfection. You know. You know. And "sva-karma-nirataḥ siddhiṁ". You
know. That while being engaged in one's karma, the "siddhiṁ". So, Krishna is
talking, using the word "siddhiṁ". And "saṁsiddhiṁ". In the secon..., third, in
the third and second lines. "yathā vindati tac chṛṇu". You know. "yathā
vindati". How one can attain this? Oh, Arjuna, hear this. So, you know, let us
understand this imp..., the implication of this verse is very significant. You
know. Actually, varnashram can be of different types. That means that varnashram
can be whatever, our, the way Bhak..., Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura has
explained this, Bhaktivinoda Thakur has also explained this based on the Vedic
scriptures. He says, there is, you know, Vedic varnashram. Then, there is "asuri
varṇāśrama". And then, there is "daivi varṇāśrama". So, Vedic varnashram was,
you know, you know, ba..., based on birth. But in general, in the past, you
know, the birth would be, you know, more or less compatible with the varana.
Because, you know, with the nature. With the "svabhāva". Because say, if a
brahmana and a brahmani unite, they do it, you know, they will attract a
brahminically inclined soul in their womb. And, in their, as their child. And
that is how one's birth would now, would normally, you know, you know,
harmonised with one's varana. But that was not necessary. There are are exa...,
even in the original Vedic scriptures, there are various references which
indicate very clearly that if a person has a different varana, then that person
should be engaged according to different, that, that varana. You know. You know.
You know. Like, I engage according to that different varana. So, rather than,
you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, focusing on the point of
birth. The focus is always on qualities. And if a person has a different set of
qualities, that person can accordingly, you know, be, considered to be a member of
a different varana. There is a way, famous anecdote, "Satyakama Jabala". You
know. Who was a, who wanted to go to Gautama Rsi for getting brahminical
education. And Gautama Rsi asked him, who is your father? And he went to his
mother. And then, his mother told that I have been a maidservant. And I do not
know who your father is. You know. So, he want back and told that to his
"Satyakama". And then, to, to his spiritual teacher. And he said, oh, you are a
brahmana. You know. Why? Because you have the brahminical quality of
truthfulness. So, actually, the "brāhmaṇas" are determined by, not just by
birth. But also by qualities. Primarily by qualities, actually. So, that is the
traditional Vedic varnashram. You know. You know. So, you know, what is
prevailing in, in India, today, it has been prevailing for a good amount of
time is "asuri varṇāśrama". "asuri varṇāśrama" means that the characteristic
of asuras is, you know, that they actually delight at the bodily level. You
know. The, all their pleasures are at the bodily level. That is asuric
inclinations. Asuric tendencies. And because of that, asuric tendency, you know,
you know, what happens is, you know, that taste, identifies strongly with the
body.

So, even spiritual institutions, like varnashram, they reduce them to the bodily
level. And assumes that, ok, one's body is, determines one's varana.  And then,
the higher cast, they, they take power. And they try to, they take privilege.
And they, instead of cooperating for the growth of the social body, they exploit
the lower caste for their own, you know, selfish purposes. You know. And this is
very, you know, this has taken on, off on very ugly shapes. You know. And
because of that, there are, you know, there are peop..., lower castes who rebel
against the higher caste. In fact, the spread of Buddhism and Janism, which
happened in the Indian history, that was basically because, you know,
culturally, these religions, you know, offered the lower caste an escape way
from the domination by the higher castes. And, you know, similarly, you know,
there is also an anti-propaganda in India, you know, you know, based on a
political parties. And quote allocations. All this is based on history of
exploitation. But that history of exploitation is not because of, you know, what
is there, originally meant to be in the Vedic culture. It is because of a
degradation of the Vedic culture. So, that is "asuri varṇāśrama". And then,
there is "daivi varṇāśrama". "daivi varṇāśrama" is, you know, you know, "daivi
varṇāśrama" is, you know, like, you know, the idea that, you know, different
people are, everybody is meant to serve Krishna. You know. But depending on
one's individual nature, one can serve Krishna. So, normally, in the Vedic
varnashram, the progress is linear. That means, a "śūdra", if the "śūdra" does
the duty properly. Then, the "śūdra", in a future life, will become a "vaiśya".
"vaiśya", if does duty properly, "vaiśya" will become a "kṣatriya". "kṣatriya"
will become a "brāhmaṇa". And eventually, "brāhmaṇa" will become liberated. So,
that, that is how the progression is. But within "daivi varṇāśrama", the
progression is vertical. It is not just linear. It can be directly upwards. That
means that, you know, even if a person is, you know, acting as a "vaiś...", is,
is, you know, acting as a "śūdra". Or a "vaiśya". Or whatever. If that person
devotes oneself to Krishna. Practices devotional service seriously, then from
whatever varana, one might be, one can attain liberation. You know. So, Krishna
is talking here about this "daivi varṇāśrama". You know. He is not talking about
the Vedic varnashram. And it is definitely, He is not talking about the "asuri
varṇāśrama". So, He is talking about the varnashram, in which "sve sve karmaṇy
abhirataḥ". By doing one's activity, one can become liberated. You know. "yathā
vindati tac chṛṇu". So, let us see what Krishna is telling. "tac chṛṇu". You
know. You know. So, we describe the process in the next verse.

        yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ
        yena sarvam idaṁ tatam
        sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya
        siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ

You know. So, Krishna is using the word "siddhiṁ" once more in this, you know,
you know, verse. He has used the word "siddhiṁ". And "saṁsiddhiṁ" in the
previous verse. "siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ". Human beings can attain perfection.
You know. And "sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya". The key over here is whatever one's
work, work one is doing, "sva-karmaṇā". So, one, one's prescribed work. "tam
abhyarcya". Worship that Supreme Being. So, you know, you know, you know, this
is the closest the Bhagavad Gita comes to the common idea of work is worship.
People have the idea that work itself is worship. But if we look at what
Bhagavad Gita is saying, Bhagavad Gita never says anything like ka..., you know,
"karma hy puja ahei". Nothing like that. Here, what is, Bhagavad Gita is saying,
by your work, worship Him. You know. That means, by devotion to the Supreme
Lord, translate work into worship. Not that work is automatically worship. You
know. Rather, wha..., wha..., when we have, when we devote ourselves to the
Supreme Lord, we spe..., spend time in worshipping the Supreme Lord. And then,
after that, we do work. Then, that work, you know, we carr..., we develop a
spiritual consciousness by whi..., by serving the Supreme Lord. And then, we
carry that spiritual consciousness over into our world, daily activities. And
that is how we become, we get ourselves spiritualised. That is how work becomes
worship. "sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya". You know. You know. And who is that "tam"?
Krishna is not yet directly co..., Krishna has not yet come to the level of
bhati-yoga. That is why He is still talking in a third person. You know. So,
here, He is referring to that Supreme Lord. And He describes the characteristic
of that Supreme Lord. "yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ". From whom, all living beings
come. "yataḥ pravṛttir". "pravṛttir" can mean living beings. "pravṛttir" can
mean all of existence. From whom, all of existence emanates. Now, Krishna has
already talked about how He being the source of all of existence. Several times.
He has talked about it especially in 10.8. When He says "ahaṁ sarvasya
prabhavo". Everything comes from Me. So:

        yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ
        yena sarvam idaṁ tatam

So, that Lord is not only the source of everything, but the Lord, that Supreme
Being pervades everything. That Supreme Being actually exists in all of
creation. So, it is like a parent who is the source of the children. But then,
the parent, also, extends himself to provide for the children. You know. So,
then, if the parent is, you know, you know, the source of the child and is the
provider of the child. Then, what is the duty of the child? The child's duty is
to cooperate with the parents. So, similarly, Krishna is:

        yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ
        yena sarvam idaṁ tatam

He is the source. And He is the sustainer. And therefore, "sva-karmaṇā tam
abhyarcya". So, the Vedic varnasham syst..., the varnashram system which Krishna
is talking about, is based on this principle of ha..., you know, reuniting with
our Supreme Lord. With our supreme father. Through the spiritualisation of our
work. By offering our work for His pleasure. "siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ". You
know. In this way, one can attain perfection. You know. So, Prabhupada explains
in the purport that:

"Everyone should think that he is engaged in a particular type of occupation by
Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the senses."

So, it is Krishna as "Hṛṣīkeśa", He is engaging us in His vari..., the various
services. It is not that we are doing the services on our own. It is He who is
engaging us. And when we understand this, this is, this is role that Krishna has
given me to play. In His, you know, you know, plan. His plan. And His order of
things. Then, I do my part in Krishna's plan. You know. So, that is how we move
forward. Now, Krishna, now, actually, the question will come, ok, but there are
activities which are not very easy to do. Which involve, you know, you know,
which involve some conduct of mismatch. That Krishna addresses over here. 

        śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ
        para-dharmāt sv-anuṣṭhitāt
        svabhāva-niyataṁ karma
        kurvan nāpnoti kilbiṣam

So, this and the next verse, Krishna will address this problem of, you know,
problematic prescribed duties. You know. Problematic prescribed duties means
that, sometimes, one may feel that my duty is too troublesome. Therefore, I do
not want to do this. But Krishna is saying no. "śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ". It
is far better to do one's own "sva-dharmaḥ". "śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ". Even
if this having faults. "viguṇaḥ". It is faulty. Or imperfectly performed.
"para-dharmāt sv-anuṣṭhitāt". As compared to "para-dharmāt". Because
"svabhāva-niyataṁ karma". When one acts according s..., to one's karma, "kurvan
nāpnoti kilbiṣam". One will not accrue karmic bondage. The idea is that, all of
us have our responsibilities. And when we execute those responsibilities
responsibly, then we progress. We progress spiritually. We progress, you know,
in keeping the, in moving towards Krishna. So, Krishna is telling over here, you
know, better stick to one's prescribed duties. So, this is especially addressing
Arjuna's concern. That he is thinking that, you know, violence is undesirable.
And especially, violence against one's relatives, how can one do that kind of
violence? So, better I should not fight. You know. So, Krishna is saying that,
ok, tolerance and forgiveness, they are the qualities of, you know, you know,
they are the qualities of "brāhmaṇas". So, you know, in contrast, the quality of
a "kṣatriya" is "yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam". So, that is actually an indirect
reference to Arjuna's situation, also. Arjuna, you cannot run away from the
battlefield. That is again "kṣatriya" nature. You have to fight. So, you know,
He is saying that "viguṇaḥ". Even it, if, appears faulty. But you will become
purified by doing your prescribed duty. So, it is like a hospital. Where
a different treat..., patients, who have different afflictions, are given
customised medicines. So, each patient has to take one's own medicine. One
cannot take somebody else's medicine and expect, oh, that medicine is in, more
palatable. My medicine is not so palatable. No. Whatever is the medicine, what
is best suited for me, I take that medicine. And by that, I get elevated. You
know. So, a "kṣatriya"'s activity may, may dharm..., "kṣatriya" dharma may
involve killing. You know. But killing is also essential for maintaining law and
order. Violence is also required sometimes. So, one should accept that. So,
Krishna will now give an example of, how the, you know, for, within there are
faults. One should not give up duty because that, that.

        saha-jaṁ karma kaunteya
        sa-doṣam api na tyajet
        sarvārambhā hi doṣeṇa
        dhūmenāgnir ivāvṛtāḥ

"saha-jaṁ karma kaunteya". So, "saha-jaṁ" means with born, with karma, is, you
know, "sa-doṣam". That along with karma, there may be some fault. But even if
there is fault. "na tyajet". One should not give it up. "sarvārambhā hi doṣeṇa".
That all activities have some faults. Just as "dhūmenāgnir ivāvṛtāḥ". "dhūma" is
smoke. "agniḥ" is fire. So, smo..., fire is considered to be auspicious. Fire is
used in yajnas. Fire is used for cooking. Fire is used for warmth. Now, as
compared to that, you know, smoke is not considered desirable. You know. Smoke
does not illuminate. Smoke obstructs. Smoke may go into the nose. And it may
irritate. And smoke is not what is considered to be the mouth of "agniḥ". So,
normally, when a per..., sacrificial fire is put, the smo..., fire should come
out nicely over there. So, for that, there is smoke. Smoke is considered to be
obstacle. But whenever there is fire, there is smoke. And one has to expertly
handle the fire so that the smoke goes away. And the fire blazes forth. But one
has to tolerate the presence of the smoke as long as it is there. So, similarly,
you know, one has to tolerate false in one's prescribed duties. So, you know,
even while doing any particular duty, there will be some things which are
palatable. And some things which are unpalatable for us. So, we recognise there
is certain things that are unpalatable. And put them aside. Tolerate them. So, a
"brāhmaṇa" may have to do some fire sacri..., some yajnas in which there has to
be killing involved. So, the "brāhmaṇa" understands, ok, this sort of killing is
there. I will accept it. No problem. Because I do it within scriptural
direction, then I do not get bound by it. I can still get elevated. So, in this
way, this whole section is telling us that one should act according to dharma.
And thereby, get elevated. We will discuss, now, from this next verse onwards,
the transition will go to jnana-yoga. That we will discuss in our next class.

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
