Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n4TpsVHR59I
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now going to go to the last section of the 17th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita.
The 17th Chapter discusses, you know, faith in the three modes. "Shraddha Traya
Vibhaga Yoga". So, in the 17th Chapter, Krishna has started by talking about how
faith within three modes. Arjuna's question was at the start of 17th Chapter,
those who have faith. And those who do not have faith. You know. That, that,
those two extremes are talked about in the 16th Chapter. The divine. And the
demoniac nature. But what about those who are in-between? Those who have faith.
But not in scripture. What happens to them? So, Krishna responds by telling
about the three modes of material nature. And how, by observing the modes, we
can understand what the, you know, situation of a person is. And accordingly,
that person's faith will be in that particular mode. So, we discussed about
"āhāraḥ". "yajñaḥ". "dānaṁ". And "tapaḥ". Now, Krishna comes to the solution
part in the last section. Wherein He says what, you know, if somebody's faith is
not scriptural. Somebody's faith is not transcendental. Then, how can that
person elevate faith? Elevate oneself? Increase one's faith? That is by doing,
by reciting "oṁ tat sad". So, that means, you know, you know, there can be
non-scriptural faith. There can be scriptural faith. And there can be
transcendental faith. So, non-scriptural means, somebody has some, some faith in
some, something which it comes in one's own tradition. Or culture. Or whatever.
Scriptural faith does not always have to be transcendental. In this chapter
itself, Krishna has said:

        yajante sāttvikā devān
        yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ
        pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye
        yajante tāmasā janāḥ

So, He describes faith in three modes. How people in goodness worship devatas.
People in passion worship the, you know, "yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ". "yakṣa"s. And
"rākṣasa"s. And "pretān"s. And "bhūta"s, they are worshipped by those in the
mode of ignorance. So, this is scriptural faith. It is within the three modes.
It is scriptural. Now, sc..., not all scri..., everything taught in the
scripture is transcendental. So, the, some bit of scriptural faith is
transcendental faith.

        śraddhayā parayā yuktaṁ

"śraddhayā", "parayā", "upāsate". Krishna uses the word transcendental faith
several times in the Bhagavad Gita. So, now, the chanting of the "oṁ tat sad"
can elevate from non-script..., one, sc..., from non-scriptural faith to
scriptural faith. And from scriptural faith to transcendental faith. So, let us
see how this happens in the series of verses. 17.23, we will begin with.

        oṁ tat sad iti nirdeśo
        brahmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛtaḥ
        brāhmaṇās tena vedāś ca
        yajñāś ca vihitāḥ purā

"oṁ tat sad". So, "oṁ tat sad" are all three references to the Absolute Truth.
And "nirdeśo". "nirdeśo". Indicated. Or referred to. The Absolute Truth is
referred to by this. Now, the word "brahmaṇaḥ" can have many meaning. It can
refer to the person who is a brahmin. It can also refer to the, you know,
Brahman. You know. The aspe..., Absolute Truth. Which is known as Brahman. So,
in the second line of this verse, that is 17.23B, "brahmaṇas" refers to the
Absolute Truth. Brahman. Supreme. And "brāhmaṇās" refers to brahmins. The people
who are, in the, who are having brahminical qualities. So, "brāhmaṇās".
"brahmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛtaḥ". So, that Brahman is "tri-vidhaḥ". In three ways,
it is "nirdeśo". It is referred to. You know. "smṛtaḥ". This is said. It is said
like this. So, that is said that the brahman can be referred to in three ways.
He said that. What are three ways? "oṁ tat sad". And, you know, "brāhmaṇās tena
vedāś ca". And in, you know, "yajñāś ca vihitāḥ purā". "purā" means in the past.
It is, this is how it has been used. "brāhmaṇās tena vedāś ca". So, by the
"brāhmaṇās". By the "vedāś". And the "yajñāś". This is how "oṁ tat sad" has been
used. You know. So, here, Krishna is now explaining how, you know, you know,
things work. In spiritual life. In terms of the gradual progression. The gradual
progression is that, you know, you know, one is first just materialistic.
Without any reference to any faith. And anything higher. Then, one comes to some
kind of faith. Which is not scriptural. Then, one comes to faith that is
scriptural. And then, one comes to a faith that is transcendental. So,
faithless. Non-scriptural faith. Scriptural faith. Transcendental faith. You
could have four levels like this. So, now, here, Krishna is describing that:

        oṁ tat sad iti nirdeśo
        brahmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛtaḥ

So, He says that, "oṁ" is a very familiar incantation of the Vedic literature.
And what is its purpose? Srila Prabhupada also uses the word "oṁ tat sad" at the
end of his many introductions. For example, at the end of introduction of the
"Bhāgavatam". He conclude with "oṁ tat sad". Other places, also, he does that.
So, it is a stan..., it is a familiar Vedic invocation. It is even today used
to then, you know, you know, in the society quite often. So, "oṁ tat sad". So,
here, Krishna says in broad terms. First point, He says is, it refers to the
Absolute Truth. "brahmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛtaḥ". It refers to the Absolute Truth.
So, when, you know, people want to chant the, or refer to the Absolute Truth,
they can refer to the Absolute Truth in a personalist sense as Krishna. As
Vishnu. As Rama. That is possible. But when people do not want to refer to the
Absolute Truth in personalist terms. Or they do not know about the personal
aspect of the Absolute Truth, then at such times, they may refer to "oṁ tat
sad". So, "oṁ" is a non-personal. We will not use the word impersonal.
Non-personal. Because there is no, you know, direct reference to personality.
But "oṁ" itself is not necessarily an impersonal reference. The word "oṁ" is
cognate. It is related with, you know, the words that refer to God. Even in the
various world religions. For example, in English, we see the word "omni". "omni"
means all. So, God is omnipotent. He is supremely powerful. He has all power, in
fact. He is omniscient. He knows everything. So, omni is related with "oṁ". If
we, sound, say it semantically. As well as, you know, vocally. The two sound the
same. Omni. Same sense. Everything. So, "oṁ". That which pervades everything.
That which con..., subsumes. Including everything. Then, you know, there is
also the, you know, in Islam as well as Christianity, in the Abrahamic religions
in general, there is amin. Or amen. So, there, also, sound is, there is 'o'.
'u'. 'l'. There is the, just as 'om' is there. So, "am", 'a', 'a', 'm' is there
over there. The roots are the same. So, in general, you know, the idea of
referring to the Absolute Truth by using non-specific designations. Non-specific
means that, ok, what does "om" refer to? You know. Krishna refers to a specific
person. "oṁ" does not necessarily refer to Krishna. At least, that is not the
understanding of all people when they recite the word "oṁ", rec..., recite the
words "oṁ tat sad". But even if people do not understand it, if they understand
that I am referring to the Absolute Truth by this. So, Bhaktivinoda Thakur talks
about two kinds of names of the Supreme Lord. He talks about primary names. And
secondary names. So, Krishna. Yashoda Nandan. Radhika Vallabh. These are primary
names. They are, you know, references to Krishna. With respect to His personal
life in the spiritual world. With respect to His pastimes with His devotees.
Whereas Paramatma. You know. You know. Param Purusha. Jagadath..., you know.
Jagan, you know, Jagat Purusha. Jagatvyapi. These names are secondary names. Why
are they secondary names? Because they refer to, you know, the attributes of
Krishna. Which are not directly connected with His pastimes in the spiritual
world. They are connected word with His administration in this world. So, there
is no Paramatma required in the spiritual world to escort all the living beings.
There is no, you know, you know, you know, you know, there is no supervisor
required. For the "upadraṣṭānumantā ca". Like that. It is spiritual world.
For is, everybody is serving Krishna lovingly over there. Krishna is omniscient
in the spiritual world, also. Whenever He need..., when..., whenever lila wants
Him to be omniscient. But overall, Krishna does not have, supervise anyone over
there. So, that is how the spiritual world is transcendental. Now, whereas, you
know, in the material world, Krishna's functions of the material world are
referred to in the secondary names.

So, the secondary names, "oṁ tat sad", are, these are the secondary names. So,
"oṁ" is a reference to the Absolute Truth. Sometimes, the word is used, "oṁ" is
used along with some other words. "Om Namo Narayanaya". This was the mantra
which Rāmānujācārya got from his gurus. And similarly, there are other mantras,
also. So, which begin with "oṁ". "Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya". Now, Krishna
has earlier explained that "oṁ" refers to, you know, Himself.

        praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu
        śabdaḥ khe pauruṣaṁ nṛṣu

In 17..., 7.8 when He is describing the essence of everything, you know, at that
time, you know, how, describes how He is the essence of everything. Therefore,
that time, He describe that "praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu". Among all the Vedas, I am
"praṇavaḥ". So, "praṇavaḥ" refers to Krishna. So, Krishna has, that is just one
reference. In 10th Chapter, also. In the Vibhuti Yoga, a reference comes about
how Krishna is "oṁ". And in this way, Krishna has made clear what "oṁ" refers
to. Now, "iti nirdeśo". "iti nirdeśo" means that this is how the Absolute Truth
is referred to. You know. "brahmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛtaḥ". You know. "tri-vidhaḥ".
Three names. "tat" is also a name of the m..., Absolute Truth. "tat" refers to,
as we know, "Tat Tvam Asi". You are that. You know. You are that means, you are
that, that is what the, the way the mayavadis interpret it. You are His. You are
not He. You are His. "Tat Tvam". "Tvam" means you. "Tat" refers to that Absolute
Truth. "Asi". So, mayavadis say, you are that. But we are that in qualitative
sense. Not in the quantitative sense. You are, you know, you know, the, you
know, you know, you are the source of the Absol..., you are, you are of the same
quality as the Absolute Truth's. You are not He. You are His. "Tat Tvam Asi".
That is the Vaishnava understanding of the "Tat Tvam Asi". But "sat". Now, "sat"
refers also to the Absolute Truth as the eternal underlying cause and source of
everything. So, "oṁ tat sad". You know. These are three re..., ways to refer to
the Absolute Truth. And in one sense, through this, Krishna is talking about the
chanting of the holy names. And the potency of the chanting to elevate the
faithless to the faithful. And the non-scripturally faithful to the scripturally
faithful level. That is. People can all make spiritual advancement through
chanting of the holy name. So, this is a very inclusive understanding of, you
know, bhakti. Wherein, you know, Srila Prabhupada, you know, we see that, you
know, when people would ask, you know, you know, let us say, Christians, or
other people of other bui..., religious faiths, they would ask, you know, do as
everyone have to chant the name of Krishna itself? No. Prabhupada said. You
know. You can chant the names of the Lord according to your tradition. You know.
So, Srila Prabhupada was once in Iran. And then, at that time, when he, you
know, you know, when he was talking with some devotees, at that time, in the
background, then, when the nama has started. The Pra..., as the prayers were
being offered, Prabhupada closed his eyes. Folded his hands. And became
absorbed. Deeply in it. And then, he heard the full recitation of the prayers
of namas. And when it got over, then he opened his eyes. And Prabhupada's eyes
were bright. And he said, wasn't that beautiful? So, you know, the devotees
have little taken it back. Then, the devotees said, but wouldn't it have
bett..., wouldn't it have been better if they had been chanting Hare Krishna.
One of the devotees asked. So, Prabhupada looked hurt. And Prabhupada said, why
are you making me sectarian? They are glorifying God in their way. And we are
glorifying God in our way. So, why do you, why are you making me sectarian? It
is a very deep, you know, point which Srila Prabhupada is making over here. You
know. Actually, the, as long as the principle of the glorification of God is
there, that principle has to be focused on. The form in which glorification
happens, that is, you know, different. For different people. So, now, the name
Krishna does refer to Krishna, the form of the Lord which is there in the
highest abode in the spiritual world. So, there is, there is some speciality
through the name Krishna. But when we are talking from universalist perspective,
at that time, we should understand what to present when. So, when we are talking
with people from different faiths. We do not have to impose our faith on them.

You know. Our goal is not to, you know, just spread one organisation. Our goal,
ultimately, is to raise global consciousness. You know. Prabhupada gave the name
of the m..., organisation also as "International Society for Krishna
Consciousness". So, you know, our, the goal is not just to spread the con...,
organisation. But to spread the consciousness. So, now, to spread the Krishna
Consciousness. Now, at one level, Krishna Consciousness, you know, for some
people is just God consciousness. They may not be conscious that God is Krishna.
So, if some people can be elevated. Pra..., from level of faithlessness to,
faith, level of God consciousness, then why not? That is good for them. Now, we
will see also that Srila Prabhupada's approach to people of other religions was
different, you know, depending on the level of commitment of those people. Say,
if somebody was just a nominal Christian. You know. That means maybe born in
that faith. So..., occasionally going to the church. Not a very serious
practioner. That Prabhupada would say, yes, you know, practice Krishna
Consciousness. We can develop love for God by practicing Christianity, also. By
practicing Krishna Consciousness, also. But, you know, this is Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's mercy is available here. He is the yuga avatar. And the holy name
can give us access to Goloka Vrindavan. So, he would recommend that. But on the
other hand, if he met, you know, Chri..., Christians were committed practioners.
For example, somebody is a Christian pastor. You know. Christian monk. You know.
Christian teacher. Prabhupada would not try to convert them. You know.
Prabhupada would say that, you know, follow, you know, you know, the Bible more
faithfully. Understand the universal principles of God consciousness. And
Prabhupada would say that, you know, we can read the Bhagavad Gita. This is the
science of God. By studying the Bhagavad Gita, it will help you to become a
better Christian. You know. You know. So, in that sense, you know, you know, the
focus of a devotee in the outreach is to elevate global consciousness. By
helping people to come closer and closer to Krishna. To Krishna. According to
their level. You know. Now, if they can come directly to Krishna. They can take
the elevator. That is wonderful. But if they cannot, then whatever level they
are, they can elevate themselves. So, now, we, some devotees, you know,
consider, have this perspective that other religions are all bad. For example,
even Gaudiya Vaishnavism and Hinduism in general has born the brunt of Islamic,
you know, you know, vandalism and fanaticism. Many temples were desecrated. Many
deities were, you know, you know, have, were, you know, you know, had to be
re..., you know, removed. So that they were not desecrated. We know many of the
Vrindavan deities are now in Jaipur. That was because the Islamic invaders were
fanatical at that time. So, now, we see that this is there. But Srila
Prabhupada's attitude, Srila Prabhupada acknowledges this point in
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta". But he does not harp on it. In every religion, there are,
you know, sectarian, fanatical, exclusivist elements. Exclusivist means, you
know, my way is the only way. And this statements like that, you know, they have
to be understood in proper context. So, Krishna also says:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

Surrender only to Me. Somebody can construe this as a fanatical statement.
Sorry. And only to Me means that we will not surrender to Jes..., you know,
Jes..., Jesus. Do not surrender to Muhammad. Do not surrender to anyone else.
Surrender only to Me. But actually, even Krishna is saying, surrender only to
Me. It is through His representatives. And His representatives can come in
different ways at different times. And they can elevate people gradually. So,
when, you know, statement like this comes. Surrender only to Me. Or say, Bible
says, I am the way and the light. No one should go to the father except through
Me. So, this statement simply refers to this fact that in this world, you know,
you know, we need to follow the word of God. Just like, if a patient goes to
doctor. And the, you know, doctor says, ok, this is your ailment. And this is
your medicine. But if patients are saying, no, I went to that doctor. And that
doctor said that was the problem. And then, I went to that doctor, and the
doctor said that was the problem. And I went to that doctor, and the doctor said
that was the problem. What will the doctor say? Forget everything else. Just
follow what I am telling you. You will get cured. Now, this does not necessarily
mean that all the other doctors are false. But that sta..., exclusive sort of,
you know, statement, forget everything else. Just follow what I am telling. That
is meant to create a focus. You know. Take one doctor's treatment. You will get
cured. So, it is, Prabhupada also had the same focus. You know. One time, when
Prabhupada was in America. After New York, he gave a class. And after that one,
one hippie sitting at the back, he said, Swamiji, your philosophy is, sounds
like the philosophy of Buddha. So, Prabhupada said, do you follow Buddha? You
know. Just taken a breath. He says noes. Prabhupada said follow Buddha. Follow
Jesus. Follow Krishna. Follow someone. Do not just talk. Do not just talk.
Because if we just go and talk with a doctor, that is not going to cure us. You
know. We have to follow someone. And if the doctor, it is, it is possible,
unfortunately, sometimes that the doctor may be a quack. Doctor may be bogus.
Buw how will we understand he is bogus? Either we have to intellectually
scru..., scrutinise the philosophy. And see whether it does not make sense.
Then, we can understand. Or we take the medicine. We understand it is bogus. So,
just by talking, we will neither understand the truthfulness. Not the fal...,
not the falsity of anything. So, we have to practice. So, Prabhupada would
encourage people to take up God consciousness, whatever level they are at. So,
when we are talking about, say, Islamic fanaticism, we have to recognise that
these statements which are there, they are meant to create a focus. You know.
Follow this path. Do not bother about others. That does not necessarily mean
that all other paths are wrong. Although, some fanatical followers within a
particular religion may construe those statements that way. And, you know, that
may be even with the mainstream understanding among, in some, among, you know,
you know, some people in some areas of the world. You know. Who are followers of
that religion. But we have to understand overall the point that, you know, we,
if somebody else is following God consciousness, we appreciate that. And, you
know, Srila Prabhupada in the "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". In his, you know, you know,
purport to the, you know, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's decision, Chand Kazi. He
describes that, you know, the scriptures of the "mleccha"s and the Yavanas are
the Old Testament. And New Testament. And the Quran. And he says that, these
scriptures are not eternal. And they are not necessarily perfect. So, they are
recently composed. Caitanya Mahaprabhu himself is talking this. And, you know,
Srila Prabhupada elaborating over there.

So, they are, they are not necessarily, they are not necessarily perfect. They
are not eternal. And they do not contain much advanced knowledge about God. And
that is why people who want to know scientifically about God, they are not
satisfied by these books. That is what Prabhupada says over there. So,
Prabhupada is candid. But where is he speaking these things? He is speaking
this in his "Caitanya-caritāmṛta" purport. Not in his Bhagavad Gita purport. Not
in his public classes. Because how it is that somebody who does not have any
faith in God, it will help them to come one step upwards. One step upwards. But
if somebody can take up Krishna Consciousness. Then, we do not have to let that
person go to some other path. So, when somebody is reading
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta", that person is quite interested in the serious Krishna
Consciousness. So, they understand that time. So, that other religions, they can
also elevate people. But ultimately, elevation is dependent on one's devotion to
God. So, if one does not have devotion. Then, how can the, how much can there be
the elevation? So, if there is devotion, then whatever be the tradition one is
following, one will get elevated. But in general, in many religions, we see
that, you know, the religion is often a tool for material aggrandizement.
Dharma. Artha. Kama. Moksha. This is the karma kanda level of religion. And that
is what is largely the level at which most religions practice today. So, people
say that. If we serve, if we, you know, follow the rules of God. If we worship
God. Then, we will go to, you know, we will go to paradise. We will go to
Jannat. And there, we will be able to enjoy. There may islamic jihadis who
believe that, based on some, some interpretation on some quranic verses that,
actually, if we die in jihads, then we will be able to enjoy with 73 virgins. In
Jannat. For all of eternity. Now, this is, you know, this is not love of Allah.
This is love of virgins. And this is de..., definitely not, you know, very
All..., you know, this is not definitely the level of faith that any religion
ultimately aims for. "Muhammad" also talks about, ultimately, surrender to God.
Pure surrender to God. That is what Quran also teaches. But that is not the
emphasis. So, when Srila Prabhupada is saying that, you know, you know, the
scriptures of the "mleccha"s and Yavanas have limitations, he is simply pointing
out an objective fact. This is not a sectarian imposition. It is an objective
fact. Anybody can study the extent of knowledge of God that is given in the
Vedic scriptures. And the extent of knowledge that is given in the non-Vedic
scriptures. And we can see that the, you know, richness of depth and detail is
far greater in the Vedic scriptures. And therefore, you know, if somebody wants
to know about God, let that person come to Krishna. And in, somebody may say
that, no, no, no, but if some people, some Christians may ask that, ok, Jesus,
he did not say that Krishna is God. You know. We say that, you know, Krishna is
the father. And Jesus is the son. Jesus said I am the son of God. So, it is,
Chri..., we are, Jesus did not say that that Krishna is the father. So, you
know, you know, here, there are different perspetives. First is, Jesus himself
said, I have much to say. But you have not the ears to hear. Jesus actually
preached only for five years, practically speaking. And in that, he gave
whatever knowledge he could. But what happened? He gave some knowledge. And he
says, Dauji to, he did not fin..., he, he created the commitment, "dausa", not
kill. And people killed him, only. So, the, how much could he give in those five
years? And again, objectively speaking, suppose, somebody is studying Computer
Engineering. Say, that person studies Computer Engineering in IIT. And then,
that person comes to know that there is advanced Computer Engineering available
in MIT in America. You know. Will that person say, oh, I am from IIT. I will
study only in IIT. I will study only in IIT. No. That person say, comp..., my
interest is Computer Science. So, wherever I can get knowledge of Computer
Science, I will take that. Whether it is in IIT. Or that is in MIT. I will get
the knowledge that I am interested in. Comp..., knowledge, comp..., so,
similarly, different religions are like colleges. For coming to know about God.
And for learning to love God. So, if based on objective observation, we find
that, say, in the Vedic tradition, as compared with the non-Vedic tradition, in
the Vedic tradition, there is more knowledge of God available. Then, why not
take that knowledge of God? And increase one's devotion to God based on that
knowledge. You know. So, if somebody is, no, no, no, this is not taught in our
religion. Then, we have to ask that person, are you interested in knowledge? Or
are you interested in college? You know. What is the interest?

You know. We are not interested in college, primarily. The college is a means to
the knowledge. We are grateful to the college which has given us the knowledge.
But still, the focus is on the knowledge. So, if in the Vedic tradition, there
is more knowledge about God. Wha..., if somebody says, no, I will not take this
knowledge because it is not in my tradition. Then, that person is being
sectarian. You know. We are not sec..., being sectarian in saying that Krishna
is God. Prabhupada would say, when somebody would ask, why do you consider
Krishna to be God? Prabhupada say, He is the objective conception of God. Is God
all-attractive? Is God all-power..., is God all-beautiful? All-powerful?
All-wealty? All-straight..., all-knowledgeable? Like that. Six opulences.
All-renounced? So, you know, you know, you know, Krishna has, so, now, which
religion will say that God does not have these attributes? These are universal
attributes. Which are understood and agreed upon by all religions. So, when we
understand that, all the religions agree to these attributes. Then, the question
comes up, ok, so, where is there a description of a person with these
attributes? For example, now, if somebody says, the, I am the, you know, I am
the Prime Minister of India. We may say, ok, you know, so, then, Prabhupada
would say, I am the queen of England. You know. It is nonsense. You know. Where
is the power that you are showing the Prime Minister of India. So, if, if, let
us say, there is a desc..., you know, description of a post. You know. What is
the power of the Prime Minister of India? The Prime Minister of India can, by
one command, cause the Indian Air Force. The Indian Naval Force. The Indian Army
to immediately start action to attack. Or declare, declare emergency. And stop
the suspension of most governmental functions all over the country. You know.
So, like that, there is a description of the power of the per..., you know,
person. And then, if you find, here is the person who has that power. This
person can get the army to move. Army to stop. Can get the Air Force to move.
Air Force to stop. He says ok. Here is the description of a person. And here is
the person who has, who fits that description. Then, we can say this person is
God. So, similarly, the, here, the, the description of God as having six
opulences. Now, and there is, here is a person, Krishna, who exhibit those six
opulences. So, why not accept this as God? You know. Prabhupada would
say, if you do not want to accept Krishna as God. Then, you give us a better
conception of God. Is there any sweeter, better conception of God available in,
in the world religions? If there is a better conception of God available, we
will accept that. So, the point is, this is universal knowledge. And "oṁ tat
sad" is a universal way of addressing God. In the sense that, you know, even if
one does not know that, you know, there is, God is a person. And His name is
Krishna. One can refer to God by the na..., by the generic names. And by
uttering, referring to those, God's, God by those generic names, one can become
spiritually elevated. So, from non-scriptural to scriptural faith. So, from,
fai..., sorry, from faithlessness to scriptu..., non-scriptural faith. From
non-scriptural faith to scriptural faith to transcendental faith. Like that.
One can get elevated. So, let us look at the next verse now. You know. You know.
You know. You know. You know. So, 17.24:

        tasmād oṁ ity udāhṛtya
        yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ
        pravartante vidhānoktāḥ
        satataṁ brahma-vādinām

So, "tasmād oṁ ity udāhṛtya". So, after, therefore, by uttering "oṁ", you know,
what would people do? "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ". So, these are "kriyāḥ"s. These
are actions in the Vedic tradition. Which are considered to be pious.
"yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ". You know. This is "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ". These are
"pravartante vidhānoktāḥ". You know. You know. "pravartante" means to begin.
"vidhānoktāḥ". "vidhāna" refers to scriptural un..., direction. "vidhānoktāḥ".
"satataṁ brahma-vādinām". "brahma-vādinām". Here, refers to, you know, you know,
those who are, you know, seeks peace, seeking after the "brahma". Yeah. "brahma"
means the Absolute Truth. So, "brahma-vādinām", you know, refers to those who
are trying to, you know, seek the "brahman". Now, they may seek the permi...,
"brahma" by the sheer, rapid method. That is, you know, the method of direct
transcendental path. You know. You know. The, or they may, for, seek it by the
gradual method. Dharma. Artha. Kama. Gradually. So, "brahma-vādinām" can refer
to those who are transcendentalists in the sense that they are connected with
transcendence in some way or the other. So, all such people, "oṁ ity udāhṛtya".
Whenever there is a "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ", they do it with, you know, they start it
with "oṁ". And "pravartante vidhānoktāḥ". They do it according to scripture,
Krishna is saying. So, what is the poi..., point of Krishna over here? He is
giving, He is telling precedence. That this is how "oṁ" has been chanted
earlier. And this is how "oṁ", you, can also be chanted by those who want to
elevate the level of their faith. "brahma-vādinām". Now, this word
"brahma-vādi" does not necessarily refer to the same sense in which we use the
word "brahma-vādi". You know. We use the word mayavadi. And "brahma-vādi". You
know. So, mayavadi refers to those who consider everything, except Brahman, to
be maya. And "brahma-vādi"s are those who may know about the personal aspect of
the Absolute Truth. But, you know, they do not o..., offend that personal
Absolute, the Absolute Truth. However, they themselves feel attracted to the
impersonal aspect. You know. Those are "brahma-vādi"s. "satataṁ brahma-vādinām".
So, here, "brahma-vādinām" refers to those who are adhering to scripture. Are
those who are aiming for practicing spiritual life in general. So that
ultimately, we can become transcendental. Then, you know, you know:

        tad ity anabhisandhāya
        phalaṁ yajña-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ
        dāna-kriyāś ca vividhāḥ
        kriyante mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ

So, "tad ity anabhisandhāya". "anabhisandhāya" means without desiring. With
detachment. "phalaṁ". So, without desiring the fruits. What are the fruits?
"yajña-tapaḥ". "yajña-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ". So, "dāna-kriyāś ca vividhāḥ". So, Krishna
is again, He is referring to "yajña", "dāna", tapaḥ". "kriyante". Now, the
difference between this is, you know, previous, previous verses, here,
specifically, Krishna is mentioning "mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ". Those who are seeking
lib..., liberation. "tad ity, "abhi...", anabhisandhāya". So, "abhisandhāya"
refers to attachment. You know. "abhisandhāya". And "anabhisandhāya" refers to
without attachment. "tad ity anabhisandhāya". And Krishna says "phalaṁ
yajña-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ". "anabhisandhāya". So, without attachment. With the fruits
of "yajña". "dāna". "tapaḥ". When one chants "tad", you know, then one can
attain transcendence. Or those who want to attain transcendence. Those who want
to attain liberation. They chant "tad" in this way. So, that means, Krishna is
talking here about "mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ". So, if somebody wants "yajña". Wants the
material results, also. One does "yajña", "dāna", "tapaḥ" for material results,
that time, also, one can chant "oṁ". And one get those material results. The
word "tad" also refers to the Absolute Truth. And "tad" can be chanted so that
one can get liberation. So, "tad" refers to the Absolute Truth. And when one
chanted Absolute, name of that Absolute Truth, that can elevate one towards
liberation. So, this is, Krishna is talking about religious li..., faith. Or
scriptural. So, there, we can have religious faith. We can have scriptural
faith. We can have transcendental faith. Religious means having some kind of
faith. It may not always be scriptural faith. You know. You know. Then, you
know, 17.26 and 27. So:

        sad-bhāve sādhu-bhāve ca
        sad ity etat prayujyate
        praśaste karmaṇi tathā
        sac-chabdaḥ pārtha yujyate

        yajñe tapasi dāne ca
        sthitiḥ sad iti cocyate
        karma caiva tad-arthīyaṁ
        sad ity evābhidhīyate

So, "sad-bhāve sādhu-bhāve ca". This is poetic here. "sad-bhāve sādhu-bhāve".
"bhāva". "bhāva". Coming twice. So, in the sense, "sad-bhāve". That means when
one is referring to the Absolute Truth. "sādhu-bhāve". So, "sādhu". So, "sad",
"sad" is the Absolute Truth. The Supreme. "sādhu". Who is a devotee.
"sādhu-bhāve ca". "sad ity etat prayujyate". So, the word "sad ity" is used.
"praśaste karmaṇi tathā". So, when one is doing work. Very different kinds of
work. One uses this. And "sac-chabdaḥ pārtha", "ucyate...", "yujyate". So,
"sat-śabdaḥ". That, the sound "sat" is used. So, what is happening here? Krishne
has first talked about "oṁ". Then, He has talked about "tat". Now, He is talking
about "sad". And then, He is describing.

        yajñe tapasi dāne ca
        sthitiḥ sad iti cocyate

You know. That "sad" is used. "ucyate" is pronounced. When "yajñe tapasi dāne
ca". While doing "yajña". "tapasa". And "dāna". "karma caiva tad-arthīyaṁ".
"karma caiva". And while doing karma for what? "sad ity evābhidhīyate". While
one is doing karma, also, the "sad" is indicated through this. So, Prabhupada
translates this as:

"The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is
indicated by the word sat. The performer of such sacrifice is also called sat,
as are all works of sacrifice, penance and charity which, true to the absolute
nature, are performed to please the Supreme Person, O son of Pṛthā."

So, you know, you know, here, you know, "praśaste karmaṇi" refers to the
prescribed duties. The prescribed duties that we perform are for various
purposes. They are for, they are material sva-dharma. And there is
transcendental sva-dharma. Material sva-dharma is according to our varana. And
our ashram. We do specific duties. And transcendental sva-dharma is what we do,
you know, for practicing bhakti. And ultimately, attaining, getting li...,
gaining liberation from material existence. So, you know, you know, "praśaste
karmaṇi". So, whatever "karma" one is doing, according to one's material aus...,
sva..., spiritual nature. That "karma", we can actually sva..., you know, we can
actually connect with the Absolute Truth. So, of course, the spiritual
sva-dharma is directly connected with the Absolute Truth. Because it is meant
for the ultimate spiritual rule, you know, reality. That is Krishna. The
material dharma, also, we can connect. So, the co..., starting question at the
start of the chapter was what is the, you know, you know, you know, what is the
nature and destination of person who has faith. But not in scripture. So,
Krishna is telling over here, ultimately, one has to come from non-scriptural
faith to scriptural faith. And the chanting of "oṁ tat sad" can help one to come
from non-scriptural to scriptural faith. So, chanting of "oṁ tat sad" within the
specific Vedic context, you know, "oṁ" refers to certain things. "tat" refers to
certain things. "sat" refers to certain things. That those specific references
are true. At the same time, they can also be generically used to refer to the
na..., to the secondary names of God. So, in different trans..., tran...,
traditions, God may be referred to by different names. And Prabhupada would say,
which, any authentic name of God if we chant, that will elevate us. And what is
authenti..., the basis of authenticity? Whether it is referring to the
attributes of God. To a person with those attributes. To a truth with those
attributes. So, Allah. Jeho..., Jehovah. These names. Actually, refer to God as,
as, you know, all, all-merciful. All-powerful. So, they are referring to, you
know, God's attributes. Which are in net, which are in harmony with the
understanding even in scripture about God's attibutes. So, you know, you know,
in different languages. In different cultures. Say they, say, the, you know,
Aztecs. They may have added different name to refer to God. The native, you
know, native Americans may have a different name to refer to God. All these
names can be accepted if they are referring to God's attributes. In terms of,
you know, you know, what is correct according to scripture. So, there are
universal un..., there is universal understanding of God's attributes. And when
one recognises those, that understanding. And harmonises with it. Then, whatever
names one is referring to, that is fine. Just like the sun can be referred to by
"Sūrya". "Ravi". "Bhāskara". Suraja. By different names. So, similarly, the
Absolute Truth can also be referred to by different names. You know. You know.
You know. So, Prabhupada says actually, once one starts doing something for
transcendental purpose, just like Krishna has told in s..., 4.24 that, you know:

        brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir
        brahmāgnau brahmaṇā hutam
        brahmaiva tena gantavyaṁ
        brahma-karma-samādhinā

"brahma-karma-samādhinā". That one can actually do "brahma-karma". You know. If
one has the spiritual consciousness. All of one's work becomes spiritualised.
When one does work in spiritual consciousness. So, "tad-arthīyaṁ". Similarly,
whatever "yajña". "dāna". "tapaḥ", speech, i..., if whatever, "yajña". "dāna".
"tapaḥ" we are doing. "tad-arthīyaṁ". If we do it for the purpose of the
Absolute Truth. Then, we will, will become elevated and liberated by that. You
know. Over a period of time. Now, Krishna will conclude, you know, if somebody
says, I do not want, I will not have any faith at all. Then, what happens? No.
He says that faith is absolutely essential. And best is if the faith is
transcendental. Otherwise, it is scriptural. You know. Or at least, some kind of
faith is required. So, Krishna says, what happens if the fai..., there is no
faith at all?

        aśraddhayā hutaṁ dattaṁ
        tapas taptaṁ kṛtaṁ ca yat
        asad ity ucyate pārtha
        na ca tat pretya no iha

So, "aśraddhayā hutaṁ dattaṁ". You know. You know. That which is performed
without "śraddha". "hutaṁ". "hutaṁ" means offered in sacrifice. "dattaṁ" means
given in charity. "tapas taptaṁ kṛtaṁ ca yat". Whatever austerity is also
performed. "asad ity ucyate pārtha". There, it is considered "asad". It is
considered not of much use. It is temporary. Or false. As Prabhupada translate
over here. "na ca tat pretya no iha". "pretya" means after death. You know. And
"iha" is in this world. That means neither in this world. Nor the next world.
Faster. You know. You know. "aśraddhayā hutaṁ dattaṁ". You know. "tapas taptaṁ
kṛtaṁ ca yat". "aśraddhayā hutaṁ". If one is fai..., faithless. As Krishna has
earlier said, also, in 4.40.

        nāyaṁ loko ’sti na paro
        na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ

If somebody "saṁśayātmanaḥ". Somebody is filled with doubts. That person
can non-gain any good result either in this life. Or in the next life. That
person cannot get happiness either in this or next life. So, same point, Krishna
is reiterating over here. "na pretya...". "na ca tat pretya no iha". Nor,
neither in the next life. Nor in this life. If one is faithless, one will not be
able to function anyway. Now, what is Krishna saying by faithless over here?
Now, in principle, we can say, faithless, this is impossible. Because even an
atheist has some kind of faith. You know. Even an atheist. Atheism is the
religion of faith in faithlessness. What do you mean by faith in faithlessness?
You know. That means the atheism has, atheist has faith that there is no God.
You know. Now, it is an article of faith. How can anyone prove that there is no
God? If there is no experiment by which we can conclude that there is no God.
So, it is an article of faith. Now, somebody may say, because of this. This.
This. Because, say, there is so much suffering in this world. Therefore, there
is, there is no God. But that is a logic. And that logic is flawed. You know.
You know. Just as there may be a doctor in a city. And despite the doctor's
presence in the city. Still, there may be sickness. So, why is that? Because the
patient is not going to the doctor. Similarly, just the presence of sickness
does not prove the absence or non-existence of a doctor. Similarly, the presence
of evil does not necessarily disprove the pre..., existence of God. There can be
alternative explanations. So, same way, the point is that one has to come to
similar, you know, logical, log..., ar..., arguments. And inferences. And those
inferences are flawed. So, ultimately, it is a matter of faith. So, even when
the person is an atheist. Atheist is also having faith. So, they, atheists may
sell defin..., designate themselves as non-believers. You know. Non-believers
means what? You know. Actually, it is not that they are without belief. They
have the belief in disbelief. They have faith in faithlessness. They have belief
in disbelief. That means they do not believe in, you know, any religion. Any
God. That is why they call themselves non-believers. But in principle, nobody is
a non-believer. Because everybody believes in something. Nobody can base all of
one's, you know, life and all of one's activities ba..., on, without faith. On
just by seeing things. You know. If see, if we have to believe only in things
which we ever see, then nobody would write a plane. Because gravity is something
which we cannot see. And without gravity. Without mechanics. Without many of the
concepts of science which are invisible most of the time, we would not be able
to, you know, function in today's technological world. You know. So, therefore,
we need techno..., we need help. You know. In terms of, you know, you know,
faith. So, we have to have faith in something. But when, if the world, faithless
is used in a general sense. Often, it is referred to lack of faith in anything
spiritual. Anything connected with God. You know. That kind of faith.
"aśraddhayā". So, in a, in a broad spiritual sense, faithlessness is impossible.
Because, you know, faithlessness means, you know, not having any faith. But
nobody can live without faith. Even an atheist has, has faith in the
non-existence of God. Has faith in faithlessness. So, that is, that is the, in a
broad sense. In a more, you know, inter..., in an intermediate sense. Faithless
can refer to, one who does not have faith in God.  Faith in spirituality. Faith
in, you know, you know, faith in, you know, adhering to God. So, in that sense,
faithless, you know, can be used to, also used to refer, generally, we use, also
use the word, we also use the word, non-believer to refer to that. That is the
faithless in the sense in which Krishna is using it. Here. But now, the word
faithless can also be used in a much narrower sense to refer to faith,
specifically, in Krishna. In the "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". You know. In, you know,
Krishna Dasa Kaviraja Goswami defines faith. He says:

        ‘śraddhā’-śabde — viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya
        kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya

So, he says, "‘śraddhā’-śabde — viśvāsa kahe". What is "śraddhā"? Faith is, you
know, is unshakable confidence is something transcendental. "viśvāsa kahe
sudṛḍha niścaya". "sudṛḍha". Determined. Unshakable. "niścaya". Strong
determination. But what is that? He says, that is, you know, you know, "kṛṣṇe
bhakti kaile". That if one does "kṛṣṇe bhakti". Then, what happens by doing
"kṛṣṇe bhakti"? "sarva-karma kṛta haya". All other work is done. So, this, this
faith is talking about, is similar to the faith that is exhibited by the gopis.
The gopis of Vrindavan, you know, when they left, you know, home. You know. They
left their duties as wives. They left their duties as mothers. They left their
duties as, you know, female members of a community. And they just went to
Krishna. And they had a confidence that if we serve Krishna, then everything
else is done. When I water the root of the tree, all the parts are watered.
Similarly, when I satisfy Krishna, everyone will be satisfied. "kṛṣṇe bhakti
kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya". All work will be done. And it is this faith that
actually Krishna also calls upon. At the end of the Bhagavad Gita.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

Here, He is saying, give up all varieties of religion. And surrender unto Me. He
is calling for this level of faith. That just forget all, everything else.
Forget all other religions. You should surrender to Me. Everything will be done.
You know. "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". Then, "ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo".
"mokṣayiṣyāmi". Even if you feel that, because you have not done this duty. Or
not done that duty. So, some sinful reactions will come. Ok. I will take care of
those sinful reactions. Do not worry. Do not worry about that. Just serve Me.
So, Krishna is telling about that level of faith. And He will talk about it in
the 18th Chapter. When He comes to surrender. "mām". "parityajya". You know. So,
that means, when we talk about faith, you know, faith is not just, you know, you
know, monovalent term. It is a polivalent term. Monovalent means having only one
specific meaning. Polivalent means having many meanings. So, we, the word faith,
at an initial level can just mean, you know, you know, you know, ok, there, that
there is something beyond this world. There is some higher spiritual reality.
There is some, there may be some God. I want to know about it. So, if we look at
the nine stages of bhakti, you know, the it, fir..., the first stage is
"śraddha".

        ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-
        saṅgo ... bhajana-kriyā
        ... ’nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt
        ... niṣṭhā rucis ...

You know. You know.

        ...āsaktis ... bhāvas

And:

        premṇaḥ

So, nine stages are there. So, first is "śraddhā". And Prabhupada translate
this as favorable curiosity. Favorable curiosity. So, it starts off with that
curiosity. Ok. What is there? I want to know about it. So, that is the
beginning. That is also, at one level, faith. When the Bhagavad Gita also used
the word, you know, sorry, the, the, "Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu". While describing
the nine stages also uses the word "niṣṭhā". And "niṣṭhā" is strong. Unshakable
faith. So, at the stage of "śraddhā". The faith is like a banana tree. Shakable.
At the stage of "niṣṭhā", the faith is unshakable. Like a banyan tree. So,
"niṣṭhā" is very strong faith. That is a realised faith. Internalised faith. It
is not just inquisitiveness. It is actually assimilated. And internalised
internally. And thereby, realised. So, after this, you know, the next stage is,
at the ultimate level is, "śraddhā" matures, "śraddhā" or "niṣṭhā" matures into
"prema". When we love Kri..., when we love Kri..., someone, we are ready to give
any, up everything and anything for that person. You know. That is what, you
know, makes romance movies are, romance nowadays attractive. You know. Boy and
a girl. Man and woman are attracted to each other. And the, one of them may be
from wealthy family. Another from a poor family. But the wealthy person is ready
to give up everything for the other, other person. So, that is what? Wis...,
talk about love. Now, that is of course in a material sense. But the point is,
that is understood to be, love means that we are ready to give up everything
else.  And in love, faith is implied. At least, at that level. You know. So,
when Krishna talks about, you know, prema. As the, when the
"Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu" talks about "prema" as the Ninth level. So, in love,
that level of love means com..., faith is completely implied over there. Now, in
their, there can be some loves. In which, faith may not be there. How is it
po..., can there be love without faith? Yes. It is possible. That, say, even a
mother loves the child. The mother re..., re..., genuinely cares for the child.
But the mother does not have faith in the child. Because child is not,
intelligence is not grown up. Mother may not like the child go near fire. The
mother may not like the child play with a knife. So, there can be love without
faith. And similarly, there can be faith without love. Faith without love means,
you know, one may have faith. Ok. I go to a doctor. Doctor treats me. So, I have
faith in the doctor's treatment. It is not that I love the doctor. You know. I
am grateful to the doctor. But it is not that I love the doctor. So, these two
are not necessarily entirely identical. Faith. And love. There can be love
without faith. And there can be faith without love. But at the highest level,
when love is there, faith is implied in that. You know. Devotee, when, you know,
when Bhaktivinoda Thakur is, say, praying, you know:

        mārobi rākhobi-jo icchā tohārā

So, either you can destroy me. Or you can protect me. You know. "jo icchā
tohārā". My dear Lord, whatever is your desire. What does this indicate? It
indicates such an implied and implicit level of faith that one knows, without
any doubt, that whatever Krishna does is for my good. And therefore, I will not
oppose it. I will accept it. I will accept it gracefully. And gratefully. So,
that is a very advanced level of faith. Where one accepts Krishna's will. And
the Bhagavad Gita will talk a, to us in this end conclusion. What it says,
Arjuna says, "kariṣye vacanaṁ tava". I will do Your will. So, this is actually
an even higher level of faith. In the Bible, when Jesus going to be crucified.
The next morning, he is going to be betrayed by Judas. And then, he is going to
be crucified. So, the previous night, he says that let thy will be done, my dear
Lord. Not my will. Let thy will be done. That is a, considered to be exalted
expression of surrender. Let thy will be done. The Bhagavad Gita acknowledges
this when Krishna says, do My will. "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". You know. But, you
know, the, but Arjuna says further is that not only let your will be done.
Arjuna says, I will do Your will. It is a higher level. Let thy will be done
means, ok, whatever you want to happen, let it happen. But, you know, "kariṣye
vacanaṁ tava". When Krishna says, he is talking about something deeper. He is
saying that, not only let your will happen. And you make it happen. He says I
will make your will happen. So, there can be various levels of faith. And the
whole process of spiritual advancement is in gradual increase. Increase.
Increase of faith. So, faith is like our muscles. You know. You know. You know.
Muscles, the more we exercise the muscles, the stronger the muscles become.
Similarly, all of us know that certain activities which we do, they will
increase our faith. If we associate with devotees. Study scripture. You know. 
Learn from those devotees who have knowledge. And faith. And conviction. Then,
our faith will increase. So, just as when we exercise muscle, muscles increase.
That is the, how faith increases by human endeavor. But there is other aspect,
also. Faith increasing by divine grace. We have certain moments. Certain
transformational experiences which we may have in our life. We go to Yatra. We have
some darshan. We have some very thrilling, you know, experiences in spiritual
life. Spiritual experiences. They can in..., make our faith. Boost up in rapid,
you know, steps forward. So, you know, it is, faith is both a result of human
choice. And divine grace. And what we do is, for us, we have, chanting of the
holy name is the most potent way. If we chant the holy names. And study the
scriptures. And associate with devotees. We go to the holy places. And worship
the deity. These are the five potent forms of devotional service which are
talked about in "Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu". By this, faith can be increased
tremendously. And over a period of time, it will mature into "niṣṭhā".
Unshakable faith. And finally, into love. And that is like s..., per..., supreme
perfection.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
