Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FZZpwOirVTM
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=spkScPtLRkgHRg9PV00G0SHmD-Z8MTU0ODQ4OTc3N0AxNTQ4NDAzMzc3&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_129_-_Bhagavad_Gita_15.11-15.14_-_Jnana-chakshu_to_appreciate_Krishna%27s_benevolence_at_the_material_level_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=FZZpwOirVTM

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the 15th Chapter. We, you know, discussed, you know, the first two sections
of the 15th Chapter. Let us have a quick overview. So, attain, first verse about
the upside-down banyan tree. Attain liberation by detachment. And if one is not
detached, then one, you know, goes on in the cycle of birth and death. So, this
section goes from 7 to 11. We have discussed until 10th verse. The 10th verse
talked about, you know, "jñāna-cakṣu". You know. You know. About seeing with
the eyes of knowledge. So, now, the question may come up, why do some people
have "jñāna-cakṣu"? And others do not have "jñāna-cakṣu"? What is the
difference? So, that is talked about in this particular verse. You know. 15.11.

        yatanto yoginaś cainaṁ
        paśyanty ātmany avasthitam
        yatanto ’py akṛtātmāno
        nainaṁ paśyanty acetasaḥ

So, it is "yatanto yoginaś cainaṁ". You know. You know. The yogis, those who
are, you know, striving for yoga. "yatanto". So, they endeavor. And "cainaṁ".
"enam" means this. H.., this is what? H..., this is reality of how the soul is
trapped in material existence. And is dragged around by the modes. So, you know,
"paśyanty". So, the yogi is who endeavor, they perceive. How do they perceive?
"ātmany avasthitam". By becoming situated on the spiritual platform. But on the
other hand, "yatanto ’py akṛtātmāno". You know. "yatanto ’py". Others may
endeavor. But still, they are "akṛtātmāno". They are, you know, they have, they
are not situated on the spiritual platform. "ātmānaḥ" is the soul. "akṛta" means
they have not actually, you know, adequately, you know, situated themselves on
the spiritual platform. They are not of the "ātmā" level. And therefore, "nainaṁ
paśyanty acetasaḥ". "nainaṁ paśyanty". One is not able to perceive. "acetasaḥ".
Because of misdirected consciousness, one cannot perceive. You know. So,
basically, there is a contrast here between those, you know, who is able to
perceive. One whose, you know, consciousness is, you know, one, who, both are
endeavoring. The word "yatanto" comes for both. But one is "ātmany avasthitam".
You know. The other is "akṛtātmāno". And "acetasaḥ". So, they are not able to
perceive. So, that means, you know, the, it is not just enough that we desire
and strive to perceive the spiritual reality. You know. That yes. The, so,
"jñāna-cakṣu". And, so, the previou..., the previous verse had the word
"jñāna-cakṣu". Now, here, the word is "paśyanti". So, yes, this logical, you
know, connection with eyes we see. So, you know, what is required for developing
this "jñāna-cakṣu"? It is not just endeavor. Endeavor is important. But if that
endeavor should lead to a transformation. By which, one can become "ātmany
avasthitam". One becomes situated in the spiritual platform. Srila Prabhupada
would give the example that, you know, you know, just, you know, endeavor or
willpower alone is not enough. If a person is blind. And there is a beautiful
painting. Maybe, the world's most beautiful painting. Say, a Mona Lisa. Or
some other painting something like that. You know. Even from the secondary point
of view, what is considered to be a very artistically magnificent. Now, if a
person just stands in front of a, you know, you know, you know, a painting. And,
you know, and, you know, you know, stares. And glares. And pears. It is not
going to much mag..., the difference. No matter how long that person stares and
glares. That person is not going to be able to see. A process is required. What
is the process? The process is a process of, you know, you know, healing. A
process of surgery. Or healing. Or whatever. By which, the person will develop
the eyes to see. So, just endeavor is not enough. There has to be guided
endeavor. So, the guided endeavor going, going on some treatment. By which, that
person can get the eyes. And see thereof. So, you know, you know, both are
"yatanto". But just by "yatanto", it is not that "paśyanty" will come. But along
with "yatanto", there has to be a transformation by which, you know, "ātmany
avasthitam". One becomes situated on the spiritual platform. Now, it may seem a
little bit, you know, you know, you know, you know, kind of a circular logic.
Which traps us. He says that, you know, to see the soul, we have to be situated
on the spiritual platform. And those who cannot see the soul, be..., you know,
be..., they, they cannot see the soul. Because they are not situated on the
spiritual platform. Now, we may wonder, what comes first? You know. If I cannot
see the soul, I will not feel inspired to become situated on the spiritual
platform. To try to advance to the spiritual level. And if I am not advancing
towards the spiritual level, I cannot see the soul. So, where does it begin? So,
we can rephrase this as, you know, two words. Perceive. And pursue. Perceive is
to see. And pursue, P, U, R, S, U, E, pursue is to go after. So, what comes
first?

Does per..., the perceiving come first? Or pursuing comes first? So, do we
perceive the spiritual platform first? And then, we will come to perceive it. Or
do we perceive it first? And then, we start purs..., pursuing it. You know. You
know. Actually, what comes first is hearing. Is submiss..., submissive hearing.
By hearing, we understand. There is a higher reality. So, you know, you know,
you know, you know, there is a higher reality. And then, that, you know,
triggers both. We get some perception of that reality. And that inspires us to
pursue it further. And then, when we pursue it more, we percei..., we perceive
it more. And then, that inspires us to pursue it further. So, we could say that
the initial, you know, initially, we have to do a little bit or pursuing. By
hearing. When we hear, by that, we start pursuing. You know. That itself is a
pursuing, basically. Seeking it. That is why "ādau śraddhā". With a little
faith. What is that faith? We have discussed. It is just, you know, you know,
inquisitiveness. But a serious inquisitiveness. Ok. What, what is this actually?
So, it is, it is, it may be, en..., be positive curiosity. It may not be a very
life-transforming inquisitiveness at that stage. It, if, that will, you know,
come, that stage will come later. But even if there is an initial
inquisitiveness. A positive favorable curiosity. That itself is a person. Ok.
Might people find out. What is this spiritual level? That will begin the
process. And:

        yatanto ’py akṛtātmāno
        nainaṁ paśyanty acetasaḥ

"nainaṁ paśyanty". One cannot perceive because "acetasaḥ". The consciousness is
caught at the material level. You know. So, Krishna has talked about this
"acetasaḥ". And similar concept. You know, a point of not being able to perceive
in:

        bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ
        tayāpahṛta-cetasām
        vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ
        samādhau na vidhīyate

So, "cetasām" is "apahṛta". The consciousness is abducted. Is, you know,
kid..., you know, "apahṛta" can also be kidnapped. You know. If there was a
child. When he is coming from, you know, when the child is coming from, say,
school to home. At that time, the child wants to go in a particular way. But
some kidnappers come and tuck. They take the child somewhere else. So,
"apahṛta". "apahṛta" is kidnapping. You know. So, you know, you know, you know,
you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, actually, we have to be
careful. You know. You know. If we do not want our consciousness to be, you
know, kidnapped. You know. "āpahṛta-cetasām". So, what causes the
"āpahṛta-cetasām"? That is, you know, the attachment to matter. So, if we do not
want our sou..., consciousness to be kidnapped, then we should not be kids. And
we should not take naps. What does that mean? Do not be kids. And do not kidnap.
So, do not be a kid. Do not take a nap. What does it mean? You know. We should
not be, you know, do not be a kid means do not be naive. Do not be childish. We
have to recognise that. You know. Spiritual life is a serious pursuit. And
children may be casual. Playful. Frivolous. You know. Sometimes, they like
something, so they will play. Sometimes, they do not like it. They will not
play. They will just give it up. So, they have hobbies. I think one thing as a
hobby. Tomorrow, another thing as a hobby. So, they are causal. You know. You
know. But we cannot be ki..., kids like that in our, you know, pursuit of
spiritual life. You know. We have to be serious. You know. Serious means we have
to recognise, we have grown up. When adults grow up, they recognise. Now,
normally, if we are working in a company. And sometimes, you know, we, if, say,
we have got a difficult, you know, work to do. So, if the curr.., job, if the
boss gives some work, we will basically, and we do not do the work. And then, the
boss asks, why didn't you do it? Because, we will be, say that I did not feel
like doing it. No. We will never, we will not say like that. You know. The boss
will say I do not feel like employing you. Now, get out. He shows the door then.
That does not, it does not work like that. So, we may fee..., have our feelings.
But we, our, sub..., we subordinate our feelings. So, kids are often ruled by
their feelings. But adults, at least to some extent are meant to rule their
feelings. So, you know, you know, you know, when we rule our feelings, then that
does not mean that, we are, switch off all the feelings. But then, we know when
the feeling, you know, we..., when to be guided by the feelings. And when to
subordinate, control the feelings. So, that is important. So, you know, do not
be a kid. And do not take naps. Do not take naps means we cannot, you know,
become lazy. A nap means just go off to sleep. So, we have to be constantly
alert. You know. You know. We recognise that if I have to raise to the spiritual
platform, it has to be a continuous steady pursuit. You know. If at any moment,
I lower my guards, tuck. What will happen? Maya is just waiting outside. And
maya will come. And catch me.

        nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

"nikaṭa-stha māyā" is right closed by. And just waiting. "jāpaṭiyā dhare".
Actually, the "jāpaṭiyā" pounds. And capture. That is very, you know, rela...,
where can be rela..., related very easily with kidnapping. You know. Kidnappers,
what they do is, is he, as soon as they get an opportunity, they pounds from the
child. And drag way. So, like that, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know, you know, for what we have to do is we have
to be alert. You know. So, we have to know that, you know, you know, Krishna
Consciousness is not just momentary or, you know, short, you know, short-lived
peaks of ecstasy. There has to be a steady climb in our consciousness. And the
peaks of ecstasy may sometimes come. You know. We feel very high. We feel
wonderful. Oh, I feel so happy in devotion service. I feel like dancing. And 
singing. And I feel like, you know, I feel joyful. I, you know, but then, other
times, I feel so dry. But either we feel high. Or we feel dry. We recognise that
I have to keep going on. Just this steady climb which we have to do. So, you
know, you know, those who do not do this. Those who do not do "akṛta-ātmānaḥ".
Those who do not do all this homework of situating oneself on the spiritual
platform. Situating oneself on the spiritual platform is not an abstract
concept. You know. It is not that, you know, just, if, sometimes, when we go in
a programme, there is a stage. So, you go and stand on the platform. So, is
spiritual platform like that? Some platform somewhere we go and stand on it?
You know. Situating ourselves on the spiritual platform means act..., basically,
acting at the level of the soul as much as possible. And not acting at the level
of the body. At the level of the body means what? My eyes see something
attractive. And I think, oh, this is so attractive. I want to go and, you know,
and enjoy it. My tongue, you know, eyes are, see something beautiful, you know,
see delicious, immediately, my tongue says I want to enjoy it. And we go after
it. So, acting at the bodily level means, letting the bodily desires and drives
rule our life. Acting at a spiritual level means, letting, you know, the, you
know, in, the needs and the opportunities of the soul, you know, guide our life.
Shape our life. You know. Mold our decisions. So, it is not an abstract
conception. It is not, to be situated, to be at the serious level of spiritual
platform, one does not necessarily have to be fully self-realised. You know. We
cannot be entirely at the spiritual platform right now. But we can act at the
spiritual level to a significant extent by choosing to not let the bodily drives
and desires, you know, rule our life. So, those who do not do this, those who
let the bodily desires and drives rule their life, what happens is "acetasaḥ".
For them, their consciousness gets, you know, dragged away from Krishna. Krishna
has used the word "acetasaḥ" also earlier, you know, you know, you know, in the
Bhagavad Gita. Even He is talking about the faithless people. You know. You
know. You know. You know. Here. Yeah. Ok. So, He talks about the faithful people
in 3.31. And 3.32, He talks about the faithless.

        ye tv etad abhyasūyanto
        nānutiṣṭhanti me matam
        sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān
        viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

So, "acetasaḥ", He says. Those who are envious of Me. Those who are, you know,
those who do not have faith in my words. You know. You know. Even if they have
knowledge. "sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān". Their knowledge get destroyed. Because
"viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ". "acetasaḥ". Their consciousness gets dragged away.
Dragged away from Krishna. So, "acetasaḥ". You know. You know. You know. Now,
when, you know, here, Krishna is using the word "acetasaḥ". So, "cetasaḥ" is,
"cetasaḥ" is related with "cetana". Consciousness. So, "acetasaḥ" means, one is
not conscious. So, now, we are actually always conscious of something. You know.
If somebody is, you know, absent-minded. Now, when we say absent-minded, that
does not mean the, the person's, you know, does not have a mind. You know. You
know. That the person is absent the mind. The mind is not where we are. The,
where the body is physically present, the mind is not there. So, like that,
"acetasaḥ" means not that the person does not have consciousness. The person has
consciousness. And the person is conscious. But the person is not conscious of
what one should be conscious of. So, "acetasaḥ" means, what, if, one should, one
should be conscious of spiritual reality. But instead, you know, because of
excessive material. Excessive and unregulated material desires. And material
attachments. One is not conscious of Krishna. One is simply conscious of matter.
You know. You know. So, you know, how, how can this happen? You know. We may go
to the temple. And there is beautiful darshan over there. Beautiful deities are
there. But if we are agitated by lust, you know, we may, may not be taking
darshan of Krishna. We may be fantasising about other things. When we are meant
to take darshan of Krishna. So, Krishna is right in front of us. And we may
arise, may also be in Krishna. But, you know, if, you know, we are captivated
and fantisising about other things. Then, "acetasaḥ". The cons..., the, we are in
front of Krishna. But what we are not in front of, we are not looking at
Krishna. So, "acetasaḥ". So:

        yatanto ’py akṛtātmāno
        nainaṁ paśyanty acetasaḥ

So, even if one endeavors. But if one does not striving to situate in the
spiritual platform, then, you know, one may, cannot perceive the spiritual
reality. You know. You know. Then, we may say, what exactly is the, is the
"yatanto" in the second case referring to? "yat...", "kṛtā", "yatanto" refers to
misinformed endeavor. Misinformed endeavor means that as I said earlier, you
know, a person, blind person just trying to stare. And stare. And stare. And
glare. And glare. And glare. At a painting to, in order to see it. That endeavor
is misinformed. And it is unproductive. But when there is well-informed. Then,
end.., for, endeavor, you know, when, you know, guid..., guided endeavor. Then,
that becomes productive. So, the difference between the two is, you know,
you know, proper, you know, improper endeavor. And the proper and improper is
determined by whether it is guided or not guided. So, Prabhupada explains that,
you know, you know, you know, you know, you know:

"Even though they are endeavoring in a so-called yoga system,"

"so-called yoga system", Prabhupada says. "Even though they are endeavoring".

"they are not self-realized."

And they:

"cannot understand the process of the transmigration of the soul."

That means they have a hazy conception. Of, not, not self-realised means, they
have a hazy conception. Of the soul. You know. You know. You know. Because of
the hazy conception, you know, they, you know, they do not, you know, b..., you
know, make, take tangible steps towards self-realisation. You know. And that is
why they have neither comprehension. Nor transformation resulting from it. You
know. Let us look at the next verse. You know. So, from here, the next section
is starting. The next section is, how Krishna assists us in our material
existence. And our spiritual endeavor. What is the connection between the two?
How Krishna assists us, You know. You know. In our material existence, that is
described from verses 12 to 14. And our spiritual endeavor, that is described in
verse 15. So, the correlation between this and the previous verse is that, you
know, you know, you know, you know, the previous verse said that, you know, the
people should have "jñāna-cakṣu". So, that is, they can perceive the "ātma". But
the question comes up that what if a person does n..., is not able to perceive
the "ātma"? What if a person is at the bodily level, itself? And that the person
is not, you know, so re..., you know, so developed in consciousness. Or
thinking, you know, to be able to perceive the soul. Then, how can such a, can
such a person make spiritual advancement? Or, for, is it that for such a person,
spiritual advancement is blocked? No. It is not blocked. You know. Actually,
Krishna starts talking about Himself. And how the "jñāna-cakṣu" can work in a
different way. See, the "jñāna-cakṣu" can, you know, perceive the "ātma". Or we
can, you know, work. And try, we can instead tr..., try to perceive the hand of
God. We can try to perceive Krishna's role in our life. You know. You know. The,
what is the difference between the two? Perceiving, you know, perceiving, you
know, you know, say, attma-tattva? Actually, perceiving attma-tattva is,
requires, you know, more, you know, critical thinking. More, you know,
intellectual sophistication. More, you know, depth of penetration. And
contemplation. That is not always easy. But even if somebody is at the material
level of consciousness, one is not able to perceive spiritual reality, does not
matter. Even if the person is at the material level of consciousness, you know,
one can see the hand of God, you know, in material things. That whatever
material things we have, even those, we cannot get by ourselves. Even those come
to us by the arrangement of the Lord. You know. You know. That is what we talk
about in the next verse. So, actually, let us look at this. You know. So, you
know, get jnana by perceiving higher arrangement in material world. So, we want
"jñāna-cakṣu". We cannot perceive the "ātma". But still, we can, you know,
re..., you know, get some jnana. We can start perceiving the spiritual reality
in terms of Krishna's, you know, hand. You know. So, higher arrangement, so, the
12th verse talks about cosmological arrangement. 13th verse talks about the
terrestrial arrangement. 14th verse talks about the physiological arrangement.
And the 15th verse talks about the spiritual arrangement. You know. You know.
So, cosmological refers to the universe. Terrastrial refers to the earth. And
physical refers to the body. So, we can say, the, this atma is encased. In various
coverings. The "ātma" encased. So, the "ātma" is, at a broad level, we are in
the material world. That is our broad material, that is the broad material
covering around us. Then, within the material world, we are on a particular
planet. We are on the earth. So, that is referring to the terrastrial. So,
there, also, in this particular enclosure, also, we need some facilities for
living. And then, within that, we are living on this ea..., in this body. So,
body also needs to be maintained. So, let us look at how Krishna arranges, you
know, for our, you know, maintenance. We are looking at some examples. You know.
You know. So, 15.12.

        yad āditya-gataṁ tejo
        jagad bhāsayate ’khilam
        yac candramasi yac cāgnau
        tat tejo viddhi māmakam

"yad āditya-gataṁ tejo". "yad āditya-gataṁ". You know. So, "āditya-gataṁ" is the
sunshine. So, "āditya" is sun. "āditya-gatam" is sunshine. So, you know, in the,
"yad āditya-gataṁ tejo". The splendor of the sunshine. "jagad bhāsayate
’khilam". So, the whole universe gets illumined by "jagad bhā...". By the sun.
And then, "yac candramasi yac cāgnau". The moon. And the fire. "tat tejo viddhi
māmakam". "māmakam". That "tejaḥ" comes from Me. "viddhi māmakam". You know. You
know. You know. You know. That effulgence comes from Me. What this means is, you
know, "yad āditya-gataṁ tejo". So, now, Krishna has used these three. Same
three. "ādit...", you know, is, the sun. The moon. And the fire. Earlier in 5., in
15.6.

        na tad bhāsayate sūryo
        na śaśāṅko na pāvakaḥ

So, you know, you know, you know, you know, here, the same, you know, three
objects are used. All the names are different. There, it was "sūryaḥ". Here, it
is "āditya". There, it was, you know, "śaśāṅkaḥ". Here, it is "candra". And
there, it was "pāvakaḥ". Here, it is "agnau". But the objects refer to the same.
So, the point is what Krishna is saying that in the spiritual world, these are
not required. Because spiritual world, everything is self-luminous. But that is
not the case in the material world. In the material world, the reality is not
self-luminous. So, in, if we need sources of illumination. So, the things are,
things are not self-luminous. So, these are the three, you know, representative
sources of illumination. And actually, they are not just sources of
illumination. They are also sources of nutr..., you know, sun, if we consider,
is also source of nutrition. So, the nutrition also takes place by the
arrangement of the sun. Sun gives energy. By which, forces, this is, happens.
And then, the, we get, you know, food. But even if you consider illumination.
Still, at a universal level, without the energy coming from the sun, nothing
would have been possible. You know. You know. So, now, Krishna is saying, saying
that the important is "tat tejo viddhi māmakam". That their effulgence comes
from Me. Now, what do we mean by this point? That their effulgence comes from
Me. So, is it that, you know, the sun is having its effulgence? And, you know,
the sun has some other source from which the effulgence comes? Now, this may
seem to be disproved by modern science. You know. You know. You know. Modern
science will say that there is particular process. Of course, that process,
sometimes, you know, you know, there is one, some, one explanation of the
process. But there is sometimes alternative explanations, also, given. You know.
They debate. But whatever. Scientists will say that there is some mechanical
process. By which, the sun is giving light. So, where does God come into the
picture? See, the understanding is that the mechanical process is a partial
explanation. What started the mechanical process, what, you know, you know,
sustains the mechanical process, that is the arrangement of God. So, you know,
you know, "tat tejo viddhi māmakam" means that this illumination is made by My
arrangement. We may study the arrangement. And studying the arrangement can be
helpful. But beyond the arrangement is the arranger. We may study the design.
But beyond the design is the designer. You know. So, "tat tejo viddhi māmakam".
Krishna is saying that it is I who make all these arrangements. By which, you
can live, you know, by which, you know, ill..., illumination is possible. And
existence becomes possible. So, this is, you know, Kri..., the, Krishna, you
know, Krishna's arrangement at the cosmological level. So, Srila Prabhupada
explains in the purport, it begins by saying:

"The unintelligent cannot understand how things are taking place."

The unintelligent. So, this unintelligent refers to "vimūḍhā". "vimūḍhā
nānupaśyanti". You know. The unintelligent cannot understand how things are
happening. So, you know, you know, that means, they just see, oh, the sun is
there. It is there. You know. Sun gives light. Very good. Enjoy the light. But
yes, where, that is what, that is how the animals live. You know. When the sun
comes, they start, you know, they start, the birds start chirping. And the
animals may start, if they are not knocked-on animals, then animals wake up. And
then, they start moving around. So, that is what the animals do. Animals do not
think about why. You know. They just think, ok, things are there. Yes. Season
has come. I will enjoy now. Season has gone. Now, what should we do? So, they do
not really think about, you know, why things are. They can, so many, so, animals
can only think about how. Ok. How can I get food? How can I get, you know, you
know, you know, a mate? How can I get shelter? They cannot think about in much
beyond that. We humans beings however can think, is not only about the how
questions. But the why questions. So, science largely focuses on answering the
how question. The how question means, ok, what is the mechanism by which the sun
gives light? That is fine. That is, you know, there may be some mechanism. And
investigating that mechanism can give us some understanding. But, you know, why?
Why does the sun exist at all? Why does the sun give light? Now, if we look at
the uni..., you know, even if we consider from the perspective of modern
cosmology, you know, then the sun is at a particular distance from the earth.
So, you know, even if we assume that life requires the kind of conditions that,
you know, modern science considers necessary. That means oxygen. And water. And
a particular temperature range. So, then, we find the, that actually, according
to modern science itself, if earth would have been just slightly closer to the
sun, you know, if the earth would have been, say, in the position of, you know,
you know, you know, Venus. You know. Instead of, you know, you know, you know,
its own position. So, we have, you know, so, we have, you know, you know, the
earth is a third planet according to modern cosmology. So, then, if it had been
in second position, then what would happen is that the earth would have beome
too hot for life as we know, it to exist. And if the earth had been in a
position, just slightly away from the, you know, sun. That is at the position of
Mars. Then, it would have been too cold. And again, life would have been
difficult. So, either way, the point is that, you know, now, in the Vedic
culture says that life exists everywhere. And life can exist in all possible
conditions. In, in different possible conditions. Because the "ātma" is not
affected by any material condition. The "ātma" is "sarva-gataḥ". And "nainaṁ
chin...", and it is:

        acchedyo ’yam adāhyo ’yam
        akledyo ’śoṣya eva ca

It is not destroyed by anything material. So, that is, in principal, that is
correct. But now, when we are looking at things, you know, this "jñāna-cakṣu",
we are trying to look from the point of view of people who are at the material
level of consciousness. How they can begin to appreciate God. So, you know, you
know, in the, you know, initia..., initial stages of scientific research, when
scientists study the universe, actually, if we look at all the pioneering
scientist, Newton, Galileo, and, you know, i...,, that is right at the start of
scientific revolution. But throughout the centuries, you know, the leading
scientist, they were all believers in God. You know. If we consider Kelvin. Or
Pasteur. Or, you know, any of the other scientist of the later centuries, also,
19th century, also. Almost all of them believed in God. And the reason for their
belief was not just religious. You know. Religion, at that time, you know, you
know, was taking a beating. Christianity was taking a beating. But still, there
were many scientists who continued to believe. Not just because of, you know,
their religious, you know, you know, predispositions. But also because of their
scientific conclusions. That, you know, they felt that, why they study of,
li..., you know, science, they had unconvered such a majestic, you know, you
know, you know, you know, majestic order. Majestic, you know, no..., harmony.
Majestic, you know, intricacy that they said, this was, this is, reflects a
super human mind. A supreme intelligence. So, it was only later that af..., you
know, after Darwin's theory of evolution. And subsequent ideas. That science
became overcon..., scientists became overconfident. And they felt that there is
no need for God. And they rejected God. So, you know, we have discussed earlier
about how there is theism. There is deism. And there is atheism. So, theism is
the understanding that God is the creator. And the controller. Deism is the
idea is, the God is the creator. But not the controller. And atheism is the
idea is, God is neither the creator. Nor the controller. So, that God does
not exist only. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, i..., science, you
know, itself can at the very least help us to move towards deism. That God is
the creator. Things cannot have started on their own. But if we let science move
forward, then it, science not only may be the deistic idea, conception. But also
a theistic conception. Thei..., you know, so, theism is the idea that God is not
just the creator. But also the controller. So, that we will see in 15.15. When
we come to it. See, it, deism is the idea that the universe is like a clock.
Now, a clock surely requires a maker. But after the clock is made, now, the
clock has been given to people. You know. Clock has been handed over to the
customer. And now, the creator of the clock does not have any control. You know.
The clock has made by a mechanism. And clock runs according to the mechanism.
So, that is the idea of many scientists. That the universe is like a clock. And
it functions according to its own rules. So, the mechanisms have been set up.
And functions according to those mechanisms. That is true. That is the way,
normal way, you know, scien..., you know, of things function. But, you know, and
scientists do not deny that. Even theistic scientists do not deny that. That
there are mechanisms. But, you know, where do those mechanisms come from? The
mechanisms are set up by the Supreme Lord. And, you know, they are set up by the
Supreme Lord. And by His, under His supervision, by His guidance, you know,
things work. "mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ". So, the word "adhyakṣeṇa" indicates that
Krishna is overseeing. He is not directly involved. He does not touch material
nature. But He oversees. But His sight alone is enough for, for the actions of
material nature to take s..., place. "mayādhyakṣeṇa". So, you know, you know,
that we look at the majesty of material nature, we understand that, yes, this is
all by Krishna's arrangement. You know. You know. So, from the point of view of,
you know, the Bhagavad Gita, here, Krishna is telling, revealing, so, this is
just, this, one example. But from this example, we can understand the underlying
point that Krishna is saying. That even if somebody is at the material level of
consciousness, still, at the material level of consciousness, also, for
existence and enjoyment, there is so many background arrangements needed. And
those background arrangements do not come by chance. They come by divine plan.
And through that, recognition of that divine plan, one can appreciate the
arrangement of the Supreme Lord. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada explains
that, you know, so:

"Without His mercy there cannot be sun, without His mercy there cannot be moon,
and without His mercy there cannot be fire, and without the help of sun, moon
and fire, no one can live. These are some thoughts to provoke Kṛṣṇa
consciousness in the conditioned soul."

Prabhupada uses the interesting word "provoke". Provoke, you know, generally
means out, provoking in terms of negative. Provocative. You know. Provocative
sights. Provocative sense objects. Provoke. So, the idea of provoke is, there is
a forceful shaking up. So, by, if we contemplate seriously, a person gets
forcefully shaken up. That is why I think, it is, you know, Pla..., Pascal. I
have written about this in my book, "Science & Spirituality". You know. You
know. Pascal, I think, who said that, you know, a little of science takes a man
away from God. But immersions in science brings that person back to God. So,
little of science gives a person in..., infatuation. Intoxication. Yes. I know
everything. I do not need God. We can explain everything without God. But when
one goes deep into science. Then, one starts understanding. Oh, actually, God is
required. God is essential. So, that is how, you know, things move forward. Now,
you know, so, when we thin..., contemplate on the nature of the universe
seriously, it provokes Krishna Consciousness. It forces us to become, you know,
recognise the hand of God. And, you know, become conscious of Him. So, for,
after the cosmological, now, let us look at the terrestrial arrangement. So, you
know, you know:

        gām āviśya ca bhūtāni
        dhārayāmy aham ojasā
        puṣṇāmi cauṣadhīḥ sarvāḥ
        somo bhūtvā rasātmakaḥ

You know. "gām āviśya". You know. So, "gām" is the planets. "āviśya". Entering
into them. "ca bhūtāni". So, living entities, also. "dhārayāmy aham ojasā". You
know. "dhārayāmy" is to maintain. "aham ojasā". "ojasā" is by My energy.
"oj...", the word "oja" is generally refers to energy. So, Krishna says, I am
sustaining all the planets along with the living entities. You know. By My
energy. How? "āviśya". By entering into them. You know. Then, further, He says,
you know, you know, you know, "puṣṇāmi cauṣadhīḥ sarvāḥ". So, "puṣṇāmi". You
know. It is I, I am nouri..., nourishing, the "auṣadhya...", "auṣadhīḥ". The
word "auṣad" often be used in conversations and used to refer to medicine. But
also, in general, refers to vegetables. And plants. And herbs. You know. So,
they are all, they are sources of medicines. And medicinal components. So,
"puṣṇāmi cauṣadhīḥ sarvāḥ". So, actually, I nourish all the plants and
vegetables. How? Especially, the vegetables especially? "somo bhūtvā
rasātmakaḥ". You know. You know. As the moon, I provide the "rasātmakaḥ". I
provide the juice that nourishes the vegetables. You know. You know. You know.
"rasātmakaḥ". So, here, what is happening? Krishna is illustrating a principle
again. What is that principle? That He provides arrangements. So, now, we may,
you know, say that, you know, why are the planets sustained in their, you know,
particular orbits? It is because of gravity. So, when Krishna is saying, it is
I who sustain. You know. You know. So, what does it mean? I who sustain? So, how
do we understand this? Actually, ultimately, gravity is also, you know, the,
be..., acting by the will of Krishna. You know. All the la..., rules of material
nature, the laws of material nature, they are all acting by the will of Krishna.
So, it is Krishna who has made the arrangement for the force of gravity. And,
you know, even scientists, you know, you know, you know, you know, admit that
often, their, you know, that is exp..., what they call as explanations are often
descriptions. They are not really explanations. What does it mean? What is the
difference between a description and an explanation? Description simply means
that, ok, something is there. And we describe. This is how it is. This is how it
is. This is how it is. Explanation means we give causes. You know. You know. So,
now, if we ask, what is gravity? Gravity is, say, I mean a non-technical. A
generic definition. We may say, gravity is the force that kee.., keeps the
planets in their, you know, you know, in their orbits. And then, we, ok, then,
what is the, what keeps the planets in their orbits? Gravity. So, you know,
what is happening over here? What is gravity? The force that keep planets in
their orbit. And what i..., what is the force that, what keeps planets in their
orbit? That is gravity. So, this is circular. So, where is the explanation over
here? So, actually, just naming a pre-existing phenomena, is it really an
explanation of that phenomena? Scientists may say, no, we have got the equation
for it. Yes. Equation is fine. But, you know, even Newton himself admitted that,
actually, you know, in, you know, one of the pee..., peers of Newton was
Leibniz. And Newton, and Leibniz said that, you know, this whole idea of gravity
i..., is smacks of occultism. Occultism is, you know, said to be unscientific.
You know. It, the whole idea of spirits and e..., energies going through. Space.
He says, what is the medium? Through which, you know, the whole force of gravity
is coming from another planet to this planet. And how is it, you know,
connected? And he says, what is the explanation for this? So, Newton frankly
admitted, he says, I am not talking about, con..., you know, you know, ontology.
Or I am not talking about the nature of existence. What is the source of this
force. I am simply giving, you know, mathematical formulation for an observed
phenomena. So, we see that planets moving in particular orbits. And I am giving
mathematical equation by which we can explain those motions. So, you know, you
know, you know, to, you know, to whatever length it goes, it is useful. But, you
know, the point is again that here we are not going to causes. Now, of course,
Einstein later on came up with the idea of space-time. And therein, he said
that, you know, you know, gravity is a characteristic of space, time. Now, I do
not want to go into science too much. We are studying Bhagavad Gita here. But
the point is that that is also a piling of concepts. You know. First, to explain
an observed phenomena, we post.., postulated an invisible concept called gravity.
And then, after that, for, you know, explaining, you know, as a part of
an explanation for gravity, we postulated another concept called space-time. So,
we are just piling up concepts. So, wha..., what exactly is being explained?
What is at the bottom of the inferen..., chain of inference which is solidly
routed? There is nothing. So, that is why there is a serious issue over here.
There is serious problem here. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know.
You know. You know. Now, when we move forward. And recognise that, ultimately,
Srila Prabhupada would use the example that if a person is observing, if a
person, normally, when we see light, when we are moving along in an area, where
there is light. Light. Light. And suddenly, light goes. Stops. We may wonder,
what happened? Has the power got switched off? Or we look at, ok, maybe, there,
there is power over there. But the power is reached. The light's reach does not
come over here. So, what happens is, we understand that darkness is the absence
of light. On the other hand, you know, you know, if a person has always lived in
light. And after living in light for a long time, that person suddenly comes
out. And then, that person comes out. And then, starts looking. Ok. Where is
this, you know, you know, when, suddenly, that person sees light, then the
person asks, oh, how has darkness produ..., provide..., produced light?
Actually, the, now, from that person's limited experience, the question seems to
be natural. And valid. Ok. I was in darkness. And suddenly, I am seeing light.
So, darkness was what I had experienced. So, from darkness, light has come. So,
how did it come about? But the person has got the question all wrong. Actually,
the question is not how darkness produces light. Because darkness never produces
light. Rather, darkness is nothing. But the absence of light. So, similarly, to
try to explain how matter, you know, and material, at the material level,
everything can be explained. You know. Including the intricacy of all the
arrangements without considering any ultimate cause, that is a, you know, you
know, that is a, you know, invalid understanding. That is incorrect
understanding. So, we got all the questions wrong. So, consciousness comes
first. And consciousness arranges matter. It is not that matter produces
consciousness. That is what Krishna is pointing towards in this verse. When He
says that, actually, it is I who sustain the planets. So, there may be some
material mechanism. But there is Krishna. So, presence, within everything, that
sustains it. So, you know, "dhārayāmy aham ojasā". You know. "dhārayāmy". So,
Prabhupada explains that, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know:

"By His strength and energy, all moving and nonmoving things stay in their
place."

That:

"It is said in the Vedic hymns that because of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead the sun is shining and the planets are steadily moving."

So, you know, you know, it is by His arrangement that all these things are
happening. You know. You know. You know. So:

"Were it not for Him, all the planets would scatter, like dust in air, and
perish."

It will perish. So, Prabhupada gives the example, also, of a, you know, you
know, person who is, you know, of the soul. Just as the soul gives, you know,
you know, life to the body. Matter is heavy. You know. But the presence of soul
makes matter light. You know. You know. And then, the person moves around. You
know. You know. You know. You know. You know. When, you know, the soul dies, you
know, one soul, when its presence can, you know, you know, make the body run
around. Dance. And, you know, skimp. And play. But, you know, you know, when the
soul dies, and what happens? The body is so heavy. That one person finds it on,
impossible to lift. Actually, often, when there is a, you know, doing the
crema..., w..., crema..., procession has to be taken to crematory. And
sometimes, four people required. Even the four people are not enough. Their
shoulder gets, you know, starts paining. And they keep changing. You know.
Maybe, you take. You take. You carry. You carry. So, why is it like that?
Because, you know, you know, actually, it is so, you know, it is so tiny. You
know. The soul is so tiny. But it is so powerful. You know. Soul brings, you
know, brings en..., its energy. And their body is active. So, similarly,
Prabhupada writes it, actually, the sou..., it is Supreme Lord because of whom
everything is floating. So, when a person is alive, the person can swim along.
After that, person dies, the soul departs. The person, you know, drowns. So,
the same way, this is what happens with respect to the soul, also. With respect
to the, with respect to the general material universe, also. It is by the
presence of the Lord that everything is sustained. Now, what about this point,
about:

        puṣṇāmi cauṣadhīḥ sarvāḥ
        somo bhūtvā rasātmakaḥ

That I nourish the moon. You know. You know. Now, according to modern science,
photosynthesis is what brings about, you know, the transformation by which, you
know, you know, we can get, you know, edible food. In the pla..., through the
plant world. That is true. But Krishna is not talking about that. Krishna is
talking specifically what? "puṣṇāmi". He says "rasātmakaḥ". He says I nourish in
what sense? "rasātmakaḥ". The juice. You know. Juice comes because of, b..., of
My arrangement. And it happens through the moon. So, now, we have to know that,
you know, scientific research is never complete. You know. And science is
ever, ever evolving. So, you know, the ideas of science, that are considered
today to be, you know, you know, bedrock truths may be rejected, you know,
tomorrow as outdated ideas. You know. So, you know, you know, we should not,
there is no need to, you know, the history of time, and history of ideas have
shown that no man-made idea has, you know, survived the test of time. That, you
know, all man-made ideas which were considered infallible at one time are
eventually shown to be fallible. So, we should not put too much faith in doubt.
What does it mean to put faith in doubt? That means, you know, science may come
up with particular explanations. Material mechanisms for explaining certain
phenomena. And that may be true in limited extent. But we do not have to put
undue amount of faith in that. Because it is ultimately, you know, it is one
conception. If we look at the history of science, ought, there have been so many
different theories which have come up. Some of them have lasted for, you know,
some time. Some have lasted for more. But ultimately, the, you know, all these
explanations are incomplete. They are maybe correct in a limited perspective.
But they are not correct in the ultimate perspective. So, that is why, you know,
what we understand is, there may, there is, you know, you know, you know, if the
Lord Himself is saying that there is, He, He is providing nourishment through
the moon, then there is some mechanism which we do not know about. You know.
There are some researchers who say that, you know, there is some statist...,
some research has been done that, you know, when the vegetation is growing. Say,
when the cops are growing, if at that time, the overhead is cloudy. And the moon
is not there in the sky at night. Then, the rate of plant, you know, crop
vegetation, you know, vegetable growth is less. And when there is the moon
shining at night, the growth is more. So, this, you know, sort of empirical, you
know, research is ultimately indecisive. It may come to the right conclusion. Or
it may go to a wrong conclusion. That is why we do not focus on empirical
research. We focus on shabda. And then, to the extent, empirical research can
help us in understanding shabda, you know, we use it. But otherwise, we do not
focus on it. So, you know, now, after describing this. How Krishna is making
arrangement at the tran..., at the terrestrial level. Now, we will look at how
Krishna is making arrangement at the physiological level.

        ahaṁ vaiśvānaro bhūtvā
        prāṇināṁ deham āśritaḥ
        prāṇāpāna-samāyuktaḥ
        pacāmy annaṁ catur-vidham

You know. So, here, Krishna is now moving on to physiological, you know, you
know, arrangements that He makes. So, 12th was, you know, cosmological that He
is providing the sun, en..., ener..., energy, and the light that comes from it.
Then, 13th was terrestrial. How He is sustaining the earth. And now, it is, you
know, you know, physiological. How He is sustaining the body. So, "vaiśvānaraḥ"
is the, you know, devata who presides over digestion. You know. "ahaṁ vaiśvānaro
bhūtvā". That it is I who become, "bhūtvā" means I become "vaiśvānaraḥ". That
means "vaiśv...", it is not that there is a complete oneness between Krishna and
"vaiśvānaraḥ". But just like in the Vibhuti Yoga, you know, Chapter, some, you
know, some kind of correlation is described. There, of course, the correlation
is more in terms of, as we discussed, the one among the many, the one above the
many. You know. You know. Here, the correlation is more in terms of the, you
know, it is the, you know, "vaiśvānaraḥ" gets power at, to digest and make all
the arrangements by the grace of the Lord. Just as the sun gets power to give
light by the arrangement of the Lord. So:

        ahaṁ vaiśvānaro bhūtvā
        prāṇināṁ deham āśritaḥ

"prāṇināṁ". So, actually, this applies, not just to, you know, human beings. It
applies to all living beings. "prāṇināṁ". The word "prāṇi" refers to all living
entities. "deham āśritaḥ". You know. So, the living entities are, as 15.7 has
said "mamaivāṁśo". They are parts of Krishna. Or they are meant to live in
shelter of Krishna. But instead, now, of they have taken shelter of the body.
"deham āśritaḥ". And having taken shelter of the body, they are trying to enjoy
at the bodily level. But when they are trying to enjoy thus at the bodily level,
they themselves cannot maintain the body, you know, by their independent effort.
You know. You know. You know. We are living in a body. We think not only that
this is my body. But we think I am the body. But actually speaking, we cannot
maintain the body ourselves. "prāṇāpāna-samāyuktaḥ". You know. You know. Again,
digestion, how does it take place? Now, there may be certain chemicals involved.
And the, you know, you know, chemicals also play a role, but
"prāṇāpāna-samāyuktaḥ". That actually by the moment of "prāṇa" and "apāna", you
know, you know, the, you know, you know, in, modern science talks about
peristalsis and peristalsis, how the, you know, the food that we swallow, chew
and swallow, that goes down. Because of the different, the emotions with the,
happening in the elementary canal. That is true. Now, how do those emotions
happen? The Vedic, you know, the Gita worldview explains, the Vedic worldview
ba..., from which, you know, whi..., Gita is, on which Gita is based. It
explains that actually this happens by the moment of the airs in the body.
"prāṇāpāna-samāyuktaḥ". So, you know, you know, you know, you know, this is,
when a person is enabled to ex..., excrete. When person gets constipation, that
is because there is not adequate air to excrete the, you know, re..., waste
matter from the body. So, the "prāṇa", the airs are, the various airs are very
important in all the functions of the body. And they play a vital role even in
digestion, also. "prāṇāpāna-samāyuktaḥ". So, by keeping in balance the up..., as
Prabhupada translates, down-going air. And the up..., and the outgoing air. So:

        prāṇāpāna-samāyuktaḥ
        pacāmy annaṁ ...

I, I digest the food. What, which are the foods? "catur-vidham". So, the four
different kinds of food. We talked about these four differents, you know, kinds
of food even in our "Maṅgala-ārati". That the, you know, you know, he is,
spiritual master prepares the four different kinds of food. And offers to
Krishna. And then, you know, distributes it to everyone. So, that is the, you
know, "catur-vidh...", you know, so "catur-vidham". Four kinds of foods. There
is a chewed. Swallowed. Sucked. And then, you know, you know, licked like that.
You know. You know. So, you know, now, when we talk about these, you know,
dru..., you know, four kinds of food. Drunk, also. So, now, when we talk about
these four kinds of foods, the important point to recognise is that we can, you
know, eat the food. But after that, we do not know what happens. We cannot
digest the food ourselves. Who digest the food? Actually, it just happens as far
as we know it. You know. We do, we put a food inside. And then, it gets
digested. Only time when we think about our digestive system is when it does not
work. That is the time when we think about, oh, this is not working. Why is it
not working? So, it is a, you know, it is a blessing when it works. But we do
not think about it. As it is said, God gives. And forgives. We get. And forget.
So, therefore, if we contemplate seriously, we will recognise that, you know,
the body's functioning is not in our hands. We may provide food for the body.
That is a part of our duty to maintain the body, also. But then, even that, that
alone, that alone, if no matter how competently we do it, that alone is not
enough for the functioning of the body. After we digest the food, also, you
know, after we eat the food, it has to be digested. And how does digestion
happen? It happens by the arrangement of Krishna through "vaiśvānaraḥ". So, you
know, you know, you know, you know, we may, now, some people may say, oh, I do
not believe in all this idea of some devata supervising digestion. You know. So,
but if we think about it seriously, you know, if it is scientifically, we will
find, understand that it is a, digestion is a very complex process. It does not
work very easily. Why is it the process of digestion complex? Because digestion
requires us, you know, to, you know, you know, you know, it in..., involves
many, many complex, you know, reactions. Which transform the food into usable
energy. So, nowadays, you know, the, it is the age of transplantation. And, you
know, using, usage of artificial organs and limbs. So, people when the hand is
you know, amp..., damaged. Or amputated. Then, they use artificial hand. You
know. So, like that, they may use different, you know, you know, you know, limb.
That li..., artificial limbs. So, some researchers have been trying, that, we,
can we make an artificial digestive system? You know. That when that person
cannot digest food, then we just put a digestive machine inside. But they found
that if we try to replicate, you know, you know, try to use a ma..., machine to
digest the food, the complex is, the more, process is so complex that not a
ma..., we do not, a machine will not suffice. Actually, you know, you know, we
will need a factory. And not just a factory, a chain of factories that may
extend over several malls at times. It is complex process. You know. So, you
know, who does that actually? You know. Who does that? All those complex
reactions? No one knows who does it. You know. We just assume that it happens.
So, like that, not just the digestion. But in the elementary canal. You know.
In, not, not just digestion in the elementary canal. But all bodily functions,
very few of them are under our control. You know. There are voluntary bodily
functions. Like, say, I raise my hand. Now, I speak. These are, to some extent,
in my control. But there are involuntary bodily functions. Like, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know, so, blood circulation. Respiration. The
digestion of food. These are vital for the functioning. And even the survival of
the body. But we do not func..., you know, we do not do, you know, them. It is
Krishna who does them. Researchers have found out that if we, you know, when a
person is sick and is about to die, at that time, you know, you know, sometimes,
artificial ventillation is used. So, breathing can be made, you know,
artifi..., can be sustained artificially. So, like that, some of, some of the
functionalities of the body can be artificially ex..., but externally sustained.
But actually, this is very expensive. And to sust..., to keep a person
artificially alive for even a day costs thousands and thousands of rupees. You
know. Even more, also. And if it has to be done for several days, it costs even
much, much more. So, act..., you know, now, when we have to spend so much, we,
first of all, we cannot do those functions ourselves. We have to use external
machines to do them. And when we do them, using the external machines, also,
such a, lot, it costs so much. So, who is it, you know, doing, just, doing it
normally? Just to dismiss it away by saying that it all happens by chance. Or by
nature. It is no explanation. You know. Yes. It is not by chance. It is so
well-designed. And it is not by nature alone. Because nature, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know, is not a, you know, nature is not a, you
know, in itself intelligent. Nature does not have consciousness as purpose. So,
there has to be a being with consciousness and purpose. Who is overseeing it.
So, when we understand thus, that actually, "deham āśritaḥ". We have taken
shelter of the body. But the body is ultimately sheltered by Krishna, only. So,
we cannot move away from the shelter of Krishna. We are always dependent on
Krishna. And even when we are turning away from Krishna, we are still resting on
Krishna, only. We are still dependent on Krishna for His, you know, merciful
arrangements so that we can, you know, get, we can live at the material level,
also, properly. So, to live at the material level, to enjoy at the material
level, also, we need Krishna's arrangement. You know. In the "Ramayana", there
is, you know, "Rāvaṇa", when he sees Sita. For he is about to kidnap her. He is
flattering her. By talking about her beauty. And he says that, you know, your
beauty is so great that I think after making you, the creator must have re...,
retired. Because the creator must have thought that I cannot make anyone
more beautiful than, this is the perfection of My beauty. So, even "Rāvaṇa"
recognises that I did not make this beauty. So, but still, he thinks that this
beauty is meant for my enjoyment. So, even if we want to enjoy sense objects,
who makes those sense objects? We do not make them. They are actually made by
the Supreme Lord. They are made by the Supreme Lord. So, that is, you know, the
important thing that we need to understand. That ultimately, it is the Lord who
creates everything. It is He who is the sustainer. The maintainer. It is He who
is the, you know, you know, con..., take..., caretaker of the body. It is He who
is the, you know, arran..., who is the arranger of all bodily, you know,
necessities. In terms of internal functioning. So, by recognising this, we can
see, you know, we can develop the "jñāna-cakṣu". That Krishna is maintaining us
at all times. And even when we want material sur..., whe..., whether it is
survival at the material level. Or it is enjoyment at the material level,
ultimately, we ourselves cannot do either. We cannot even survive. And nor can
we give, you know, ourselves create the sense objects for enjoyment. So, in this
way, even if we cannot perceive the attma-tattva. Even if our consciousness is
at material level, at the material level, we can see the benedictory nature of
the Lord. You know. We can see His, you know, arrangements. And thereby, learn
to be, learn to develop appreciation for Him. Learn to start app...,
appreciating and connecting with the spiritual reality. With the supreme
spiritual reality, Krishna, who is maintaining the material reality so that we
can live and, you know, you know, you know, and do our material things in this
world. And this is the first step in developing "jñāna-cakṣu". And then, Krishna
does not just arrange for our material, you know, you know, material life. But
He also, His primary purpose is to elevate us to spiritual level of
consciousness. And that is what He talks about in the next verse. Which we will
discuss in the next class.

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
