Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1V_DrRXbnF8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=1V_DrRXbnF8&redir_token=3VshRMuo9uu46n5BAIi6RGPlop58MTU0ODQ4OTg3M0AxNTQ4NDAzNDcz&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_133_-_Bhagavad_Gita_16.11-16.17_-_The_demoniac%27s_ruinous_obsession_with_lust_and_greed_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the, you know, 16th Chapter. We discussed, you know, the errors. And the
disasters of, you know, of the demoniac world view. And like, living. Now, we
will continue that. And the demons are motivated by lust. And by greed. They
want to enjoy sense gratification. For that, they want money. So, dharma. Arta.
Kama. Moksha. These four are the, you know, you know, they form a balanced world
view. But the demons want to remove dharma out. And they want to cut off moksha,
also. So, artha and kama is also, all are, is all that they want. And Krishna
talks about the, how:

        bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ
        tayāpahṛta-cetasām

So, "bhoga" is kama. And "aiśvarya" is artha. And both of these abduct the soul
away. So, let us look at the verses. So, now, right now, in the overview part if
we see, you know, you know, what we are looking at is the activities of the
demoniac. So, how do they act? We will look at this.

        cintām aparimeyāṁ ca
        pralayāntām upāśritāḥ
        kāmopabhoga-paramā
        etāvad iti niścitāḥ

        āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ
        kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ
        īhante kāma-bhogārtham
        anyāyenārtha-sañcayān

So, "cintām aparimeyāṁ ca". "cintām" is anxiety. "aparimeyāṁ ca". Unlimited
anxiety. Immeasurable anxiety. "pralayāntām upāśritāḥ". "pralayāntām". Until the
moment of "pralay". So, "pralay", as we have discussed earlier can refer to
cosmic destruction. Or it can be, re..., refer to the destruction at the time of
death of within a person. "pralayāntām upāśritāḥ". "upāśritāḥ". "upāśritāḥ". So,
until the moment of death, they are filled with anxiety. In fact, they have
taken shelter of those anxieties. Now, why would somebody take shelter of
anxieties? Actually, one does not take shelter of anxieties. But one takes
shelter of something that leads to anxieties. What is that? You know.
"kāmopabhoga-paramā". "kāma-upabhoga". The enjoyment of sense gratification. Of
lust. Of sensuality. "paramāḥ". "paramāḥ" is supreme. That Prabhupada translate
that that sense, they have ascertained it, sense gratification is the prime
necessity of life. "paramāḥ". Prabhupada in the word to word translation put it,
"the highest goal of life". They think that, yeah, you know, the, that,
everything in life is meant to give us "kāma-upabhoga". "etāvad iti niścitāḥ".
"etāvad". You know. This they have ascertained. This is certainty. "iti
niścitāḥ". "āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ". "āśā-pāśa". They are bound by desires. And
how many desires? "śatair baddhāḥ". Hundreds of desires.
"kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ". "kāma-krodha". Lust and anger. They are, they have sold
themselves out to lust and anger. "īhante kāma-bhogārtham". And for the sake of
"kāma-bhogā", "īhante". For the sake of enjoying sense gratification.
"anyāyenārtha-sañcayān". So, "a-sañcayān" is to collect. So, "anyā" is
injustice. Immorality. Illegality. So, you know, you know, they immorally
collect wealth. How they collect wealth immorally will be discussed in the next
verse. So, let us look at this verse a little bit more. So, you know, you know,
this verse talks about, first and foremost, "cintām aparimeyāṁ ca". So, you
know, in life, we can either do "cintān". Or we do "cintā". "cintān" is
contemplation. Especially contemplation on the Supreme Lord. On the higher truth
of life. And the highest truth is Krishna. So, contemplation on Krishna is
"cintān". So, "cintām a...", if we do not do "cintān", if our mind does not have
a steady, satisfying, stabilising, you know, you know, object of thought, then
the mind naturally thinks about worldly things. And when we think about worldly
things, the result is, because none, no worldly thing i..., is ever-lasting. It
cannot offer us any shel..., you know, lasting shelter. So, therefore, the
result is "cintām". You know. If we think about sense objects, then there is
"cintām". Whether I will get it or not. If I get it, will it stay with me or
not? If it stays with me, how long will it stay with me? Will it go away when,
future? You know. "cintām aparimeyāṁ ca". And actually, these anxieties are
immeasurable. Immeasurable. Why? Because there are so many desires. And each of
the desires leads to anxieties. You know. So, and until when do the anxieties
last? "pralayāntām". You know. Even until the moment of death. We just stay on
in anxieties. On. And on. And on. And on. You know. Kali Yuga is so perverse
that, you know, all the troubles have become multiplied. Especially, in our, you
know, in the modern times where people have gone further and further away from
God. Why is that? Because the important point is to recognise that, you know,
when people do not have a stabilising shelter, then they are left at the mercy
of the mind's vagaries. And the mind takes them here. Buffets them. Here and
there. And wherever the mind goes, they, their thoughts go. And because the
mind is restless, they remain restless. So, you know, you know, you know, this
is a broad principle which acro..., cuts across, you know, religious boundaries.
And then, Saint Augustine said that, you know, You, oh, God, oh, Lord, you have
made us, you know, for seeking each, a rest on You. And without You, we find
nei..., we never find any rest. So, "cintām aparimeyāṁ ca". Immeasurable anxiety
remains. And, you know, you know, we see that one of the primary defining
characteristics of the modern civilisation is "cintām". That wherever modern
civilisation has gone, there, you know, the, you know, stress has come about.
So, there are, there is basic trouble in the material world. Vaikuntha. Kuntha
is, this world is kuntha. The, that means there is anxiety in this world. That
is true. But the modern anxiety is far, far, you know, far, far le..., you know,
levels more. Many levels more. That is because it is actually "cintām".
"cintām". It is crea..., there is so much pride, you know, so much pressure. So
many things to do. So many, so many uncertainties. And so many complications.
You know. So, because of "cintām aparimeyāṁ ca". So, you know, you know, you
know, you know, and stress itself is one problem. But stress according to
World Health Organisation, you know, stress and mental health problems are going
to be the biggest problems. You know. In the current century. Biggest health
problems. Biggest, you know, health challenge. So, AIDS. Cancer. Heart attack.
These are the major killers. But stress is also, you know, you know, the huge
threat. Which, you know, not only takes its own t..., all dir..., takes its all
directly. But also, contributes to a variety of mental problems. There are
anxiety disorders that peo...., people have. And there is, you know, there is,
actually, according to some health researchers, you know, in many western
societies. What is called as an anxiety epidemic. Anxiety epidemic means there
is so much anxiety among the people that, you know, there are people who have
a righteous of disorders. And, you know, mental, you know, and men..., mental
problems which all, you know, comprise the anxiety epidemic. So, you know, he
says, there is an eight epidemic. Or there are, there can be a, you know, you
know, epidemic of TB. Or, you know, different diseases. So, anxiety.

Now, we may say, anxiety, cool down, man. Do not worry. Do not worry. Now, do
not worry is a very simple statement to say. But for people who are afflicted by
anxiety, giving up anxiety is not easy. And especially, this anxiety becomes
manifold. When, you know, the, the, we may not think about why the anxiety is
there. And, you know, people do not even realise it. Anxiety comes because of
desires and attachments. So, the more our desires and attachments, the greater
is our anxiety. You know. You know. "kāmopabhoga-paramā". So,
"kāmopabhoga-paramā". So, when we have that desire to enjoy sense gratification,
You know. And we make that the supreme goal of life. Then, everything becomes
centered on that. So, if I try to enjoy the sense objects, will I be able to
enjoy?  No. Will I get that object? No. Will it stay with me? Or there are so
many complications come up because of, you know, you know, because of that
desire for sense gratification. So, "cintām aparimeyāṁ ca". You know. You know.
So, you know, the, both the "Avantī brāhmaṇa". And the "Avadhut brāhmaṇa". These
are the two, you know, re..., renunciates in the "Bhāgavatam" among the many
renunciates. Who speak out. And they give profound realisations. So, "paśyāmi
dhanināṁ kleśaṁ". So, the "Avantī brāhmaṇ...", the "Avadhut brāhmaṇa", in the
Seventh Canto says "paśyāmi". I am seeing what? "dhanināṁ kleśaṁ"'. "kleśaṁ".
People are simply in misery. You know. where thi..., "virtaya arte haya". And
the "Avantī brāhmaṇa" says, "virtaya arte haya". "virtaya". In futile, "arte
haya", person works extremely hard. Craves. And slaves for, you know, gaining
wealth. But ultimately, what one gets is anxiety. So, the more we are attached
to things, the more we suffer the anxieties. You know. Once, I wrote a poem
about this that, you know, you know, you know, people in the parties are, seen
to be cheers. And that is seen as a sign of celebration. But what is often the
reality, their hearts are filled with fears. Their minds are pierced by desires.
You know. These two things. You know. Fears. "cintām aparimeyāṁ ca". Minds are
pierced by desires. "āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ". So, "kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ". So,
their hearts are filled with fears. Their minds are filled, pierced by desires.
You know. Every desire is like a st..., sharp stab. Pierces. Ok. I want this. I
want this. I want this. You know. And the minds are filled with, your know,
fea..., pierced by desires. They are on the verge of tears. So, because of fears
and desires, they are on the verge of tears. And they say cheers. So, they say
cheers. So, it is, it is a case of smiling faces. And crying hearts. People are
actually not happy. Although, they may put on a facade of happiness. So, you
know, "cintām aparimeyāṁ ca". Unlimited anxiety. And when people think that
there is no goal other than sense gratification. Or the sense gratification is
the highest goal of life, then, you know, the object which they are chasing is
not under control. And it may, and there i..., it may be, it may go off because
somebody else may, there are hundreds of other people wanting it. You know.
Sense obje..., sense gratification. There is so much competition for it. And
there is, ok, you know, there can be savagery in that competition, also. You
know. So, what happens is when people desire, make sense gratification their
goal, then the desires become their masters.

        āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ

And all the desires, they are invisible ropes. Noses. "pāśa" is nose. Which is,
which are pulling them. Pulling them. Dragging them. "āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ".
"śatair". Hundred of, you know, desires. "pāśa". They are all bound by that. And
then, "kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ". So, they have become "kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ".
Instead of becoming "nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇāḥ". You know. Instead of being devoted to
"Lord Nārāyaṇa", they have become devoted to "kāma-krodha". To lust. And anger.
And, you know, you know, "kāma". Why, why "kāma" and "krodha"? Because we have
desires. And we do not get desires. You know. I want to be the enjoyer. There is
the desire. And when at, and when I do not get enjoyment, then nobody should be
the enjoyer. Destroy everything. "krodha". So, that is why, you know, whenever
people, there, there are love affairs. And then, there is frustration. You know.
Often, you know, one, one de..., jilted partner wants to attack. And, you know,
you know, deface. Or even destroy the other partner. You know. "kāma", when
unsatisfied, leads to "krodha". You know. So, "kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ". And then,
"īhante kāma-bhogārtham". So, for "kāma-bhogā". What do they do?
"anyāyenārtha-sañcayān". "anyāyena". So, actually, "kāma". It is said that,
"kā...", when "kāma" is, you know, unfulfilled, it leads to "krodha". When
"kāma" is there. You know. Say, "kāma" is here. Then, "kāma" is unfulfilled, it
leads to "krodha". When "kāma" is fulfilled, it leads to lobha. And the both
ways, it traps us. How is that? When we, when we have desires. And they are not
fulilled, then, you know, you know, you know, the anger comes up. And then, if I
cannot enjoy. Then, whatever, whoever has stopped me from enjoyment, I will
destroy that person. Or if I cannot destroy, then whatever is the object of
enjoyment, nobody should be able to enjoy it. You know. You know. You know. You
know. So, "kāma" leads to "krodha". When "kāma" is unfulfilled. And if "kāma" is
fulfilled, then it leads to lobha. Why? Because, and I want more. And more. And
more. So, say, when a man is attracted to a woman. And then, say, that
relationship somehow works out. They decide to develop a relationship. Then, the
man wants to please the woman. And so, therefore, he has to get gifts for,
rather, she then gives, demands. Give me this. Give me that. Give me that. And
then, that leads to lobha. We see Ajamila. He was a cultured brahmana. But then,
you know, you know, once he fell prey to the prostitute, then the result of that
was that "anyāyenārtha-sañcayān". He started doing violence. You know. For a
cultured brahmana, you know, to even speak a lie is, you know, considered to be
a great, great wrong. And the brahmana does not even do that. But Ajamila, what
was his re..., what was his, you know, plight? He was living, not just speaking
lies. But he was, you know, you know, arresting, he was catching people.
Loathing people. And wounding something sometimes. So, he had, became a common
dacoit. So, from an elevated brahmana, who, who just, you know, lives in pursuit
of Brahman. And performs dharmic activities. And gets charity. He, you know, the
opposite of charity is dacoity. The extreme opposite of power..., char...,
charit..., charity means others give voluntarily. Dacoity means one takes away
forcibly. Even at threat of killing others. So, just, you know, from where to
where, a person can fall? Why? Because "īhante kāma-bhogārtham". For the sake of
"kāma-bhogā". For the sake of enjoying sense gratification.
"anyāyenārtha-sañcayān". One can go to, you know, you know, the extremes of
"anyāye". You know. Do all kinds of violence. And immorality. And illegality to
fulfill the desires. So, greed can, you know, you know, once one ha..., go...
s..., got up with the desire. The desire to enjoy. Anything and everything can
happen. To people can make a terribly violent. You know.
"anyāyenārtha-sañcayān". So, you know, you know, Srila Prabhupada explains in
the purport, you know, Prabhupada writes that, you know:

"Such foolish people do not know that a physician cannot prolong life even for a
moment. When the notice is there, there is no consideration of the man’s desire."

So, Prabhupada is talking about, here about, you know, you know, the, you know,
people who wanting to "pralayāntām upāśritāḥ". That means until the moment of
death, they think, yes, I want to enjoy. I want to enjoy. And associated with
enjoyment, there is anxiety. There is anxiety because the desires to enjoy never
end. And be..., you know, until, until the last moment, they think, yes, maybe,
I will extend myself. And I will be able to enjoy more. And more. And more. Now,
the desire to want to extend one's life is not wrong. You know. Even, you know,
in the, you know, you know, you know, the, twice in the "Bhāgavatam". In Eighth
Canto. And the Tenth Canto. It is said that it is re..., duty of a person to
protect one's body. So, "Vasudeva", he tries his best to protect, you know,
dharma. And so, he tries to protect, you know, Devaki's body. And he protects,
you know, he has to protect himself, also. Because "Kaṃsa" is so mad. That he
would kill Devaki, even kill even "Kaṃsa". Vasudeva, also. You know. You know.
So, even, you know, you know, Shukracharya tells Bali Maharaja in the Eighth
Canto of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam" that, you know, a tree can give fruits only when it
is alive. Similarly, the human body is meant to give us a fruits of dharma.
Artha. Kama. Moksha. But it can give those fruits only when one is alive. So,
therefore, it is a duty of a person to protect one's life. And for that, to
protect one's means of livelihood. So, a protecting one's life is not lo...,
wrong. But, you know, im..., ima..., but, I am just, you know, letting, you
know, mater..., the material aspect of life monopolise all our time. And
monopolise all our endeavors is disastrously wrong. Because no matter, how much,
you know, how endeavors we do. Ultimately, we all have to die. You know. So, you
know, you know, you know, through hoping that by some means or the other, we
will be able to prolong our life. That is just a fantasy. So, there are people
who, there are different sensation times. Different people have tried different
ways. To try to prolong. You know. To try to, you know, either prolong their
lives. Or the hope that we can come back to life again in future. But none of
this is ever going to happen. Because at a material level, you know, you know,
mortality is certain. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, rather than
trying to prolong life, we should long for the prolonged life. Not just
prolonged life. For the eternal life. So, we cannot prolong life here. You know.
But we can long for the, you know, eternal life. Not the prolonged. It is said
the spiritual level. Which we can attain. You know. So, that is possible by
purification. And elevation. Purification and elevation of our consciousness can
raise our consciousness from material to spiritual level. But the demoniac do
not believe in the spiritual level. So, they are stuck at the material level.
And at the material level, they struggle and strain to somehow fulfill their
desires. And they never can. Because they are caught up in, you know, sense
gratification so much. Now, you know, here, we talked about "cintām aparimeyāṁ
ca". So, you know, shan..., Kali Yuga has become so much distorted that people
have hundreds. And thousand. And millions of distractions. That is why
"āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ". Hundreds of desires. And actually, every
advertisement is like a desire-producing industry. You know. The whole idea of
advertisements is the evil genius of advertisement is to make people believe
that they cannot live without the things which they do not need at all to live.
So, something which we do not need at all, you know, created the, created
desire. You know. Somebody, people are, say, you know, so, people are having
dark hair. Say, black hair. And then, there is some advertisement about how
blond hair is so attractive. And they may have some blond-head, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know, female icon. Who just, you know, attracts
everyone. While the blond hair. And then, oh, you can make this hair blond. And
you will attract everyone. And then, this advertisement is portrayed in such an
aggressive way that people start thinking, that, you know, I need to have blond
hair. I need to have blond hair. I need to have blond hair. And in that way, you
know, blond hair dyes are so..., marketed. And sold. So, there are so many needs
that are created by the media. So, you know, every advertisement is like a,
I, is a desire-producing ind..., you know, desire-producing industry.

Every holding. Every advertisement. Every promotion. Every Commercial. So,
"āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ". And more the desire, is the more the pull. The more
the tap. The more the bondage. And this rope is such that, actually, this, the
more we enjoy, the stronger, the thicker and the tighter the rope becomes. You
know. You know. You know. The thicker means that, you know, actually, you know,
you know, every enjoyment adds a strain to the rope. Every indulgence. Because
now we have, you know, done the activity. So, the "samkara", the impression
goes deeper. And the, you know, you know, pattern in the mind becomes more
deep-rooted. And then, not only does the rope become thicker. But it also
becomes tighter. Yeah. Lesser and lesser freedom. When a person becomes
addicted, say, to alcohol. May, maybe, that person is drinking once a week.
Then, maybe once in three days. And once a day. Then, maybe, you know, three
times a day. And then, maybe, you know, person cannot live without alcohol.
Every hour, that person has to have something. So, what is happening? The rope
that is dragging a person is becoming thicker. And tighter. So, indulgence
inherently increases the torture. Increases the bondage. You know. Now, let us
move forward. Now, Krishna tells about how people commit violence. You know. For
the sake of money.

        idam adya mayā labdham
        imaṁ prāpsye manoratham
        idam astīdam api me
        bhaviṣyati punar dhanam

        asau mayā hataḥ śatrur
        haniṣye cāparān api
        īśvaro ’ham ahaṁ bhogī
        siddho ’haṁ balavān sukhī

        āḍhyo ’bhijanavān asmi
        ko ’nyo ’sti sadṛśo mayā
        yakṣye dāsyāmi modiṣya
        ity ajñāna-vimohitāḥ

So, "idam adya mayā labdham". "idam adya". This much. "mayā labdham". This much
I have "labdham". Obtained. Gained. "imaṁ prāpsye manoratham". "manoratham".
This is a beautiful image. The mind is compared to be a chariot. You know. In
the Vedic times, if we wanted to move fast. And move comfortably, also, then,
you know, then we go on a chariot. If we go on a horse, then one can move fast.
But then, the horse is not very comfortable. One ju..., one has to manage the
horse. And the horse can move restlessly. And then, it is not the most
comfortable ride. Maybe, fast. But if one wants to move reasonably fast, maybe
not as fast as on a horseback. But fast. And yet comfortable. Then, the chariot
is the way. So, somebody else is managing, is driving the chariot. And one
simply has to sit behind. And, you know, you know, one goes along. You know.
Comfortably that way. So, "manoratham". So, like that, we sit on the mind's
chariot. And the sit on the mind's chariot means, we just dream. Oh, I will do
this. I will do that. I will gain this. I will gain that. So, like that, one
sits on the "ratham". "manoratham". So, this is a different metaphor from the
"sarira-ratha" here. There is a body chariot analo..., chariot body analogy.
That is different. In that the min..., you know, mind is, that the reins and
the intelligence is charioteer. Here, it is, the mind itself is compared with
the chariot. And we are the passengers. So, we sit in the chariot of the mind.
And we just go here. Go there. Thinking I will do this. Do that. So, it, "imaṁ
prāpsye manoratham". I am the, with this plan, ok, I will get this. I will get
that. I will get that. I will get that. So, you know, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura woul, often tell stories as "Upadesh Upakhyan". And then, acharyas also
told stories. You know. Poor person thinks that. Ok. That person has just got a
little bit of money. That person thinks that, ok, in the future, now, I got this
little, you know, the person gets a li..., little milk. That person thinks that,
ok, I will, there is a little. I will sell this milk. And I will make money.
And then, make, you know, money. Then, I will get more milk. And I will sell
more money. Get more money. And like that, I will go. And then, I will have, you
know, elabo..., you know, a cow. And then, I will get so much milk from that cow
that I will have several cows. And then, I have many cows. And I will have a
nice house. And then, when I have a nice house, then I will have a wife. And
that wife, I will make her obey me. And dance to my tunes. And, you know, you
know, if she does not obey me, then I will make her obey me. And I will hit her.
I will control her. You know. And I will, moves his hand. Tuck. And as he moves
his hand, tuck. The milk pot that is there, tuck. It falls. And the milk topples
over. So, what has happened is the person was thinking that I will have so much.
And I will do this "manoratham". Imagining so many things. But what is there in
the hand gets lost.

        imaṁ prāpsye manoratham
        idam astīdam api me
        bhaviṣyati punar dhanam

So, "idam astīdam api me". This much I have right now. "bhaviṣyati". In the
future. "punar dhanam". I will have much, much more. "bhaviṣyati punar dhanam".
Now, in this world, the wealth, the resources are limited. The desires are
unlimited. So, there is wealth. And there are, people are competing for the
wealth. You know. Wars have been fought just for the sake of wealth. People are
ready to, you know, beg. Borrow. Steal. Kill. Not just kill one people. But
commit slaughter. You know. And massacres for the sake of money. You know. You
know. So, the person thinks if I am going to pursue wealth, then I am going to
have enemies. So, "asau mayā hataḥ śatrur". "hataḥ śatrur". You know. This enemy
I have already killed. So, here, Krishna is, as He is describing, you know, the
mentality. You know. This seems to be related with the description of some
underworld dance. You know. People who are demoniac. Who want to, who do not
hesitate. You know. People, they have, they hire mercenaries. You know. Any
enemy is there, I will pay you money. Just go and kill him. So, "asau mayā hataḥ
śatrur". And this enemy have killed. "haniṣye cāparān api". And that person, I
will kill after that in the future. I will send them off to hell. "haniṣye
cāparān api". And then, you know, you know, then, after that, like that, when I
have killed everyone. Then, what will happen? "īśvaro ’ham ahaṁ bhogī". So, you
know, this is the God project of the demoniac. You know. Or actually, the
demoniac are out to be God. Be number one. So, God is the, you know, God is the
controller. And God is the enjoyer. So, of course, we can control. And enjoy
when we are the prop..., proprietors. So, Kri..., they want the proprietor
ourselves, talked about in:

        asau mayā hataḥ śatrur
        haniṣye cāparān api

So, I am, as soon as I get property. Once, things are mine, then, what will I do
after that? I will try to, I want to control it. And I control it for what sake?
To enjoy it. So, "īśvaro ’ham ahaṁ bhogī". So, that is the idea. You know. That
I am the controller. I am the enjoyer. And, you know, this, actually, the, we
have re..., seen in the Bhagavad Gita how Krishna says that:

        bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

That He is the, you know, enjoyer. He is the enjoyer of all sacrifices. He is
the enjoyer of everything, actually. And He is the supreme "īśvaraḥ".

        mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

So, but this is, the person is trying to displace God. Do a cue, man, try to,
you know, become God. And it may be, it may not be that that person is
explicitly thinking that I want to become God. There are some people who think
like that, also. Like Mahara..., you know, the King Vena. In the "Bhāgavatam"'s
Fourth Canto, you know, explicitly told the brahmanas that you should worship
me. And no need to worship "Nārāyaṇa". But there are some people who may do like
that explicitly. But others, you know, may not do that explicitly. But that
subconsciously, that is, desire is there. "īśvaro ’ham ahaṁ bhogī". I am the
"īśvaraḥ". I am the "bho...", "bhogī". And then, "siddho ’haṁ balavān sukhī".
"siddho ’haṁ". That I am perfect. I am strong. I am happy. The ultimate goal is
they want to be happy. "siddho ’haṁ balavān sukhī". "siddho ’haṁ". You know. You
know. I am "siddhaḥ". I am perfect. Now, when one thinks like that. "balavān
sukhī". "balavān sukhī". So, when one thinks like this, the whole idea is, you
know, in the world, there is a fascination with champions. So, in the sports,
you know, that person wants to be, I want to be the number one. Either it be,
ok, hockey. Or cricket. Or tennis. Or chess. Now, this desire to be number one,
in and of itself is not always bad. You know. Krishna is the best. And being
His parts, we have His desires, also. So, when, we also should naturally want to
do the best that we can. But when a devotee wants to do good, the devotee's idea
of doing good is, or even doing the best is not just to try to, you know, a
devotee does the best. Not to gain appreciation from the world. But to give
Krishna, not to gain worldly apprec..., recognition. But to give Krishna
recognition. What does it mean? Not to gain worl..., you know, gain worldly
recognition. A devotee does not want to be the best so that I can prove that I
am bigger and better than everyone else. And everyone is lower than me. That is
not the motive of the devotee. The devotee's motive is that I want to do the
best that I can do. So, if by Krishna's mercy, if He has given me some talents,
you know, I want to use them for His service. And I want to give Krishna
recognition. So, how do we give Krishna recognition? If we succeed in doing
extraordinary things in Krishna's service. Then, that will, that will bring
attention to Krishna. Also, this, you know, devotee who i..., this person is
also wonderful. And this person is a devotee of Krishna. So, it will be glorious
to give Krishna recognition. You know. You know. But on the other hand, even if
that does not happen. You know. If we, whatever abilities we have, we use them
to the best of our capacity in Krishna's service. And we give Krishna
recognition. Krishna, it is You who have given me these abilities. And I am
grateful to You that You have given me these abilities. And I am using them in
Your service. So, you know, to give Krishna recognition. We give Krishna
recognition by this. And by that, you know, you know, we, "siddho ’haṁ balavān
sukhī". "siddho ’haṁ". So, we do not, you know, think that I am number one. But
we understand that I will do my best for Krishna's service. But the, so like
that the, "Hanumān", you know, he did better than what he thought he could have
done. Actually, when he was, you know, initially, he was forgetful of his
abili..., he had forgotten his abilities because of, you know, the earlier
curses of the sages. When "Jambavana" remind..., you know, you know, you know,
when they were on the, you know, you know, you know, coast of the ocean. And,
you know, we, to go over to Lanka. So, at that time, "Jambavana" reminded him
one of abili..., of the, his abilities. And "Hanumān", you know, did stupendous
feats in the Lord's service. But "Hanumān" was not thinking "īśvaro ’ham ahaṁ
bhogī". "Hanumān" single-handedly devastated at that time the, one of the
universe's most formidable armies. You know. He went into the enemy camp. You
know. Right inside. And devastated Lanka. Burning practically half of Lanka. And
reducing it to ashes. And ruins. You know. Single-handedly.

But he did not think "īśvaro ’ham ahaṁ bhogī". So, the idea is not that a
devotee should not excel. But a devotee does not think that, you know, you know,
you know, devotee does not, never wants to excel. And excel in the sense that I
want to supersede Krishna. No. I want to, a devotee wants to glorify Krishna.
So, we excel for the sake of Krishna's pleasure. But here, the demoniac, they
want to excel for the glorification of their own ego. Then, "āḍhyo ’bhijanavān
asmi". So, "āḍhyo". "āḍhyo" is, "āḍhyo". You know. "āḍhyo" is I am wealthy.
"’bhijanavān asmi". "jana" is people. "’bhijanavān asmi" is I am surrounded by
ar..., ari..., aristocratic relatives. So, people want to move around in, you
know, in, you know, glamorous social circles. You know. You know. You know.
People want to be associated with VIPs. You know. I know that person. And see, I
have got a photo with that person. And I do, I move in that socia..., same
social circle. I know this person. I know that person. So, this is what
actually, you know, the, it is the, you know, pleasure that comes from proximity
with fa..., those who are famous. You know. I know that person. So:

        āḍhyo ’bhijanavān asmi

You know:

        ko ’nyo ’sti sadṛśo mayā

And then, who is there like me? You know. One of Krishna's characteristics is
that He is "asammūrḍhava". "asammūrḍhava" means there is no one equal to Him.
But so, that the easier, the yogi thinks "ko ’nyo ’sti sadṛśo mayā". Who, who is
as good as me? You know. You know. You know. "Muhammad Ali" was a great, you
know, he was one of the world's biggest boxers. And, you know, as he, he used to
fight. And he said, he says no, he, you know, when he would knock people, just
knock them out completely. He was such a fierce fighter. But eventually, by the
time, he became, came to his retirement, generally, what happens is, when sport
stars are playing, this photo drag on. And on. And they do not want to retire.
You know. You know. Because, you know, becuase they have the idea that, you
know, they have the idea that, you know, you know, they, they have been truly on
top. At the top of their career. And, and at the center of attention. And then,
they just do not want to give up. They do not want to lose that. But then, thus
the body takes it away from them. They just cannot do it. You know. They may
have the same player. Who, who was the star performer. Now, that person cannot
even perform below par. You know. Leave alone above par. Why? Because the body
just takes away. It is, it is helplessly frustrating for a person who has been
on the top for so long. To suddenly find that I just cannot do anything. You
know. I just, I was so much on, so, so long on top. I was ruling. But now, I
cannot do anything. And no matter how much I try. It just does not work. It is
so frustrating. So, this boxer, you know, he, you know, you know, you know,
there was a challen..., another challenge him. Challenger. And earlier, this
boxer just defeated every..., you know, thoroughly. You know. Beat this, you
know, "Muhammad Ali" had defeated him, you know, thoroughly. But then, later on,
when there was in his old age, when there was a match, this, "Muhammad Ali" was
such a shadow of his self. There was a, he was easily defeated by the opposing
boxer. And then, his opposing boxer said, actually, in the match, I had to check
myself. Otherwise, I would have hurt, in the match, I would have hurt him. I did
not want to hurt him seriously. Or mortally. So, I, I checked for, from playing
my best. And even without playing his best, the opposing boxer, defeated the
champion boxer very easily. The erstwhile champion boxer. So, you know, in, in,
that actually, we cannot stay on top for long. Somebody may say, oh, I stayed on
top for, you know, this much time. At least, I have that satisfaction. But that
satisfaction does not last for long. One may think I was there at the top. But
afterwards, the craving is there. I wanted to be there. I wanted to be there. I
wanted to be there. You know. There was an Indian cricketer. Who, who had some
some cricket record of having scored the maximum number of runs. Long ago. And
then, an Australian cricketer came. And broke his record. And then, this Indian
cricketer said, you know, what was his reaction? He said, I was like a bird
flying in the sky. And suddenly, somebody has come and clipped my wings. And I
can do nothing, but see myself. Plummeting down helplessly. And now, because
this cricketer has retired, he cannot break the record. And he cannot make
another record now. So, just lost. So, like that, gone with the wind. The record
just go away. So, you know, "ko ’nyo ’sti sadṛśo mayā". Thinking that I am,
there is no one greater than me. What is this?

"yakṣye dāsyāmi modiṣya". So, this is illusion. We think that there can be no
one greater than me. But that is "mo...", that is the illusion of the, you know,
godless people. And "yakṣye dāsyāmi modiṣya". Now, these people are completely
self-centered. So self-centered that actually, they are egomaniac. You know.
Self-centered means to think, not to think about anything else. But egomania
means, you know, it is a, it is an irrational obsession. You know. You know. It
is a fixation. You know. It is a, you know, you know, you know, a fetish on. You
know. we just want, cannot think about anything else. So, obsessed with thinking
of one thing. So, man..., the mania is like that. And egomania means one just
has, you know, the ideas. You know. That I, I am so great. I am so great.
The megalomania it can be called. You know. The man..., mania about myself. And
about one's own glories. So, you know, you know, just, so, one wants not only
the glory of, you know, you know, you know, pow..., of the, of worldy fame. But
also, one wants the glory of religious fame. No. I should think. People should
think of me, also, as a good person. So, then, what I will do. "yakṣye". I will
do some fire sacrifices. And then, "dāsyāmi". I will give some charity. And
then, "mo...", "modiṣya". I will get so much reputation. I am such a charitable
person. I am such a religious person. I am such a noble person. And I will enjoy
through that. You know. So, many times, nowadays, for example, you know, people,
they have, you know, their, you know, for them, religion also becomes just a
social cosmetic. That means, you know, cosmetic is made with, there, to
something to look better. So, social cosmetic means that it reli..., that they
adopt, rel..., religion is actually meant to be a heart-transformer. You know.
Not a face-transformer. You know. Face-transformer. Cosmetic is basically, it is
a face-transformer. It just makes us look better than we are. But it does not
change us internally. Religion is meant to be a heart-transformer. But people
who use it as a face-transformer means that they use it just to look good. So,
they do not want to surrender to God. But they just want to pretend to be
religious. Or appear to be religious in world's eyes. So that they will get
praised from the world for that. "yakṣye dāsyāmi modiṣya". So, they think that,
you know, you know, I will give charity. And I will become famous. As a
religious person. So, often people want a, you know, people want a, they will
give donation. But they want their names very prominently displayed. Wherever
they have given donations. So, now, in some cases, you know, even in temples,
you know, this may be done. To facilitate people to do service for Krishna. So,
"yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet". So, the idea of giving donations is
what? That, you know, you know, we are meant to give our heart to Krishna. But
if we cannot give our heart to Krishna, then we should give what is in our heart
to Krishna. What does that mean? That means ulti..., we actually meant to give
our heart to Krishna. But if our heart is attached to materialistic things. If
our heart is attached to money. Then, what do we do? You know. We give that
money, a little bit of the money to Krishna. So, when we give our money to
Krishna, we give what is in our heart to Krishna. Then, what happens by that?
Then, we are giving a part of our heart to Krishna. By that, we, we give Krishna
a place in our heart. And once we give Krishna, you know, a place in our heart.
Then, Krishna is very intelligent. Slowly, He will expand that place. You know.
He will reveal His attractiveness. And sweetness. And then, will expand that
place. And He will attract our whole heart to Him. That is how eventually we
will become completely attracted to Krishna. This will happen a period of time.
You know.

So, but the idea is, so, giving donations. If somebody gives donation to
Krishna. Whatever be the motive, it is good. So, but, here, you know, Krishna is
talking from the point of view of the demoniac who have no intention to
surrender to Krishna. And their idea is, you know, they want religion to just
become one more ornament. You know. A one more feather. Feather in their cap.
Another me..., another, you know, medal. Or another badge of honor on their
chest. That is unfortunate. So, that is why Krishna gives the final twist in
the tale in this world. What, so, He is describing the demoniac mentality very
vividly. But then, He says, last, the twist in the tale comes. He says, "ity
ajñāna-vimohitāḥ". Thus "ajñāna-vimohitāḥ". In this way, these people are
bewildered by ignorance. You know. You know. By "ajñāna". Why is it "ajñāna"?
Because all this is illusion. None of this is going to last. You know. We cannot
have, carry, even one, you know, one penny with us from this life to the next
life. You know. You know. Whatever enjoyment we have, the will, the body loses
its capacity to enjoy, it all becomes useless. You know. So, "ity
ajñāna-vimohitāḥ". You know. It is unfortunate that people get so infatuated by
things. None of which are going to last. You know. Now, when Krishna talks
about the, these people, "yakṣye dāsyāmi modiṣya". So, the religious ego can
also be very deceptive. Often, people build temples. So, for example, there was
competition. You know. Some people, they say, I will be bing..., you know, build
a "Hanumān" deity which is ten feet. And somebody else says, I will build
a "Hanumān" deity which is fee..., twenty feet s..., somebody else says, like
people do auction. You know. I bid this much amount. I bid this much amount. I
bid this. So, like that, they do, you know, they do competition. I build a
temple of "Hanumān" with fifty feet deity. Somebody says 55 feet deity. And
then, I got the world's highest "Hanumān" deity. I build that. Like that. So,
like that, people just go on. And on. So, you know, you know, even the deity is
there. When that buil..., deity built. Are they taking darshan of, you know,
Krishna over there? Or the, of "Hanumān" over there? Or are they taking darshan
of the exhibition of their own ego? So, religion should be a sanctuary of, for a
soul. It should not become the gymnation for the ego. Gymnation is a place where
people build their muscles. And exhibit their muscles. So, the ego. See, I am so
great. I am so great. I am so great. It should not be a gymnation for the ego
like that. So, you know, then, you know, i..., Krishna further describes that
what happens to such people?

        aneka-citta-vibhrāntā
        moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ
        prasaktāḥ kāma-bhogeṣu
        patanti narake ’śucau

So, "aneka-citta-vibhrāntā". "aneka-citta". So, the, you know, you know, "eka"
is one. "aneka" is more than one. Many. "citta" is consciousness. "vibhrāntā".
So, you know, "vibhrāntā" is perplexed. Perplexed completely. So, their, their
consciousness is pulled in so many directions. That, you know, what happens to
them? They are just dragged. Here. There. Here. And "eka". I have to do that. I
have to do that. I have to go here. I have to go there. So,
"moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ". You know. They are completely covered. Completely covered
over. "moha-jāla". By the, you know, network of illusion. So, it is, you know,
Krishna has ever earlied talked about "āśā-pāśa". So, He is talking, you know,
again, in the term, form, in the language of traps. You know. Desire as moose.
And now, He is talking about illusion as a net or as a network. But as
Prabhupada translates it. So, "jāla" is a trap or a network. So, actually, when
people go into illusion. It is not, you know, not just one strand. It is a
network. Which completely traps them. "moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ". "samāvṛtāḥ".
Completely covered over. Just, you know, one cannot perceive spiritual reality,
only. People go so deep into illusion, you know, that they just, you know, you
know, cannot think of anything beyond them, you know, their, you know, their own
material desires. And their material, you know, hopes. Just cannot think about
anything. "moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ". "āvṛtāḥ" is covered. "samāvṛtāḥ" is completely
covered. So, illusion completely covers the, you know, "prasaktāḥ kāma-bhogeṣu".
So, you know, "asaktāḥ" is attached. "prasaktāḥ" is very strongly attached.
"kāma-bhogeṣu". You know. You know. And so, because of the desire for enjoying
sense gratification, "patanti narake ’śucau". So, "patanti". You know. You know.
They fall away to hell. "’śucau". That whole lives are, "aśuci" is, you know,
clean. Cleanliness. Krishna has talked about cleanliness several times in this
Bhagavad Gita. But He says that the demoniac are unclean. "na śaucaṁ nāpi
cācāro". He had said earlier in 16.7, also. "patanti narake ’śucau". "narake
’śucau". They fall away. They fall away like this. It is very, it is disastrous
for them. So, you know, here, "aneka-citta-vibhrāntā". "aneka-citta". Why
"aneka-citta"? There are so many things to do. You know. Shankaracharya has
written many verses in his, you know, you know, you know, poetic compositions.
Wherein, he, you know, exp..., you know, does, exposes of material life. He
shows how material life is empty. And frustrating. So, he says how there are
endless distractions. So, he says:

        bala vastha krida saktham
        taruna vastha taruni rakhtham
        vrda vastha cinta magnam
        param brahma kopi na saktham

So, you know, he says that in childhood, "bala vastha". And when that person is
in the childhood, "krida saktham". You know. I want to play. I want to do this.
I have to do that. So, people are just caught. Chil..., children are just caught
up in playing. They do not want to think of anything el..., anything else. And
then, when the children grow, grow older. When they, what happens? "taruna
vastha". Once youth comes, then the hormones start getting activated. And lust
may plays one like a fiddle at that time. "taruna vastha taruni rakhtham".
"taruni rakhtham". It is completely caught in the, so, the man gets attracted to
women. Women get attracted to the men. And, you know, constantly searching, you
know, with how can I, you know, you know, develop a relationship. Who can be my
partner? How can I enjoy more. More. More. So, the mind almost like, during the,
especially the years of youth, the mind just switches off from everything else.
Or it is, focuses on sense gratification. And it, everything else becomes
surrounded. Even if a, if the thought is go everywhere else, they all ultimately
come back to this, only. How can I this? "taruna vastha taruni rakhtham". And
then, after that, "vrda vastha cinta magnam". In old age, there is "cinta". Why
is there anxie..., actually, there is anxiety at all time today. In old age,
there is excess, will be, anxiety is very great. Because, you know, you know, in
old age, you know, one is having no capacity to do anything. In youth, at least,
one had health. One had energy. One had, so, one can, you know, run g...,
around. And do things. And make things happen. But in old age, one wants things
to be happen in particular ways. You should act like this. You should do like
that. That person should do like that. But one cannot control others. You know.
And once, one cannot control one's own body, also. And old people are often put
aside on the side. Neglected. So, then, what happens? "vrda vastha cinta
magnam". So, the only thing that person can do is just stoop, you know, I will
be lost. Brood in worry. Oh, will this happen? Will that happen? Will that
happen? "cinta magnam". And then, in this way, at every stage in life, there is
distraction. And therefore, "param brahma kopi na saktham". So, actually,
neither in childhood. Nor in youth. Nor in old age does material life allow us
to practice spiritual life. To, you know, it does not allow us, you know, tiny.
Because something or the other is always going to distract us. So, we just have
to put aside these distractions. Forcefully. We cannot let, you know, we cannot
postpone spiritual life. Thinking that, later on, I will practice it. You know.
Do not. Later on will never come. We have to do it now, only. So, anyway, the
point here is that, you know, the, saw, this is a normal situation in material
world. But in Kali Yuga, these things are so bad, you know, that, you know, all
distractions are there at all times. There is "bala vastha". "cinta magnam". You
know. Children, they are filled with anxiety. You know. In schools, often, in
fourth, fifth, sixth, standard, the st..., teachers, the school management, you
know, conducts stress management seminars. You know. Children. Four, five year
old. They are meant to play around. But what happens? They are stress management
seminars for them. Because so much workload. And this. And that. So much
expectations. They are crashed by all that. So, they are stressed. So, even in
childhood, there is anxieties. And then, not only that. There is "bala vastha".
taruni rakhtham".

So, what? There is, actually, there is a terrible phenomena called as the
sexualisation of childhood. This does not just refer to, that one horrific
phenomena is that there is child sexual abuse. And often, it happens by
relatives. And, you know, acquaintances whom the child, and, you know, the
parents of the child trust. So, that is, that is horrendous. But apart from
that, at a commercial level, you know, childr..., they, children, you know,
then they, they exist, these are, the, called as tweens. You know. Teens are
when the peop..., people come to teenage. Then, at that time, they, puberty
comes along. And they become sexually active because of bodily hormones.
Becoming generated. But the sexualisation in childhood is that, even when
children are, you know, in the tweens. You know. Long bef..., they are just
between. To, you know, from the word tween come from the word between. They
are before. You know. They not yet come to teens. And they just coming out of
childhood. At that time, only, you know, children are, you know, you know, just
shown models on TV. And video games. Of boys who attract girls. And boy..., you
know, and girls who attract boys. And the boys are, are all, you know,
sexualised. And the girls are all sexualised. And they wear dresses. And they
try to attract each other. So, children are neither emotionally, nor physically
in a position to be sexual, you know, you know, have sex, meant to be
sexually active at that time. And still, that is trust on them. And it is
terrible. So, "bala vastha". "taruni". "saktham" is also there. And then,
similarly, not only in childhood, all distractions are the same. And similarly,
"taruna vastha", also. So, now, "taruna vastha". "krida saktham". So, with, you
know, we have video games. And games like that. So, even young people, you know,
they can be active. They can do so much in life. You know. Often, they are so
lazy that they cannot get out of their bed. And there, they under bed, and
there are some digital screen. They are shooting down images. And they are
thinking I am a great hero. So, this is, you know, people are so caught in
playing. You know. Actually, playing sports is one thing. There is at least some
exercise. Some, you know, some activity is there. But people spend so much
energy just watching sports. Energy. Money. Passion. Emotion. So, you know, we
will get caught. And lost in that. Spectators want, this is just a way people
to forget the boredom. And the emptiness of their life. And that applies to old
age, also. Even in old age, people are caught up in sports. And, you know, they
just get infatuated by the sports. So, similarly, actually, "vrda vastha". You
know. "krida saktham" is there. "vrda vastha". "taruni rakhtham" is also there.
You know. People do all sorts of things. By which, they can try to prolong their
sex drives. And their sex capacity. You know. People do, you know, different
kinds of surgeries. And take different medicines. And somehow or the other, they
try to be sexually, be sex..., be potent. Sexually potent. And try to enjoy. So,
you know, Prabhupada writes in one place that sometimes, monkeys are caught. And
the monkey glands are extracted. And then, another, go, gland, there is a, put
in human beings. So that humans can be sexually active. So, Prabhupada says
that, one monkey loses his enjoyment so that another monkey can enjoy. So, that
is unfortunate. That is how it works. You know. So, people have, you know, old
age. People have drugs. "Get young" drugs. You know, is, that means, become,
develop as much sexual potency as you had. When you were young. So, take this
medicine.

So, there was a medicine called viagra. Which people, which was, you know,
called the magical "get young" drug. And people started taking it. And, you
know, to, enjoying. Enjoying. Enjoying. And then, it was found that this was,
this drug was contraindicative for, you know, heart, you know, patient. That
means if the some, it could lead to severe problems when the person had heart
disease. So, then, the government said that, you know, we will not, we will not
allow this drug. That was the proposal that came up. And then, the people said,
no. We do not have any heart problems. Why should we be deprived? So, you know,
the huge opposition to that. Then, the government said that, ok, we will allow
this drug to be sent only on government, on the, when a doctor gives us, you
know, you know, green signal. That, you know, this drug, this patient, patient
does not have any heart problems. So, give him this drug. And people were so
desperate to enjoy that the reg..., when the regular physician knows that they
have got a heart problem. They will not get it. So, what was happening was, if
people with heart resplendence take this severe drug. Then, they take the drug.
And they are about to enjoy. And then, the whole, actually, the sexual enjoyment
is quite draining to the body. So, bod..., heart starts beating. And the
breath starts becoming fast. It is quite a draining experience. So, then, when
people get excited. And they are just about to enjoy. And suddenly, they get a
heart attack. And they die over there, only. So, because of that, they say that,
you have to, can, not take this drug by yourself. It has to be with the doctor's
prescription. So, people are so desperate. Rather than going to the regular
physician, they would go to some other physician. Give them some extra money.
And tell them that, you know, give us this drug. And without telling them about
the heart problem, get that drug. Take that drug. And try to enjoy. And get a
heart attack. And die. So, this was even in the old age. "vrda vastha". "taruni
rakhtham". Even in old age, people are attached. Attached to enjoyment. Attached
to enjoyment. Some are desperately trying to go on. And especially, nowadays,
you know, the comm..., mat..., in, media is targetting old people. You know. Old
people. Especially, there are, you know, there are, you know, ads. And gadgets.
And devices. And things like that. Which are meant for, you know, you know, old
people. And then they try to, co..., come on, do, do this. Get this. Eat this.
And then, you will be able to enjoy even now. So, in this way,
"aneka-citta-vibhrāntā". There is just no end to the distractions that people
have to go through. Just, you know, bound. Endlessly in material existence. So,
Prabhupada writes in the purport that:

"The demoniac think that all these things are accidental and due to the strength
of one’s personal ability."

What are? What do they think? That whatever abili..., whatever they have got,
you know, I have got this. I have got that. All this is because, so,
Prabhupada's, now, this purport is not just relating with this verse. In this
purport, Prabhupada is talking from, you know, for the previous verses, also.
Where he is talking about earning money. So, they think that I have got all
these things. It is just, you know, by my own ability. And:

"Each demoniac person thinks that he can live at the sacrifice of all others."

That means, you know, you know, you know, that he does not care for others. He
just thinks that I want to enjoy. And nobody else needs to, you know, you know,
be considered. If the others are fac..., only factors in my enjoyment.
Otherwise, they have no, you know, significance of themselves. Prabhupada gives
the example of "Rāvaṇa", also. And he talks that, you know, how such people are,
are entangled in material existence. So:

        ātma-sambhāvitāḥ stabdhā
        dhana-māna-madānvitāḥ
        yajante nāma-yajñais te
        dambhenāvidhi-pūrvakam

So, "ātma-sambhāvitāḥ". "ātma-sambhāvitāḥ" means self-complacent. And "stabdhā".
Impudent. They do not care for any authority. They think I am myself, my own
authority. I do not need anyone else. "dhana-māna-madānvitāḥ". "madānvitāḥ".
They are absorbed in the delusion of "dhana-māna". Of wealth. And prestige. So,
earlier, in the 10th verse, Krishna had said "dambha-māna-madānvitāḥ". So, here,
it is "dhana-māna-madānvitāḥ". So, there is wealth. And there is, you know, the
prestige. They are just caught with the external. As there is no inner
substance. All bluff. No stuff. That is their predicament. It is all bluff. Just
show. Show to others. I have this. I have that. Where internally, they have no
understanding of what is the reality of life. Nor do they have, you know, any,
you know, har..., any intention to harmonise themselves with the realities of
life. So, "yajante nāma-yajñais te". "yajante". They may do some "yajña", also.
But, you know, we, they may do some worship. But "nāma-yajñais te". They just
for the sake of name. For sake of name mean, name and fame. They want to be
known in the world. For having done this.

        yajante nāma-yajñais te
        dambhenāvidhi-pūrvakam

"dambhena". It is filled with arrogance. And seriously, "dambha" means what?
One wants to, with, one does not have the inner substance. But by putting the
outer appearance, one wants respect from others. And then, when they want, do
this sort of thing, they will also do it "āvidhi-pūrvakam". They do not want to
follow, you know, they, they are not interested in spiritual advancement. And
they, they may not even, they do not even believe that scriptures are the word
of God. So, that is why they do not care for, you know, "vidhi"s. They just want
to do religious rituals. So that they will be, you know, they will be respected
in society. So, "āvidhi-pūrvakam". So, what they do is, the scriptures tell us,
tell us to do "nāma-yajña". But they do "yajña" for "nāma". They do not do
"nāma-yajña". "nāma-yajña" is chanting of the holy name. But "yajña" for a
"nāma" is they want people to know my "nāma". You know. I did this. Sacri..., I
did this. I did sac..., sacrifice. I did this. I did that. So, they, they
completely, you know, lose their, you know, sense of purpose in life. This how
"moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ". They are just caught up in trying to get, get more. And
more. Enjoy more. And more. Parade it more. And more. So, religion becomes just
a facelift. And not a faith lift for them. It does not lif..., lift their faith.
It does not lift their heart. Just a facelift. Temporarily, try to look better.
That is a monstrous underutilisation of, you know, you know, underutilisation
of, you know, spiritual life. And Prabhupada here talks about even people who
take, you know, become renunciates.

"They take the dress of the renounced order of life and engage in all nonsense
in that dress."

Why? Now, "They take the dress of the renounced order" because they want
prestige. And they think, ok, in a pious society, renounced order will give me
prestige. So, they get the present. They get, for the sake of prestige, they do
it. Get it. But then, they have no intention of following the rules and
regulations of the renounced order. So, they just, you know, do all sorts of
"āvidhi-pūrvakam". They do nonsense. In the name of religion. And they bring
about, they not only ruining themselves. But they are ruining, you know,
religion at larg.., they are ruin..., ruining the religion, or reputation of the
renounced order. And they just, you know, live hypocritically. So, you know, in
this way, Krishna describes the wide gamut of the psychologies, you know, of the
typical psychologies of the demoniac people. And in the new, fo..., next
section, we will discuss about their, you know, destinations. What happens to
them. You know. That we will discuss in the next class. 

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
