Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hTQbwIggL88
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=p0XBV6mKElCYhYFMqDXi4FJsBNZ8MTU0ODQ4OTU1OEAxNTQ4NDAzMTU4&v=hTQbwIggL88&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_120_-_Bhagavad_Gita_13.12-13.19_-_The_inconceivability_of_the_jneya_-_how_it_is_avijneya_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the middle of the Thirteenth Chapter. We discussed saying the twenty items of
knowledge. And we were discussing last, and, time the difference between
affection and attachment. So, affection refers to a natural emotional human
connection. Which has, which has, is there. And which has to be there. It is
vital for, you know, for relationships to exist. You know. When we are relating
with people. We have to relate with them as complete persons. We cannot say of a
person I love your soul. I do not care for your body. No. We care for, when we
care, we care for the complete person. There is a famous in..., statement when
Srila Prabhupada once, he was in Mayapur. It was his Vyasa Puja day. You know.
Devotees. Thousands of devotees were coming. And glorifying him. And offering
flowers. And obeisances. And one devotee was limping. You know. Slightly. And
Prabhupada asked him. You know. While all this arati was going on. Prabhupada
called him forward. And, you know, asked him what had happened. And he had
explained he had got some wound because of something. And then, Prabhupada,
there, during, while his Vyasa Puja offering, told him, Prabhu..., Prabhupada
gave him prescription of how to prepare some home-made medicine. By which, he
would cu..., he could cure, you know, the, you know, you know, you know, pain in
the leg. So, Prabhupada was concerned. You know. When, when he came to know that
in Mayapur, the devotees were not getting proper prasad. Prabhupada said, no,
prasad should be proper. So, now, the important point here to understand is that
the relationships have, now, of course, this is, we could say this is a
relationship between guru and disciple. And the guru is caring for even the body
of the disciple. But, you know, in general, all relationships, we cannot
separate the body, the mind and the soul. And when we take ca..., when we are
taking care, we have to take care of all three. The body. The mind. And the
soul. Protection means not just spiritual protection. Telling people. This is
right. This is wrong. You know. This is good for you. This is bad for you. No.
That is important. But along with that, you know, people should also feel
valued. People should feel cared. People should feel che..., in fact, cherished.
The success of our movement is, you know, very much dependent on how long, how
we can steadily inspire devotees to keep practicing devotional service
throughout their life. So, you know, they, once, person come to the shelter of
Krishna. You know. Taking care of the person who has come to the shelter of
Krishna is also important. So, that, that person can go on lifelong. And, you
know, feel cared. And inspired. So, often, the emphasis is on detachment, you
know, you know, from family members can have a negative effect in terms of
irresponsibility. You know. Detachment is not irresponsibility. See. We, we
discussed this briefly earlier. But, you know, detachment means, you know, a
lack of excessive emotional entanglement in material things. Whereas
irresponsibility means, you know, evasiveness. Means unwillingless to shoulder a
burden. Which is actually one's own. So, if a person is in, in family life.
Then, the person has to take care of the family. You know. There is a, you know,
you know, you know, you know, that one time, you know, the temple was
emphasising book distribution. And earlier, ISKCON was more of temple centered
communi..., not just, you know, congregation movement. It was, you know,
entirely a temple based movement. So, even the hou..., householder devotees
would stay in the temple. So, at one time, to increase the book distribution,
the devotee, the temple authorities told the devotees that, told the matajis
that, you know, you can just, you know, you di..., you know, distributing the
books of Srila Prabhupada is more important than taking care of your babies. And
then, mothers were very disturbed by that. You know. It is the fundamental
maternal instinct. And it is the need of every wom..., women to take care of her
child. And then, one mataji wrote a letter to Prabhupada. And Prabhupada, you
know, you know, wrote back a strong letter. He says, what is this strange
busi..., what is this, you know, strange thing? He said, you know, you are
mother. These are Vaikuntha children. You have to take care of those children.
And these children are gift of God. And then, so, Prabhupada wanted to avoid
both extreme. So, on one side, he did not want the mataji, you know, the,
especially, the matajis to neglect their home responsibilities for the sake of,
you know, missionary activities. At the same time, he also did not want, you
know, them to be restricted to home activities. And b...., be not allowed to
participate in missionary activities. There has to be balance. So, you know, you
know, you know, the same applies to the husband, also. The husband has to take
care of the family. Detachment does not mean that, you know, a one neglects
one's, you know, family members. You know. In, in needs. I..., there is
physi..., you know, emotionally. Or spiritually. So, you know, that means one
has to actually, you know, be as it is said, be affectionate. But not attached.
You know. Attached would mean that the, the, we may say that the dividing line
is not so easy to, you know, easy to discern. And that is correct. You know. It
is always a, it is not that we have to walk on the line all the time. Sometimes,
we may wander left. Sometimes, we may wander right. And overall, we will move in
the right direction. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. The
important point to recognise is that we need to, you know, you know, you know,
have a clear understanding at least conceptually. Or at least philosophically.
You know. To be affectionate is not only not undesirable. Actually, it is
essential.

And, you know, these relationships, you know, in the "Bhāgavatam", there is a
verse about how, you know, it is with Third Canto, especially, the section of
the Devahuti and Kardamuni. And the wife is the protection for a husband. Like a
fortress. And, you know, there are several verses like this. But Srila
Prabhupada is explaining over here that the natural objects of affection. So,
only in extreme situations where the horizontal relationship is an obstacle to
our vertical relationship. And it is insurmountable obstacle. Then, some extreme
action may be required. But we should not assume that an obstacle is
insurmountable right from the beginning. In general, we should try to practice
our devotional service in a way that does not, you know, you know, unnecessarily
disturb others. And others include our family members. Now, we may say that even
my basic, you know, chanting of Hare Krishna is disturbing others. You know. We
have to, over a period of time, understand that, you know, we, more or less,
most part of the world, li..., we live in a democratic society. And every
individual has certain right to make certain choices. So, you know, we should,
you know, we should communicate to our family members that I feel inspired to
live according to certain principles. And this is what I am going to practice.
And we do not have to impose them on others. But at the same time, that does not
mean that we have to give up de..., our devotional practices for the sake of
others. You know. You know. So, we, attachment, a good example of attachment is
"Dhṛtarāṣṭra" and Duryodhana. So, that means, you know, even when a person is
going on the wrong track, one allows that person to go on the wrong track. And
in fact, one oneself, you know, supports that wrong track. Because one cannot
displea..., one cannot, you know, you know, say no to that person. That would be
attachment. So, one has to be sensitive and careful in these things. So, now,
Prabhupada talks about this. And then, he further says that, you know, you know,
you know, you know, you know, he basically say..., you know, talks about how
this, one can spiritualise one's family life. He says chanting Hare Krishna.
Worshipping the deity. Discussing Bhagavad Gita. Basically, the five potent
limbs of devotional service. Taking prasadam. All these s..., can spiritualise
the home life. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know.
Prabhupada further says that:

        vivikta-deśa-sevitvam
        aratir jana-saṁsadi

"vivikta-deśa-sevitvam"

"a devotee has no taste"

As Prabhupada writes:

"for unnecessary sporting or cinema-going or enjoying some social function,"

So, you know, you know, the idea here is that a devotee understands that there,
one, there have to be priorities in life. We have only so much time. And we need
to engage in serious devotional service. So, how do we engage in serious
devotional service? By using all our time in purposeful ways. So, you know,
there are certain forms of socialisation which are considered normal in modern
society. But are they actually normal? Do they actually lead to, you know, you
know, you know, a bonding at a deeper level? People, there is the word, people
use "hang out". You know. I hang out with my friends. Hang out means people go
and, you know, gossip about others. Or people go and have a drink together. Or
people go and, you know, do all sorts of, you know, pointless things together.
You know. So, you know, is hanging out really a form of bonding? Does it really
lea..., lead to deep, meaningful, you know, satisfying relationships? Not
necessarily. And mo..., most often not. So, it is not that devotees do not want
to have relationships. You know. You know. You know. We can have relationships
with others, our family, naturally, we have relationships with the family members
and others, also. Depending on our profession. Or our locality. Or whatever. But
the important point is that a devotee wants to not socialise in a way that is
detrimental to one's devotional service. So, how will one balance this? You
know. Between how a devotee would like to socialise and how materialistic people
would like to socialise. And where we can find a balance, that is something
which every individual has to decide one's, one's own. But the point is, it is
not that devotional service is against socialisation. In fact, Prabhupada made a
society. International Society for Krishna Consciousness. Society, we,
naturally, there is socialisation. Now, of course, within the devotee community,
we would like to have socialisation that is Krishna centered. And, you know, you
know, when we have to socialise with others, we do it in such a way that, it,
gradually, you know, helps us in our Krishna Consciousness. Or at least protects
our Krishna Con..., does not harm our Krishna Consciusness. So, now:

        vivikta-deśa-sevitvam
        aratir jana-saṁsadi

        adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvaṁ
        tattva-jñānārtha-darśanam

So, you know, you know, you know, "aratir jana-saṁsadi". Not mixing where
materialistic people mix. So, a devotee focuses on not getting contaminated by
material desires. That does not mean a devotee cannot mix with materialistic
people at all. But we have to understand there are infections that are always
possible. And we have to protect ourselves. So, once when understand that
"adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvaṁ". That it, the spiritual knowledge alone, that will
last. And that inspires a person to see, search for spiritual knowledge with
great, with seriousness and gravity. And "tattva-jñānārtha-darśanam".
"tattva-jñānārtha". One tries to understand what is the philosophical truth of
life. And in this way, one moves forward in one's spiritual life. So, now,
Prabhupada explains that, Prabhupada explains what is the antithesis of
humility. Antithesis means exactly opposite.

"To think oneself God is most puffed up. Although the living entity is always
being kicked by the stringent laws of material nature, he still thinks, “I am
God” because of ignorance."

If:

"The beginning of knowledge, therefore, is amānitva,"

So, Prabhupada goes in a full circle. You know. Starts initially by talking
about, in, talks about initial, "amānitva" mean initial part, is the purport.
And he concludes again with the same point. You know. You know. You know. So,
you know, the, actually speaking, we may now, f..., now, there are some
mayavadis. Some self, you know, styled god-man. Who claim to be them, so, who
claim to be God. But apart from that, you know, you know, you know, you know,
there are many others. Who do not necessarily claim to be God. But they also
claim to be, you know, but there are, they may also want to be numero uno. And
that is one way of claiming to be God, also. So, actually, this whole idea is
antithetical to "amānitva". So, a devotee wants to be humble. That does not
necessarily mean that devotee does not, you know, have talents. Or use talents
in Krishna's service. But a devotee does not draw more attention to oneself. And
devotee does not want glorification more oneself. If a devotee has to come
in the attention. Public attention. So that people can understand and
glor..., people can understand. And people can become, you know, understand
Krishna. And come closer to Krishna. Devotee does that as a service. But a
devotee does not think that I am the gr..., I am great. Or I am greatest. You
know. So, you know, now:

        etaj jñānam iti proktam
        ajñānaṁ yad ato ’nyathā

Now, everything apart from this is ignorance. Now, what does it mean? You know.
The word ignorance and, you know, knowledge, they can have multiple meanings in
different context. Now, what we study in, you know, physics. In chemistry. In
economics. All this is knowledge, definitely. It has its, you know, you know,
validity. Its utility. And its own sphere. Here, Krishna is talking about jnana.
Primarily in terms of the jnana that enables one to become a spiritually
advanced. To gain liberation from material existence. You know. Krishna is not
here talking about varnashram. You know. Yes. There may not have been subjects
like say, physics and chemistry. Specifically. Directly like that. As they are
taught today, in today's, you know, universities. But devor..., whether
varnashram. And in varnashram, every varna had its own specialised skills. And
technics. Which people had to learn. So, there were ratisns. And there were, you
know, you know, others skilled people who would teach the skills generation
after generation. The ksatriyas would teach their ksatriyas, or next generation
of ksatriyas. The brahmanas would train the next generation of brahmanas. And
that is how the skills, the legacy would continue. So, succession is an
important concern. And succession was taken care of that way. So, it is not that
acquiring material skills was entirely neglected. The material skills are
required. Essential for, you know, for, you know, you know, functioning in the
material world. And we, if we look at the, the kind of, say, achitecture that
were made in the Vedic culture. Vedic times. Or for the matter of the, the kind
of music. The kind of dance. You know. Even the kind of literature that were
written. So, they are all high class. As we have discussed earlier, the
Mahabharata is the wor..., by far the world's longest poem. And it is seven
times longer than the Iliad and the Odyssey combined together. Which were
early, the Germanic sagas. That were considered to be long poems. So, obviously,
writing like this has not come for lazy people. You know. It requires hard work.
So, definitely, there is hard work. But the important point is, you know, that
we may say that that is about God. Yes. Most of the skills, that were there,
they were about God. But they were somehow connected with God. Somehow conn...,
connected with dharma. And that is good. But the important point is:

        etaj jñānam iti proktam
        ajñānaṁ yad ato ’nyathā

Apart from this, everything else is ignorance. What does it mean? None of that
is going to help us, you know, make advancement to come out of material
existence. You know. So, it may ha..., it may make things relatively better
within material existence temporarily. But it cannot help us to come out of
material existence. And jnana, as Krishna has defined earlier, i..., in this
chapter, itself.

        kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ

You know:

        yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama

That to understand the "kṣetra". And "kṣetra-jñaṁ". That is "jñānaṁ". You know.
So, the point is that, you know, you know, it may be, you know, so, we ca..., we
can look at it from the point of view multiple levels of jnana. You know. So,
modern science can be there, you know, can be called as, you know, you know,
kind of material knowledge. Which does not, modern science. Or general modern
education. It is material knowledge. It may have, it has its validity. And
utility in its own sp..., place. But it does, it is not, it does not help a
person to seek for liberation. Or to attain liberation. In the, in, of itself.
So, that is why that is not considered to be jnana from the point of view of
what jnana, you know, a spiritualist, a seeker, a spiritual seeker wants. Now,
after describing what is jnana. Krishna will now describe what is "jñeyaṁ". So,
let us start with 13.13. This is third section from this, you know, chapter. Let
us quickly look at the overview of the chapter. You know. You know. You know.
You know. Yah. So, we discussed Arjuna's six questions. That was the start.
Then, we discussed the "kṣetraṁ" and "kṣetra-jñam". Then, we discussed "jñānaṁ".
Now, we are going to discuss "jñeyaṁ". So, now, "jñeyaṁ", let us:

        jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi
        yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute
        anādi mat-paraṁ brahma
        na sat tan nāsad ucyate

So, "jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi". So, Krishna is making the, you know, you know,
transition points where He quite clear over here. He says that this, what was
told in the previous verse was "jñāna". "etaj jñānam iti proktam". This is
"jñāna". Now, He says, now, I will speak about "jñeyaṁ". "jñeyaṁ yat tat
pravakṣyāmi". "pravakṣyāmi" means I will speak. "yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute". By
knowing this, one will attain "amṛtam". "anādi mat-paraṁ brahma". "anādi
mat-paraṁ". So, "anādi" means beginningless. "mat-paraṁ" means subordinate to
me. "brahma". You know. You know. Now, "sat tan nāsad ucyate". It is "na sat tan
nāsad". It is beyond the cause and effect of this world. So, "sat" and "asat"
can mean temporary. Or eternal. Prabhupada, it will, it can also mean multiple
things. So, here, Prabhupada tra..., he translates "sat" and "asat" to mean
cause and effect. Now, you know, you know, you know, now what is it that has to
be known? "jñeyaṁ". You know. There are many things which can be known. But the
important principle is to recognise that "jñeyaṁ" is ultimately, you know, the
atma. And the Paramatma. And the Supreme Lord. Rather. So, the Super Paramatma
is one manifestation of the Supreme Lord. Ultimately, the final object of
"jñeyaṁ" is the Absolute Truth. That is what we want to know. All of us want to
know. So, we initially inquire outwards. We look outwards. Look outwards. You
know. And by looking outwards, we try to understand. What, what is it? What is
it that is a reality? That is one way, approach of looking at, you know,
knowledge. That is what "jñeyaṁ". Let us understand this a little bit better
from another perspective. You know. Yah. You know. You know. So, what are the
different modes of understanding ourselves and the world around us? You know. To
understand things, we can look outwards. We can look inwards. Or we can look
upwards. There are three primary ways. We look outwards. Then, we see the world
of matter. You know. You know. You know. And based on matter, the whole school
of thought, called materialism, comes up. And materialism largely relies on
Pratyaksha Pramāṇa. It focuses on the understanding of scriptural know..., of,
of all of reality in terms of matter. Because matter is what we can perceive.
When we look outwards, we look with our eyes. And we do not see spiritual
reality at that time. That is why it is, you know, it is normally that those who
just rely on their own external observation. They come to some kind of
naturalistic conclusions. That nature itself is supreme. Or matter is supreme.
Now, there are others who look inwards. You know. And they think, oh, by looking
inwards, we can understand the Absolute Truth. That is the, one valid way of
looking at things. But the problem with looking inwards is that, you know,
generally, we cannot see much beyond the mind. You know. We have been, people
talk about external, internal, often, they have the reference point of the body.
So, what is outside the body is external. And what is inside the body is
internal. But this is a body based distinction of external, internal. You know.
Actually, from the body's perspective, what is inside is not just the real eye.
There is also the mind. Which is the pseudo eye. You know. The mind makes us
think that its emotions are our emotions. So, if we just turn inwards without
any guidance, then we mistake the mind the mind to be me. You know. You know.
You know. You know.

And the psychological approach is based on anumana. You know. Generally, when we
turn, turn inwards, we cannot see things as clearly as we can see externally. Of
course, externally, also, we cannot see everything very clearly. But the, when
we turn inwards, it is like the inner territory is mostly filled with, you know,
our guestworks and inferences. So, it is anumana. So, both these are useful ways
of acquiring knowledge. But more important than both of them is the, loo..., to
look upwards. And to wait for descending revelation. So, revelation enables us
not only to get direct knowledge descending from Krishna. But it also helps us
to, you know, make sense of what we are observing, you know, externally and
internally. So, what we observe externally through ma..., you know, through
"Pratyaksha". And what we observe internally through anumana. This is a very
rough division. To just und..., to just communicate the idea of what are the
broad categories of acquiring knowledge. But overall, these categories will vary
depending on, you know, the, no..., nobody thinks, nobody learns everything just
by looking externally. And nobody looks entirely internally to try to learn
things. People try to mix and mesh things up. And they do not necessarily always
get a good result from their mixing up of other things. You know. You know. But
essentially, outward. Inwards. And upwards. They are three ways. The directions,
in which we can go in the search of knowledge. So, the object of knowledge, or
the goal for which we are searching through knowledge is called as "jñeyaṁ". And
"jñeyaṁ" can be known in various ways. So, Krishna is now telling in this
verse, "jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi". "yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute". So, "yaj
jñātvāmṛtam aśnute". "āmṛtam aśnute" means that this is, you know, by knowing
this "jñeyaṁ", one will attain "amṛtam". Now, what does it mean "amṛtam"? How
will one attain "amṛtam"? This "amṛtam" does not refer to the celestial nectar.
The nectar that is available in heaven. The somara. Sorr..., anything like that.
"yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute". Here, "amṛtam" refers to immortality. Actually, when
we understand the "jñeyaṁ". When we understand the object of knowledge. We
understand the soul and the Lord. And we understand the relationship between the
two. And that relationship enables us to taste the nectar of pure devotion.
Initially, the nectar of devotion. And eventually, the nectar of pure devotion.
And, you know, you know, you know, you know, fimal..., finally, we go back to
the spiritual world. Where we can keep serving, tasting the nectar of pure
devotion eternally, without any, you know, obstacles. So, this is "yaj
jñātvāmṛtam aśnute". "amṛtam". "amṛtam" means that which is nectarian. That
which is eternal. And then, further, it is said that "anādi mat-paraṁ brahma".
So, this is one of the verses in which different acharyas take different
positions about what the terms mean. So, you know, you know, you know, from the
verses 13 to 17, in this section, they can all mean either the atma. Or they can
mean the Brahman. Or they can mean the Paramatma. So, in general, you know, we
will have to look into the acharyas' commentaries to understand what is being
referred to over here. So, what is the difference between atma and Brahman? The
atma is one unit of consciousness. Whereas the Brahman is like an ocean of
consciousness, is all sat-cit-ananda. So, and now, so, "mat". "mat-paraṁ
brahma". "mat-paraṁ brahma". That which is dependent on Me. You know. "brahma".

        anādi mat-paraṁ brahma
        na sat tan nāsad ucyate

That is beyond the cause and effect of this world. What does it mean to be
beyond the cause and effect? Actually, the cause and effect just goes on
generation after generation. You know. People ask this question that who
created, you know, who, who came first? The chi..., did the chickens come first?
Or did the eggs come first? Now, if we go s..., pure, in the purely logical
perspective, the result of this sort of reasoning is that, you know, you know,
you know, you know, if a chicken came first, then we raise the question, where
did the chickens come from? And if the eggs come first, then we come to the
question, come, where did the eggs come from? So, either way, it seems to be
the chicken come from the eggs. And the eggs come from the chicken. But, you
know, what is the origin of either? You know. Is that both of them have an
origin? And that is explained to be the origin in terms of, you know, you know,
you know, "sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam". The Absolute Truth. So, that Absolute Truth,
that spiritual reality is beyond the "na sat tan nāsad ucyate", is beyond the
cause and effect, you know, cycle of this material existence. So, in fact, you
know, you know, you know, "na sat tan nāsad ucyate". Physi..., in s..., pyhsics,
or in sciences, general, scientists have often talked about the concept of
causal completeness. Causal completeness means, one that is not, they give by
God does not exist. Or, or why God does not matter. Not necessarily God does not
exist. They say, even if God exists, actually, all of material phenomena operate
according to material laws. And because material phenomena operate according to
material laws, so, therefore, there is no room for Gods to play any role. You
know. If I throw a stone down, the stone is going to fall. Why? Based on the
laws of gravity. So, it is not that, you know, God can suddenly intervene and
stop the stone from flying. We do not see that kind of interventions happening.
They are not scientific observable. Verifiable. So, therefore, they say that,
you know, you know, the material phenomena are casually complete. There is no
need to postulate any cause beyond what are found within the aren..., arena of
matter. So, in one sense, they are correct. Because Krishna has made the world
in such a way that ma..., that He does not have to intervene constantly for the
management of this world. That is why whenever He descends as happened in
Janmashtami, that is extreme, extremely rare even in terms of the vastness of
the cosmic cycles. You know. And it is extreme, as we know, it is only once in a
day of Brahma. And Brahma is, and it is extraordinary. You know. So, when we
understand this, "na sat tan nāsad ucyate". That means that Absolute Truth
exists beyond the realm of matter and sp..., you know, material causes. And
material effects. H..., material cause and material effects have their own
cycle. But beyond their cycli..., cyclic existence do exist the spiritual
things. So, now, Krishna, now, what does this refer to? "mat-paraṁ brahma"? Now,
Prabhupada, you know, some previous acharyas, some of them say that this refers
to Paramatma. Prabhupada explains this to refer to, you know, you know, Brahma.
And Brahma is that Absolute Truth. You know. You know. You know. You know. You
know. You know. You know. So, you know, Prabhupada quotes several verses over
here from the "Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad".

        pradhāna-kṣetrajña-patir guṇeśaḥ

So, "pradhāna-kṣetrajña-patir". Not "gaṇeśa". So, it is "guṇeśaḥ". So, "guṇeśaḥ"
is the Lord of the modes. "gaṇaeśaḥ" would be the Lord of people. You know.
"gaṇaeśaḥ". You know. So, "guṇeśaḥ". So, here, it is, you know, you know, there
are many "kṣetrajña". But this is a "pradhāna-kṣetrajña". This is one
"kṣetrajña" who knows about all "kṣetraṁ"s. And He is the "patir". He is the
master. And He is the Lord of the modes. So, you know, here, what is, the first
verse is saying that, actually, what is the importance of knowing about
Brahman? If, you know, by knowing about Brahma, one will be able to become
liberated from the cycle of birth and death. So, why do people, who are often
about to die, you know, you know, you know, in the Vedic tradition, if somebody
is about to die, at that time, other people go and seek blessings. And seek
forgiveness from offenses. And the whole purpose of this, you know, is to enable
people to understand that, you know, we should not let these things block us
from our connection with the Absolute Truth. So, we do not want to have harm,
negative feelings. We do not want to have, you know, harsh, you know, emotions
towards anyone. And we do not want them to have it. So, that is called as
an emotional closure. So, we close. Yes. It is a relationship now. Forgiveness
has been given. Forgiveness has been received. And now, we calm down. And we
calm down. And then, with a peaceful mind, one can turn towards, you know, what
is coming next. When a devotee understand that this Krishna, who is coming next,
that devotee can turn the mind towards Krishna, also, more peacefully. And more
purposefully. So, of course, at one level, we can say that, material, you know,
material dis..., distractions never end. And that is definitely true. But at the
same time, there are some minor distractions. Some major distractions. And
thinker of the major distractions is extremely important for us to be able to
focus on the major things. You know. So, we should not, the, dub all
distractions as minor. And neglect them. Nor, we should make all distractions as
major. And obsess over them so much that we cannot do any personal activity. Our
primary purpose is to serve Krishna. And whatever distracts our service to
Krishna. And to the extent it distracts us from service of Krishna, to that
extent, accordingly, we give it whatever, you know, co..., attention is
required. So:

        dāsa-bhūto harer eva nānyasvaiva kadācana

"dāsa-bhūto harer eva". You know. The living entity is always the servant of
Lord Hari. "nānyasvaiva kadācana". You know. You know. Actually, there is no
other position for the living entity. So, Prabhupada takes this, you know, you
know, to refer to, you know, you know, you know, the Brahman. You know, to the
Brah..., "mat-paraṁ brahm" to refer to the Jiva. Now, the subsequent verses,
they start talking about the all-pervading aspect of the Absolute Truth. Which
is the "jñeyaṁ".

        sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādaṁ tat
        sarvato ’kṣi-śiro-mukham
        sarvataḥ śrutimal loke
        sarvam āvṛtya tiṣṭhati

"sarvam āvṛtya tiṣṭhati". So, you know, you know, that this Absolute pervades
everything. Exists pervading everything. "sarvam āvṛtya". Now, this itself
should indicate what is it that pervades everything? That is the Brahman. That
is the impersonal Absolute. "sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādaṁ tat". Everywhere are the hands
and legs. You know. "sarvato ’kṣi-śiro-mukham". Everywhere are the
’kṣi-śiro-mukham". Everywhere are the eyes. The head. And the face. "sarvataḥ
śrutimal loke". And everywhere are the ears. So, the eyes. The head. The mouth.
The ears. The hands. The legs. They are everywhere. You know. What does it
indicate? It indicates that this is talking about, you know, you know, now,
generally, we do not talk about the Brahman as having, you know, many personal
attributes. We do not talk about the Brahman as having face. And hands. And
legs. So, "sarvam āvṛtya tiṣṭhati" can refer to the Brahman. But then, the other
features, that are talked about, having hands, having legs, which are
everywhere. That does not, what does it refer to? So, now, if you see, if we
look from our philosophical perspective. We may say, oh, this is so easy. This
is Paramatma. Paramatma is present in:

        anda tarastha paraman uchayan tarastham

"anda tarastha". That the Paramatma is situated in the Brahman. Then, the
Paramatma is also situated in the atom. We understand that Paramatma is
all-pervasive. You know. So, what is the implication of the statement that
Paramatma is all-pervasive? The simple implication is that, actually, the
Paramatma is, you know, you know, the, you know, "jñeyaṁ". So, He, that is
everywhere. That point which has been talked about is that we want to know about
Him. And it is not, knowing about Him should not be difficult. Because He
is everywhere. He observes everything. He can do everything. He knows
everything. So, that is the "jñeyaṁ". Now, this is not necessarily a direct
description of what the "jñeyaṁ" is. But it is a transmission of an intitue...,
inspirational understanding of what the "jñeyaṁ" is. So, that means that, you
know, Krishna is giving us an insider's perspective. You know. People often
want insider, inside story. Inside story means, say, if there were some
terrorist attacks. Say, there was a terrorist attack then Mumbai. And, you know,
you know, on this 26.11. If somebody was in a particular hotel, where taja
hotel. Where the terrorist attack was there. And then, that person, from inside,
some of that persons survived. And then, that person says, oh, what was it? You
know. What was it? You know. How was it like? You know. They were coming like
this. And they went like that. And they went like that. And they did this. And
they did that. So, all that, you know, it is insider's story. And that insider
story, inside story or insider's story is what people want to know. How was it
from inside? So, you know, we cannot, have the vision that a pure devotee has.
Because we do not have the devotion that a pure devotee has. That is why we
cannot see directly from that perspective. The things, the material world. But
for advanced devotees, they see like that. And Krishna is in here reporting to
us the vision that, you know, you know, an advanced spiritual has. Let us say
"sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādaṁ tat". Everywhere are the hands and legs. Everywhere are the
eyes. The mouth. And the head. Everywhere are the ears. And in this way, the
Supersoul exists pervading everything. What does it actually refer to? It refers
to the Paramatma aspect. As we know. But Advai..., this is, this, this verse is
quoted in a pastime of "Advaita Ācārya". Which Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu describes
in the Maha Prakash Lila. When he is glorifying the various devotees. And
benedicting them. So, you know, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu describes, yeah, how
"Advaita Ācārya" was such a great Vaishnava? That whatever Vedic literature was
brought in front of him, he would explain to it, in terms of, he explained it in
terms of pure devotional service. Instead of they are beating around the bush.
And they are giving different kinds of explanations. He would explain them for
pure devotional service. But when he came to this, he just could not understand
this verse at the level of pure devotional service. And then, even he was, you
know, as fast asleep. One night, the Lord itself appeared in his dream. And gave
him the understanding. Oh, what does this verse mean? He says, this is referring
to Paramatma aspect. You know. So, you know, you know, for us, Prabhupada has
given intimate things. So, very simple. So that we know, it is very easy to
understand. This refers to the Paramatma. But for "Advaita Ācārya", there was a
brilliant insight at that time. And that came to Him by the grace of the Supreme
Lord. You know. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada then talks about the, you
know, potency of the Lord to accept prasad. We discussed in 9.26.

        patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

You know. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada gives one more understanding of how
the Lord is all-pervading. He quotes from the "Brahma-saṁhitā", 15.7..., 5.37
over here:

        goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ

So, "goloka eva nivasaty". "nivasaty" means one who resides in "goloka". But
"akhilātma-bhūtaḥ". That Lord is the, you know, all, you know,
"akhilātma-bhūtaḥ". That means He is the "akhilātma". He is for the in-dwelling
Supersoul of all living beings. You know. You know. That is not the position of
the Jiva. So, now, let us look at the next verse:

        sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ
        sarvendriya-vivarjitam
        asaktaṁ sarva-bhṛc caiva
        nirguṇaṁ guṇa-bhoktṛ ca

So, "sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ". So, "sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ". You know. That
means, He is the, you know, source of all the "guṇa"s. And
"sarvendriya-vivarjitam". You know. Actually, "sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ". He is
the source of all the senses. And source of all the qualities. But, you know,
"sarvendriya-vivarjitam". That Absolute Truth has no, you know, senses, no, you
know, inner, "sarvendriya-vivarjitam". Free from all senses. "asaktaṁ sarva-bhṛc
caiva". You know. That Absolute Truth is detached. You know. You know. You know.
You know. From everything. But at the same time, "sarva-bhṛc". He is the
maintainer of everyone. "sarva-bhṛc caiva". "nirguṇaṁ guṇa-bhoktṛ ca". So, that
Absolute Truth is, you know, you know, you know, not affected by any modes. He
is transcendental to all the modes. But still is the controller of all the
modes. "guṇa-bhoktṛ ca". So, in this way, the Absolute Truth is, the reser...,
He is the reservoir of all contradictory attributes. All integrated into one.
"sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ". So, what is being referred to over here? Here, the
point, that is being made, is that the Absolute Truth has inconceivable
attributes. We saw this point was talked about in the Isopanishad, also.

        tad dūre tad v antike

        tad ejati tan naijati
        tad dūre tad v antike
        tad antar asya sarvasya
        tad u sarvasyāsya bāhyataḥ

So, the, at the Is..., you know, at the, that point in the Isopanishad, we
discussed how that Absolute Truth walks. And does not walk. He is far away.
And He is close. He is inside of everything. And still outside of everything.
So, how is that possible? That is the inconceivability. So, inconceivability
does not mean that we cannot understand. It just means that we cannot understand
at our present level of consciousness. Over a period of time, we will be able to
understand more and more. We will never understand completely. But we will be
able to properly understand. You know. At a deeper level, as we keep practicing.
So, here, the point is, you know, you know, you know, three sets of
contradictions are established. The source of all senses. But is without senses.
Is the maintainer of all. But does not the maintainer of everyone. And is the,
is the Lord of the modes. And still is beyond the modes. These are all possible
because the inconceivable potency of the Supreme Lord. Then, Prabhupada explains
further. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know.
You know. You know.

"Due to materially contaminated senses, we cannot see His form. Therefore the
impersonalists, who are still materially affected, cannot understand the
Personality of Godhead."

So, why we cannot understand these conceivable attributes? That is because of
what? "materially contaminated senses". You know. So:

        bahir antaś ca bhūtānām
        acaraṁ caram eva ca
        sūkṣmatvāt tad avijñeyaṁ
        dūra-sthaṁ cāntike ca tat

You know. You know. "bahir antaś ca bhūtānām". He is situated inside. And
outside of everything. "acaraṁ caram eva". Sorry. He is inside. And outside of
all living beings. "acaram". And "caram". The moving. And the nonmoving. You
know. You know. "sūkṣmatvāt tad avijñeyaṁ". "sūkṣmatvāt" means because He is
very, very subtle. "avijñeyaṁ". We cannot know Him properly. Now, it is
interesting that, you know, you know, you know, this verse has declared the
"jñeyaṁ" to be "avijñeyaṁ". He started by saying that, now, I will talk about
"jñeyaṁ". But now, it is saying that that "jñeyaṁ" is "avijñeyaṁ". "avijñeyaṁ".

        sūkṣmatvāt tad avijñeyaṁ
        dūra-sthaṁ cāntike ca tat

All this is far away, is also close by. "cāntike ca tat". So, here, the
inconceivable attributes. We discussed how "tad dūre tad v antike" How that way,
understood. For the nondevotees, Krishna is far away. For the devotees, Krishna
is close. Like that. So, in this way, these things can be understood.
"sūkṣmatvāt tad avijñeyaṁ". You know. You know. So, Prabhupada explains.
Prabhupada quotes from the "Upaniṣad"s. This is chapter. When, chapter, where
Prabhupada quotes from the Upanishad a lot. Because there are, you know, you
know, parallel passages in the "Upaniṣad". Which illune the themes which have
been explored in this verse. So:

        Āsīno dūraṁ vrajati śayāno yāti sarvataḥ

"śayāno". "dūraṁ vrajati". Although He resides far away. "sarvataḥ". He is
actually, you know, also residing everywhere else. He is residing all,
everywhere. He is, you know, all-pervading. You know. You know. And how can
these inconceivable, contradi..., attributes be understood? Well, at one level,
we can say that the Bhagavanis far away. And the Paramatma is close to us. That,
you know, we can say that, you know, from the, you know, the Supersoul is inside
us as "Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu". And the Mahavishnu is outside us as "Mahavishnu".
Or even as "Garbhodakaśāyī Vishnu". So, like that, we can understand these
verses. Another way of loo..., understanding, it is that this is all, you know,
recognising the glory of the Sup..., of the Supreme Being, who has such
extraordinary attributes. You know. You know. Both perspectives are true. So,
now, let us go by:

        avibhaktaṁ ca bhūteṣu
        vibhaktam iva ca sthitam
        bhūta-bhartṛ ca taj jñeyaṁ
        grasiṣṇu prabhaviṣṇu ca

So, "avibhaktaṁ ca bhūteṣu". "avibhaktaṁ" means undivided. "vibhaktam iva ca
sthitam". You know. Although, He is undivided, He is also acting as if He is
divided. How is He divided?

        avibhaktaṁ ca bhūteṣu
        vibhaktam iva ca sthitam

You know. You know. Although He is undivided, He is divided. "bhūta-bhartṛ ca
taj jñeyaṁ". "bhūta-bhartṛ" is the maintainer of all living entities. "taj
jñeyaṁ". That is the knower. "grasiṣṇu prabhaviṣṇu ca". "grasiṣṇu" is,
"grasiṣṇu" is that person is the, you know, the devourer. And is also the, you
know, you know, you know, the, the developer of all things. So, here, you know,
you know, you know, you know, you know, first of all, "avibhaktaṁ ca". Let us
look at that, all these verses are essentially talking about the contradictory
attri..., attributes of the Supreme Absolute Truth. So, "avibhaktaṁ ca bhūteṣu".
He is undivided. But He appears as if divided. How is that? You know. The
Supersoul is one. But the Supersoul in your heart is there. Supersoul in my
heart is there. Supersoul in each one of our hearts is there. So, is the
Super..., are the Supersouls different? No. They are all one Supersoul. But
in many manifestations. That is why "avibhaktaṁ ca". "vibhaktam iva ca sthitam".
As if it is situated in, separately. "sthitam". "iva ca sthitam". So, in the
sanskrit, there is word, "iva". And there is the word "eva". So. Iva. And eva.
And their meanings can be radically different. "Iva" means like. You know. And
"eva". "eva" means certainly. It is a phrase that one may use in the, within the
presence of children. You know. And it is also a phrase. Or is not a phrase. It
is a word, actually. It is a word that indicates something which is, is
generally used for emphasising. "eva". Whereas "iva" is for comparing. So,
"vibhaktam iva ca sthitam". It is as if He is separated. Just like we have a
moon overhead. And then, that moon, you know, you know, you know, is say
reflected in, you know, dozen puddles. On the ground. After rains, there may be
some puddles formed in the ground. And at night, when the moon comes out in the
sky, the moon is reflected in the puddles. So, now, when it is reflected in the
puddles. At that time, the moon is the same. But it is also not the same when it
is reflected. Why is it the same? It is the same because it is that same one
moon. Which is being reflected. But it is not the same because the reflection
does not contain all the potency of that sun, moon. So, of that moon. You know.
It cannot, you know, illumine the same, to the same degree. It cannot offer the
same va. It cannot do most of the things that we assume people are able to do.
So, of, of course, you know, you know, you know, the example is material. And it
does not necessarily apply entirely. Because, you know, the Supersul is not like
that. Because the Supersoul can expand. And still remain the same being.
"vibhaktam iva ca sthitam". Is separated. Is, still, He is one, also. And then,
"bhūta-bhartṛ ca taj jñeyaṁ". "bhūta-bhartṛ". That, that Absolute Truth is the
maintainer of everyone. And "grasiṣṇu prabhaviṣṇu ca". But He is also the, the
destroyer of everyone. And the creator of everyone. So, here, basically, we
know, time has these three aspects. You know. Through the time, creation
happens. Maintenance happens. Destruction happens. And here, the point of that
Absolute Truth being the transcendental to the material changes is brought out
by saying that, actually, all those three material changes are the agencies of
time. So, it is through time that creation happens. It is through time that
maintenance occurs. It is through time that destruction happens. So, you know,
we are all ultimately instruments. Sometime, Pra..., in the, you know, in the
"Bhāgavatam". There is a verse which says that, "pathita". You know:

        pathi chutam tistadi 

That when a person loses money, you know, that person, you know, the wallet
falls on the road. And person loses the money. So, sometimes, it may well happen
that, that that person comes back after two, three days. And find the wallet is
still there. Or a, or may be a bo..., boy, boy, working in a local neighborhood,
finds that money. And keeps it. And when the real th..., real owner comes along,
gives the money to that person. So, in that way, one, you know, you know,
understands that things are not in my control. I lost the money. And it could
very well have been lost. But if the Lord had willed that the money be there, it
is there. Otherwise, it may, I may have the money in my pocket. But somebody
can steal it from my pocket, also. So, you know, what essentially it means is
that our cha..., actions are not final. They are not decisive. Sometimes, a man
and the woman unite. And s..., although, both the, ma..., woman is fertile. And
the man is potent. Still, you know, you know, there is no progeny that happens.
There is, you know, no child is born. Why is that? That indicate that the, just
the husband and the wife, the man and the woman are not the only doers. So, it
is God who is creating through them. It is God who is protecting the money
through the negligence of the people who are around, you know, to visit. To look
at the money. So, like that, the impe..., ultimate doer is, whether it is
creation, whether it is destruction, whether it is maintenance, is the Supreme
Lord. And remembering that is important. That "bhūta-bhartṛ ca taj jñeyaṁ". So,
all three are included. It is not that, you know, something is developing, we
consider it as good. Something is already being considered to be good. But
something is downside. That is not necessarily what we consider to be good. The
things will have to go through circles in this material existence. But that does
not mean that we have to maximise the pains of the circles. We can, you know,
deal with them in a philsophical vision recognising that this Krishna who is
manifesting. You know. When "Parikṣit Mahārāja" was cursed. That "Parikṣit
Mahārāja" saw that, this, it is Lord Krishna who has come to me as this curse.
And He has given me the opportunity to take shelter of Him in the form of Hari
Katha. You know. So, you know, the, what is the meaning of that? He see, saw
that death has also time for form of the Absolute Truth. "grasiṣṇu". "grasiṣṇu".
This death, death has come in that form. You know. You know. You know. You know.
You know. So, let us go to the next verse now.

        jyotiṣām api taj jyotis
        tamasaḥ param ucyate
        jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ
        hṛdi sarvasya viṣṭhitam

You know. So, "jyotiṣām api taj jyotis". You know. You know. "jyotiṣām". That
means among all luminous sim..., you know, objects, I am the light. "tamasaḥ
param ucyate". I am beyond all darkness.

        jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ
        hṛdi sarvasya viṣṭhitam

I am situated in the heart of all living beings. So, I am situated in the heart
of all living beings. What does it mean? It is clearly referring to the
Supersoul. The Brahman is not situated in the heart of all living beings.
Brahman is all-pervading. So, you know, "jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ". Let us
look at these three things. You know. That there is, you know, knowledge. There
is the object of knowledge. And then, there is the goal of knowledge. So, now,
now, object of knowledge and goal of knowledge, what is the difference? It is a
subtle, but significant difference. When a, when a medical student is in...,
medical doctor is investigating a patient. At that time, the object of
knowledge, that means this, the thing that is, about which knowledge is being
wanted. That is the patient. So, the patient's body technically. So, different
kinds of scans will be done. And, you know, getting knowledge about that is the
object. But what is the goal of that knowledge? The goal is not just to get
knowledge about that body. The goal is to get cured. To re..., help improve the
health of that patient. If not to help him get cured. So, in that way, there is
a difference between the object of knowledge. And the goal of knowledge. And
with respect to spiritual circles, there is "jñeyaṁ". And there is, you know,
you know, you know, the arena of knowledge. So, there is "jñāna-gamyaṁ". So,
"jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ". So, actually, "jñeyaṁ", we can know about
anything. You know. I can sit on this, take this wire. And make a PhD, it is
about wire. You know. What color they should have. What composition they should
have. What, you know, you know, you know, technics they should have. What
visi..., capacity of the electricity that should be allowed to pass through
them. All these things, we can make a PhD about it. You know. Somebody might be
able to use that knowledge, also. To some extent, it might be useful. You know.
But the important point is that that is not transcendental knowledge. That is
not the kind of knowledge that will liberate us from material existence. You
know. You know. So, "jñeyaṁ", for us, is the atma. The Paramatma. And the
relationship of love between the two. Because when we understand the soul and
the Lord. And the rel..., relation, the loving relationship. That knowledge
brings liberation. So, we discussed that is the "jñeyaṁ". So, once Prabhupada
was asked, you know, that, you know, what is the use of, you know, basic..., you
know, of knowledge that is not, does not serve any ultimate purpose? Prabhupada
asked this to scientist. There was this professor "Benford" who came for a
morning walk with him. And he was saying that, you know, they walking along in a
garden. So, Prabhupada said that, you know, that professor "Benford"'s. So,
Prabhupada asked him, so, what is the current scientific knowledge about the
soul? And Prabhupada says, current, the scientist says, currently, there is no
scientific knowledge about the soul. Prabhupada said, then your knowledge is
useless. Professor says why? But, you know, is, the scientific knowledge is the
different category of knowledge. You know. Prabhupada said that is fine. You
know. Is, may be different category. But is the most important character.
Without knowing who you are, how can you know about anything more? About how
life is to be perceived? You know. Now, they had a very, you know, stimulating
discussion for a long time. And then, Prabhupada decided to get back for giving
the class. And as he was going, you know, they were still going back. And that
scientist said that Swamiji, you know, you see, either, he pointed to the grass.
And he said, Swamiji, now, you know, we have got two big volumes of books
explaining how this grass grows. So, Prabhupada replied, you know, you know,
that grass was growing even without your books. What is the big deal? So, now,
scientist ma..., no, but he said that, but Swamiji, you know, if God did not
want us to study that grass, why did He put the grass there? So, Prabhupada
said, my point is that you study the grass. And you put, do not study at all the
designer who put the grass there. That person who put the grass there. So, there
is fractured. Diversed. You know. You know. Segregated knowledge. Which does
not, which, you know, frag..., such fragmented knowledge does not lead to
integrated understanding. So, for us, the "jñeyaṁ" is not just matter. That is
the "jñeyaṁ" for science. But for us, the ultimate "jñeyaṁ" is the Supreme Lord.
And the atma. And the relationship between the two. And "jñāna-gamyaṁ".
"jñāna-gamyaṁ". What is the ultimate goal of the knowledge? To know more about
Krishna. To form more and more love with Krishna. To be eternally liberated to
love and serve Krishna. That is "jñāna-gamyaṁ". You know. You know. "jñānaṁ
jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ". So, then, after this, Prabhupada quotes several verses.
You know. Now, Krishna gives a conclusion of this section.

        iti kṣetraṁ tathā jñānaṁ
        jñeyaṁ coktaṁ samāsataḥ
        mad-bhakta etad vijñāya
        mad-bhāvāyopapadyate

You know. You know. "iti kṣetraṁ tathā jñānaṁ". That this is, you know, so, in,
in this way, Krishna is telling, I have told you about what? I have told you about
"kṣetraṁ".  Then, I have told you about "jñānaṁ". And I have told you about
"jñeyaṁ". And, you know, of course, Krishna has talked about "kṣetra-jña", also.
But the talk about "kṣetra-jña" was very brief. So, Krishna mentions about, you
know, "kṣetraṁ". And "kṣetra-jña" is included in "kṣetraṁ" over here. So:

        ... kṣetraṁ tathā jñānaṁ
        jñeyaṁ coktaṁ samāsataḥ

In summary, I have described this to you. But who can actually understand this?
"mad-bhakta etad vijñāya". So, even in the heart of the "jñānaṁ" section, what
is Krishna telling over here? That one can know this knowledge by bhakti. Not
just by mental speculation. Not just by, even by intellectual speculation. By
bhakti. "etad vijñāya". And when one understand it, "mad-bhāvāyopapadyate". You
will attain "mat-bhāvāya". One will attain one's eternal spiritual nature. You
know. Krisna's spiritual nature, actually. That means we will attain the
spiritual level of existence. We will become liberated. So, this is such a
significant verse. Right in the heart of the bha..., "jñāna" section. So, bhakti
has come twice in this chapter. You know. First, it came in the, you know, the
"jñāna" section itself. In the 8 to 12 verses.

        mayi cānanya-yogena
        bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī

And now, secondly, it has come "mad-bhakta etad vijñāya". Who can understand
this? With, my bhakta can understand this. So, others cannot understand this.
That means, you know, which, if, even if one is practicing "jñāna", one has to
include the bhakti sadhana in it. And of course, if one focuses of cultivating
bhakti itself, then the "jñāna" will automatically come. You know. Automatically
means, not spontaneously necessarily. But by steady consistent practice. It will
come about. "mad-bhakta etad vijñāya". It is my devotees who will understand
this. No one else can understand this. And "mad-bhāvāyopapadyate". By which,
they will attain to My nature. Thank you very much. We will continue in our next
class. We will discuss about "puruṣaṁ". And "prakṛtiṁ".

Hare Krishna.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
