Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xd86_xp9nMY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_134_-_Bhagavad_Gita_16.18-16.24_-_Krishna_provides_scripture_to_protect_us_from_demoniac_passions_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=9i_6tgbGcE4gWnAFFrXihAxGJ9B8MTU0ODQ4OTkwMEAxNTQ4NDAzNTAw&event=video_description&v=Xd86_xp9nMY

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the 16th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. Discussing the last section of the
16th Chapter. Let us have a quick overview of the 16th Chapter before we move to
16.18. So, 16th Chapter is, you know, you know, first, the divine, demoniac
qualities. Then, activities of the demoniac. And then, you know, you know, the
consequences and the causes of the demoniac activities. Then, choice between the
divine and demoniac. That is 23 to 24. So, these last two sections, 19 to 22, we
will discuss. And then, 23 to 24. After discussing the 18th verse. You know. You
know. So, you know, you know, you know, you know:

        ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ
        kāmaṁ krodhaṁ ca saṁśritāḥ
        mām ātma-para-deheṣu
        pradviṣanto ’bhyasūyakāḥ

So, you know, "ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ". So, Krishna is describing in one verse,
the various qualities that are present in the demoniac. So, "ahaṅkāraṁ".
"ahaṅkāraṁ" is arr..., false ego. Or arrogance. "ahaṅ", "kāraṁ". So, "ahaṅkāraṁ
balaṁ darpaṁ". So, the demo..., you know, ungodly, the demoniac, they delight in
brandishing their strength. And bragging about their power. You know. You know.
And they think that power is the ultimate source of power. That they think that
physical power itself is the either physical or political power is the ultimate
source of power. They do not understand that there is spiritual power. There is
divine power. That is higher than all this. So, "ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ".
"darpaṁ" is showing off. You know. Especially, for, you know, the sake of
attracting praise. And things like:

        ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ
        kāmaṁ krodhaṁ ca saṁśritāḥ

So, "kāmaṁ krodhaṁ". So, we discussed about "kāmaṁ" and "krodhaṁ" earlier, also.
"kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ". It was taked about in, you know, in, you know, 16.12,
"īhante kāma-":

        āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ
        kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ

"kāma-krodha" is a combination have come several times in the Bhagavad Gita. In
earlier chapter, also. When Arjuna asked what impells one to do sinful
activity. Krishna first says "kāma". And then, He says "krodha". And in Fifth
Chapter, al..., also, Krishna talks about:

        kāma-krodha-vimuktānāṁ
        yatīnāṁ yata-cetasām

Similarly, talks about "kāma" and "krodha" together earlier. You know.

        śaknotīhaiva yaḥ soḍhuṁ
        prāk śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt
        kāma-krodhodbhavaṁ vegaṁ
        sa yuktaḥ sa sukhī naraḥ

So, in 5.23, you know, 5.26. So, like that, He talks several times about "kāma"
and "krodha" together in the Fifth Chapter, also. So, generally, lust, when, is
the desire to enjoy. And the "krodha" is the desire, is the frustration and the
rage that comes, when, you know, the, when the attempt to enjoy is frustrated.
So, "kāmaṁ krodhaṁ ca saṁśritāḥ". So, "saṁśritāḥ". So, again, "śritāḥ". "śritāḥ"
means "ashrai". It is, comes from that. So, took sh..., check shelter. So,
instead of taking shelter of Krishna, you know, they take shelter of material
things. Of these, all these negative material emotions. You know. When, when
lust, when one makes lust into a God, lust makes one into a devil. You know.
That means, you know, that lust makes one do devilish things. If one, what does
it mean to make lust into a God? It is same as to take, you know, take shelter
of lust. That means to think that, you know, that lust will be the source of
pleasure. And lust will be the source of relief. And release from problems. But
lust is not. And similarly, you know, different people can take, not just lust
of power. Of bragging. Of arrogance. You know. When some people get angry. And
many people are, they face a reversals. And you just start, you know, using
their fist on others. Beating others. Blowing at others. And they think that by,
by exhibition of pow..., brutal anger. They can solve all problems. But this is,
this is making shelter of these things. So, you know, generally, the idea of
shelter, you know, i..., can be understood simply first from physical to, you
know, you know, emotional. And spiritual. Physical is, say, if there is a heavy
rains. Then, we try to look for some shelter. You know. So, what does the
shelter do? If I go under a tree. Or I find some shack. Or some house. Then,
when I go under that, then essentially, what am I doing? I am basically
protecting myself. So, if there are heavy rains, then the shack may provide me
some relief from those rains. And along with that, the shack will also provide
me, you know, some comfort. So, like that, the idea is the shelter, we take
shelter of these things. So, the shelter is completely misdirected. And "mām
ātma-para-deheṣu". So, from here, Krishna brings "mām" in this chapter. Until
now, "I" and, I, "mām", "mām", "mām" has not come in the 17 verses prior to
this. So, "mām" will come in this verse. 18, 19, 23, it comes quite prominently.
You know. You know. Now, you know, Krishna is telling, so, now, the divine and
the demoniac, Krishna has talked about their qualities. But here, not focused so
much directly on their relationship with Him. So, if we look at the, you know,
the divine qualities, also. Krishna has not talked about bhakti as being among
the divine qualities. Because their qualities, which are being talked about
here, are material qualities. "abhijātasya bhārata". So, these are material
quali..., material in the sense that Prabhupada calls them transcendental
qualities in the first chapt..., in the purport of the verses 1 to 3. That is in
the sense that these can help one to move towards transcendence. You know. But,
you know, divine and demoniac, they are basically, you know, you know, they are
features of our material nature. At the level of the spiritual nature, the soul
is always devoted to Krishna. So, the soul cannot be demoniac. You know. You
know. You know. You know. You know. So, there are these divine and demoniac.
Now, it, Kri..., when talking about divine qualities, Krishna has talked about
the, you know, you know, qualities according to varana and ashram. He has not
talked about bhakti. He has not talked directly about their relation..., the
relationship of the godly with Him. Yes. The godly can. And should have a
relationship with him. And the relationship of devotion. And devot..., and
service. You know. But that has not been the focus of Krishna until now in the
Gita. In this chapter. You know.

Now, after that, when he talks about the demoniac, also. He talks in terms of
their infatuation. Obsession. And, you know, you know, almost mania over lust.
And greed. And power. You know. But he does not talk about their relationship
with Him. Until, the, until now. So, in this, 16.18C, He says "mām
ātma-para-deheṣu". So, "mām ātma-para-deheṣu". "mām" is I. "ātma-para-deheṣu". I
am present in their hearts. And in the hearts of others. So, you know, you know,
you know, Krishna is referring to here, His presence as the Supersoul. He is
present everywhere. "pradviṣanto ’bhyasūyakāḥ". "pradviṣanto". "pradviṣanto" is
they are envious. "’bhyasūyakāḥ". Because of, you know, they, "pradviṣanto" is
bla..., they blaspheme out of envy. So, here, you know, you know, Krishna comes
to the mai..., main point. Where He says that, their attitude towards Him is
very unfortunate. It, it is very negative. It is, envy is inside blaspheme,
envy, envy may be inside, also. But blaspheme is when it comes out as verbal
criticism. Unreasonble. You know. Irrationale. And insensitive. And harsh
castigation. So, that is, you know, blasphemy. You know. So, "pradviṣanto
’bhyasūyakāḥ". So, their, you know, so, now, what is the relevance of saying
"mām ātma-para-deheṣu"? Krishna has talked earlier about:

        suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati

In 5.29, He has said that He is the well-wisher of all living beings. So,
Krishna has also said that how He is present in the heart of all living beings.
Just in the previous chapter.
        
        sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

In 15.15. So, Krishna is telling that, actually, I am the well-wisher of all.
So, I am with, the well-wisher of, even of the godly people. Even of these un...,
the demoniac people. But they are envious of me. And they blashpheme Me. And
they are actually, you know, you know, they are envious of Me. Who is the
well-wisher of all, you know, you know, all living beings. Including them. You
know. See, normally, you know, it ma..., we may think it is normal to treat our
enemies as a, as ene...,, inimically. So, somebody, then, ini..., inimical
towards me. I will be inimical towards that person. But somebody is my
well-wisher. And then, to be inimical to that person. That is unfortunate.
Especially that well-wisher is not just a well-wisher in terms of wishing us
good. But he is also a benefactor in terms of wanting to do good. And also, he
is knowledgeable. He knows how to do good, also. So, Krishna is that kind.
Krishna is not just wishing us good. Krishna is trying to do good for us. And
He, not, not only is He trying to do good. He actually knows what is good for us,
also. So, He is the Absolute. He is the, actually, you know, the knower of
everything. As 7.25 says:
   
        vedāhaṁ samatītāni

Twenty, you know, 26. You know. You know. So, "vedāhaṁ samatītāni". He knows
everything. He knows everything, you know, about us. And naturally, He wants the
best for, He is like a doctor. So, you know, the patient, if this world is like
a hospital. And the patient, the very least the patient can do, is to be
hospitable to the doctor. You know. The world is a hospital. Be hospitable to
the doctor. But one, instead of beinh hospitable, is hostile to the doctor.
Then, that is, you know, that ruins all chan..., most chances of that person is
getting cured. Makes it much more difficult. If the person has a inimical
attitude towards the doctor. So, "pradviṣanto ’bhyasūyakāḥ". So, these people
are envious of Krishna. So, Prabhupada explains in the purport, so, such a
person:

"he puts forward false arguments against the existence of God and denies the
scriptural authority."

So, you know, in further, Prabhupada says:

"If he has an enemy who might check the advancement of his sensual activities,
he makes plans to cut him down by his own power."

Such people do not care for anyone else. Or anytihng else. Except their own
enjoyment. So, then, Krishna now describes what happens to these people.
Consequences.

        tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān
        saṁsāreṣu narādhamān
        kṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān
        āsurīṣv eva yoniṣu

You know. So, "tān ahaṁ". "tān ahaṁ" means, those people "ahaṁ". "dviṣataḥ
krūrān". "dviṣataḥ". The envious. And the mischievous. You know. "krūrān".
Prabhupada translates as mischievous. "saṁsāreṣu narādhamān". So, among
"nara-adhamān". There was "puruṣottamaḥḥ". You know. So, "puruṣa-adhamān".
Or "nara-adhamānn". "puruṣottamaḥ" is the best among persons. So, Krishna is
ultimately "puruṣottamaḥ". So, "nara-adhamān" is those who are the worst among
all living beings. So, "saṁsāreṣu narādhamān". So, those are the lowest among
all living beings. What happens? "kṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān". "kṣipāmy". I throw
them. You know. Krishna says. "ajasram aśubhān". "ajasram" means for a long
time. You know. For, you know, Prabhupada translates as forever. So, "ajasram
aśubhān". "aśubhān" is inauspicious. "ajasram aśubhān". "āsurīṣv eva yoniṣu".
Then, He says into, into demoniac species. Now, we have earlier discussed about
how demoniac is not just a mentalit..., it is not just a specy. It is also
mentality. So, Duryodhana had a human body. But he had a demoniac mentality. But
there are also species themselves which are demoniac. So, for example, there
are, you know, say, there are, you know, there, there are "rākṣasa"s. There is
"yakṣa"s. There are, you know, Daityas. You know. They are demoniac species in
the sense that it is normal in that body to have a demoniac mentality. Of
course, the body does not entirely determine the mentality. That is why how we
can, there can be exceptions like, you know:

       prahlādaś cāsmi daityānāṁ

As Krishna says in the, you know, in the Vibhuti Yoga Chapter. In the Tenth
Chapter. That He says that, you know, among the Daityas, I am "Prahlāda".
Because Prahlahada is godly. Similaly, "Dhṛtarāṣṭra", it was godly. But these
are exceptionals. So, in those bodies, asuri bodies, normally, the men...,
normal mentality will be asuric. You know. "tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān". So,
Krishna says, I throw them. Now, it is interesting. This may seem to be little,
you know, you know, is Krishna God who seeks a personal vendetta? You know. You
are envious of Me. So, I will throw You into hell. I will throw You into hell.
"ana...", "ahaṁ". And I, not only that. "a...", "a...", "ajasram". "ajasram"
is for, almost forever. So, you know, you know, now, what does this actually
mean? You know. In, in the Christian tradition. And in the sense of mother
religious traditions. There is the concept of eternal damnation. So, eternal
damnation means that if a person does not accept God in this lifetime, then that
person has to go to hell forever. Forever. Eternal damnation. So, is this verse
actually supporting eternal damnation? You know. "āsu...", "ā...", "āsu...",
"ā...", "ajasram". Forever. You know. So, there are these two serious questions
here. Is Krishna personally having, you know, something against these people?
And does Krishna cast them, them to eternal damnation? So, now, here, we have
to understand everything from its context. You know. Without of con..., you
know, looking, if we divorce a, you know, subject from its context. That a
statement from its context. It can be very misleading. You know. You know. "tān
ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān". So, now, "krūrān". The word "krūrān" can often mean
cruel. But Prabhupada translates "krūrān" as mischievous. So, Krishna is like
the fath..., father. And no matter how terrible the activities that the children
do, from the father's point of view, they are mischievous activities. These
children are not grown up. They are ki..., they are ki..., s..., just small kids
right now. They are doing mischievous activities. Now, suppose, a child, a son.
A child wants to do something terrible. And then, that parent says, you know, if
you do this, then, you know, you will never be, be allowed to come in my house.
You know. Get out of my, you will have to go out of my house. And you will never
be allowed to come back in my house. Now, the point, the emphasis and purpose of
the statement is, not that get out of my house. And never come back. The point
is that do not do it. Do not do it. So, the, similarly, when Krishna is speaking
like this. The emphasis is not that even throw them into hell. The emphasis is
that do not do this. You know. So, that, you know, from Krishna's point of view,
it is mischievous. So, Prabhupada, when he gives this, it is a "bhavanuvada".
You know. You know. A "bhavanuvada" means that, let us see over, "bhavanuvada".
You know. You know. You know. In "bhavanuvada", what happens? Emotion and
intention are conveyed. Whereas in "arthanuvada", "arthanuvada" is literal
meaning. So, semantic accuracy is prevered..., preserved. Semantic is the
subject which deals with meaning semantics. So, now, you know, now, actually
speaking, if we want to get proper understanding. Semantics and aesthetics need
to be combined. You know. You know. You know. If only semantics is given, then
that does not lead to proper understanding. You know. Because we have to, you
know, there are different theories of meanings. So, some people have the idea
that, you know, you know, words are like pipelines. That means, you know, I,
the, for example, when I speak. You know. You know. You know. You know.

So, the words which I speak, the words are like pipes. And in the words, I put
the meaning. And then, when they come, come out, and came, the meaning comes
out. That means the idea is that, the words are simply the carriers of meaning.
And, you know, we invest meaning in the words. So, the other idea is that, you
know, words always have their meanings. And the, you know, meanings of the words
are preserved in dictionary. So, we draw those words out from the dictionaries.
And we use them according to their meaning. So, that means, words are the, you
know, carriers of meanings. One is at, ends up, you know, the words, you know,
you know, contain the meanings themselves. So, carriers means, meanings
inven..., inven..., in..., you know, in..., inserted into them. And the other
idea is word is a containers of meaning. That means, meanings are contained in
the words. And then, you know, you know, the meanings are, so we choose the
word. And then, accordingly, we speak. So, what is the actual reality? Are words
the carriers of meanings? Or are they the containers of meanings? Actually, it
is a combination of both. Certainly, we cannot use any word. And invest any
meaning in it. It will not work. But at the same time, you know, words are not
just the containers of meaning. They are also carriers. The way something is
spoken, so, for example, you know, if somebody does something for us. And we are
not at all happy. We did not want to, that person to do that. That is actually
displaying. So, I thank you. Now, if I just make a sour face. And thank you. You
know. That thank you is actually an expression, not of thanks at all. It is an
expression of annoyance. So, through the tone. Through the expression. If
somebody says. You know. If a child is angry with the mother. And the mother is
angry with the child. And the moth..., moth..., child says, ah, you never love
me. The mother says, I love you. Now, "I love you" is being said over there. But
is that really an expression of love? It is born in expression of anger. You
know. So, now, if "I love you", if the, if, if we say "I love you" is just
itself the container of meaning. Then, however "I love you" is spoken, it will
not make much difference. But, you know, you know, you know, you know, if "I
love you" is just a con..., the words are the conveyor of meaning, then can I
say I hate you? And I say, actually, I used the word "I hate you". But I meant
"I love you". No. That will also not work. So, that is why, actually, when we,
we talk about meanings. Meanings have to be talked about in the very careful
way. So, we have to understand that there is a literal aspect to it. But there
is also a contextual aspect to it. And both have to be combined together. So,
that is why semantics. And aesthetics. You know. You know. You know. When, you
know, you know, in the com..., computers, also. Now, there is google translate.
And there are computer programs which try to translate sentences. And they do a
fairly good job at times. But often, they can get completely messed up. You
know. There is this, you know, you know, some people say, the stories,
apocry..., they say, the sentence in the apocryphal. Apocryphal means it is made
up. But either way, whether it is real. Or is, it is made up. But important
point is that, this convey how things can get messed up. You know. There is the
biblical saying, you know, the spirit is willing. But the flesh is weak. So,
that, the, what, the idea of that saying is that, you know, the soul, a person
wants to do good. But the temptations of the flesh drag a person down. The
spirit is willing. But the flesh is weak. So, you know, you know, now, if a, if
a machine is just going to translate to, ok, what are the possible meanings of
the word spirit? And then, what are the meanings of the word flesh? And like
that, you take all of them. So, you know, just by that, the translation that
came out, you will, machine translation was, the vodka is strong. But the meat
is rotten. So, the vodka is strong. So, spirit actually here means intention.
Determination. But what happened is, spirit was translated as, it, like wine.
And in Russia, the, so, the, when it was translated it, into, you know, Russian.
And the Russian, Engvi..., equivalent of English, equi..., equivalent English,
the meaning is unfit given. So, spirit was translated as wine. And then, wine is
a vodka. So, the spirit is willing. So, that again, the vodka is strong. But the
flesh is weak. So, "flesh is weak" became the "meat is rotten". So, what is a
philosophical statement about the nature of, you know, men, which are of human
being, became a condition about the state of, you know, food on a table. So, it
can, you know, things can get completely lost. In translation. So, if one, that
is why if a translation has to be done, it has to be done by those who are not
just experts in language. But those who are also experts in context.

So, there is content. And there is context. So, words are, the, words are, you
know, when words are, con..., they are both the containers. And the carriers of
meaning. And there has to be a combination of both. We will look at the, you
know, that is why in English, there is said to be, you know, there is
denotation. And connotation. Denotation means, what does the word mean? And
connotation means, what does the word imply? So, connotation is not necessarily
impl..., you know, contained. But it is implied by the word. So, you know, if we
look at these words literally, you know, then it may appear as if Krishna is to,
casting a person into hell. But we will see, me..., several other praise, places
in the Bhagavad Gita where Krishna talks about how even the, you know, the
lowest of all people can get el..., elevated. You know. Krishna talks about "api
cet su-durācāro". He says, the "su-durācāro". No matter how sinful they are,
they can become elevated. So, 9.31-32 is there. 30-31 is there. Then, similarly:

	api ced asi pāpebhyaḥ
	sarvebhyaḥ pāpa-kṛt-tamaḥ

Krishna talks about that in the, the, or even most sinful people can get
elevated. You know. He, you know, you know, He talks about in nine point, in
4.36. And then, He also talks about, you know, how, whatever situation one may
be in. That person can surrender to Him. And, and, you know, you know, that
person will get elevated. So, 18.57, He says:

        sarva-karmāṇy api sadā
        kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ

Whatever karma, one might, might be doing. If one, actually, surrenders to Him.
Takes shelter of Him. That person can get, attain perfection. So, the point is,
we have to look at other places in the Bhagavad Gita, also, to clearly
understand, what, you know, verse is saying. So, here, this is more an expression
of Krishna's displeasure. And annoyance in love, anger, loving anger. So, loving
anger. You know. It is an expression of Krishna's tough love. Sometimes, the
parents have to express tough love. So, that the children learn the lesson that
is intended. Learn the lesson that is intended. So, here, "tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ
krūrān". So, when Krishna says "krūrān". Prabhupada translates as in
mischievous. Why mischievous? Because, you know, from the Krishna's point of
view, there is children. You know. Why are they act..., doing so mischievously?
They should use the, grow up. They should act maturely. You know. They do not
act maturely. They are ruining their lives. So, you know, you know, you know,
Prabhupada explains in the purport that, you know, you know, that how the soul
goes into a, you know, the many kind:

"Such demoniac species of men are held to be always full of lust, always violent
and hateful and always unclean."

So:

"The many kinds of hunters in the jungle are considered to belong to the
demoniac species of life.".

So, basically, those who live insenstively, causing hurt to others. So, they
are, the, said to be demoniac. So, Prabhupada is talking here about two things.
Demoniac species can be physical form. And he is saying, even hunters,
biologically, they will be the human form. Even if they are in the human form,
they have a demoniac mentality. So, Prabhupada is using the word species over
here. Not just in terms of, you know, biology. He is using it in terms of, you
know, you know, consciousness. So, that is how we understand the word specy. So,
those species, you know, is not according to biology as it is used in, you know,
in, as used in, in, in, normal scientific or normal conversation. Now, Krishna
goes on further cutting s..., that steam of thought.

        āsurīṁ yonim āpannā
        mūḍhā janmani janmani
        mām aprāpyaiva kaunteya
        tato yānty adhamāṁ gatim

So, "āsurīṁ yonim āpannā". So, after attaining such "āsurīṁ yonim". "mūḍhā
janmani janmani". The foolish person, for many, many lifetime. "janmani
janmani". "mām aprāpyaiva kaunteya". Without attaining Me. "tato yānty adhamāṁ
gatim". And that person will go into further "adhamāṁ". Lower, you know, die,
the lower destinations. So, you know, you know, here, you know, you know, you
know, you know, what is Krishna saying over here? That those people will go
further and further away from Him. That is. If they keep misusing their free
will. Now, they do not have to misuse their free will. But if they misuse, then
they will have to suffer. So, now, we understand that, you know, the concept of,
now, Krishna will talk in the future verses about hell, also. You know. The
Vedic concepts of hell is significantly different from the "Judeo-Christian"
concept of hell. In the Abrahamic religions, hell is considered to be a place of
eternal torment. That, you know, once a person goes to hell, that person has to
suffer in hell forever. Now, that is never the, you know, Vedic understanding.
The whole universe is considered to be like a classroom. You know. Or, or, it
is the yoga, a university. With many classrooms. And, you know, you know, hell
is also one classroom. It is not, it is a, definitely a difficult classroom. But
the important thing is, it is not a compulsory classroom. It is not a compulsory
classroom. And we are souls. Who can best experience happiness by loving and
serving Krishna. And Krishna, you know, personally comes. If we look at the
whole message of the Gita, Krishna reveal..., the Bhagavad Gita reveals a
concerned. Compassionate. Committed God. Who stays in our heart. And works
tirelessly for our elevation. And liberation. So, the teacher in the school is
concerned whether the students gets elevated. Students get promoted. And
succeed. You know. But then if some students are determined not to study. So,
now, what happens is, so, hell is not meant to cause us suffering. Hell is meant
to save us from suffering. You know. Wonder, how is that possible? You know.
Hell is a place for suffering. Isn't it? How can hell save us from suffering?
The point is, as long as we are disconnected from Krishna, we are suffering.
There is a basic denominator of suffering. Always there in the material world.
Because of disconnection from Krishna. And because of the "tri-vidhaṁ tapa". And
because of the "janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-". There is basically suffering always
in this world. So, the education that Krishna gives through guru. Sadhu.
Shashtra. Through the various systems of religion is ultimately meant to help
those peop..., help the souls come back to Krishna. So, when the souls try to
come back to Krishna, you know, at that time, Krishna helps them. And if they
come back, then they become free from all this misery. Now, if they do not come
back. If they defy Krishna, then for many, many lifetimes, they will have to
stay on suffering in this material world. So, the, just like a student who is
undisciplined, unruly, disruptive in a classroom mean, you know, may be
punished. Maybe, sent somewhere else where there is stricter discipline and
punishment. So, the purpose of that is not to speci..., just punish the student.
The purpose is so that the student comes back to the classroom, behaves in a
more disciplined way. And then, you know, studies and gets promoted. So, if, if
our actions did not have consequences, then the result would be that, we would
have to suffer more and more. Because we would just continue on cycle of birth
and death. But when actions have consequences, then those consequences remind
us. Oh, you know, for this, I got so much suffering. I do not want this
suffering. Therefore, the soul, you know, reforms. And then, the soul becomes
sober. And soul starts practicing devotional service. And returns back to
Krishna. So, the purpose of hell is to actually save us from the miseries of
material existence. In general. And, you know, for that purpose, there is the
congenial ways that the soul learns properly by hearing from guru. Sadhu.
Shashtra. But when the soul refuses to do that. Then, the alternative way is
that the soul is forced to take, you know, forced to do the opposite. That
mean..., you know, do, you know, do for..., is for..., forced to go through
situ..., through situations where the soul has to suffer. On the cycle of birth
and death. So, either way, the important point is that the soul can get
liberated. You know. And even through hell, it is just a classroom. It is a
tough classroom.  With, you know, it, as we say, life is like a school of hard
knocks. So, all of us get hard knocks in this life. So, you know, and we learn
from those hard knocks. At least, we should learn from them. So, similarly, you
know, we can say hell is a school of super hard knocks. But we all, you know,
are meant to learn. So, it is:

        āsurīṁ yonim āpannā

So, even if one goes to hellish situations. Goes to demoniac species. Still, the
Supersoul does not leave. The supersoul is there in the heart of everyone. And
the Supersoul is working to redeem even those people. So, Prabhupada explains
based on Chakravarti Pada's commentary that sometimes, these sou..., souls, you
know, these demons may be killed by the Supreme Lord. And when we descends. And
there, also, they will get elevated. So, you know, basically, you know, nobody
is hopeless entirely. Everybody has hope. And the devotees, their mission is to
make the unfortunate fortunate. To make the dur-bhāgyavān bhāgyavān. You know.
You know. As it is said, you know:

        brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva
        guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

"bhakti-latā-bīja". So, how does one get the "bhakti-latā-bīja"? By
"guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde". And then, those, you know, the, the, so, the devotees and
the spiritual master work to make the unfortunate souls fortunate. "mām
aprāpyaiva kaunteya". So, they normally cannot attain Krishna. But by Krishna's
intervention, when He confronts the demons. Or by the devotees' intervention, 
they can. Their downward journey, their, their trap in the lower spe...,
species. And the lower lokas. That will get, that will end. And then, they will
be able to attain Krishna. So, when Srila Prabhupada was asked this, is hell
eternal? Hayagriva Prabhu asked this. And this is reported in his book. "The
Hare Krishna Explosion". So, there, he says, is hell eternal? So, Prabhupada
says that, I, Prabhupada smiled. And said, nothing except ecstatic devotional
service to Krishna is eternal. Everything is temporary. So, all the miseries of
this world, they are all temporary. Ultimately, only devotional service to
Krishna is eternal. So, that is the eternal reality to which Krishna is taking
us. He wants to take us. Now, let us look at the next verse. So, now, Krishna
will tell that, you know, it is not a personal vendetta because of which He is
taking people down. There are gates to hell.

        tri-vidhaṁ narakasyedaṁ
        dvāraṁ nāśanam ātmanaḥ
        kāmaḥ krodhas tathā lobhas
        tasmād etat trayaṁ tyajet

So, "tri-vidhaṁ narakasyedaṁ". "tri-vidhaṁ" is three. "narakasya". "narakasya"
is hell. You know. "narakasyedaṁ". "dvāraṁ nāśanam ātmanaḥ". So, they are doors.
You know. To what? To the destruction of the soul. "nāśanam ātmanaḥ". You know.
What are these? You know. "kāmaḥ krodhas tathā lobhas". So, lust. Anger. And
greed. And "tasmād etat trayaṁ tyajet". Therefore, one should give these up.
"tasmād etat trayaṁ tyajet". Give up these three. So, you know, you know, there
are several significant points in this. First of all, there are, there are dual
metaphor. There are two metaphors in this verse. First metaphor is that, there,
it is the metaphor of "dvāraṁ". To door. The, generally, the door is a means by
which we we go somewhere. If I am inside this room, the door can be gate by
which I go out. If I am outside, the door is a means by which I can come inside.
So, now, you know, lust, anger and greed. So, now, we, generally, if we are
going to think of door as a physical thing. And lust, anger and greed are not
physical in..., so, what does it mean? That means that, actually, when we let
ourselves be consumed by these emotions, then our consumption by those emotions
becomes the pathway by which we go to hell. So, those emotions will make us act
in ways whose consequences will be that, we will have to go to hell. Another way
is that, so, actually, we have all these big, big advertisements. You know.
With, you know, with, you know, explicit sexual imagery often. So, each
advertisement, it is injecting into us lust. It is injecting anger. It is
injecting greed. So, gener..., so with, the advertisements are doing that. So,
what is happening, because of that, each advertisement is like a gate to hell.
You know. And ka..., in mo..., our modern, our mod..., in this tod..., today's
times, there are so many gates to hell. That instead of people going to hell,
hell has come to the people. That means that, you know, hellish conditions are
created. You know. You know. When people become, you know, you know, hardly
lusty. Or madly greedy. The kind of actions that they do, horrible. Brutal
actions that they do. You know. They can, you know, kill others. Torture others.
Exploit others. You know. Dehumanise others. And, you know, you know, the kind
of, that, that is how they can cause so much suffering. So, we see, you know,
discussed earlier, also, about it how lust, anger, greed, they are the cause,
primary causes of all the crimes in the world. You know. All sexual abuse.
Largely, it comes from lust. Or it comes from anger. And, you know, you know,
anger. Where one wants power over others. So, most, you know, then, similarly,
most violence. Even brutal violence comes because of anger. And most of
corruption. And, you know, you know, greed. And despotism. And, or, you know,
now, nepotism. Not despotism. All this comes because of, you know, you know, you
know, greed. Where, you know, person wants. I want to be great. I want the
people around me to be great. So that I can be considered greater, also. So, you
know, all these, if we look at the major crimes in society, they are, come
because of lust. Anger. Greed. So, you know, to counter lust. Anger. And greed.
One needs something substantial. What is that? One needs, you know, you know,
some higher way to happy..., you know, guide, live. And higher way to experience
happiness. That will be given by scripture. And Krishna lowers scripture
slightly later.

But here, right now, He is telling one has to be careful. Be care..., be aware.
Otherwise, one will be trapped. So, here, the word, you know, is used in a
metaphorical sense. You know. The point of they are being a, so, you know, you
know, you know, sixteen, so, what are two metaphors? "dvāraṁ". "dvāraṁ" is a
metaphor for mentality. And lust, anger, and, lag, you know, greed, can remember
that as acronym, you know, "lag". You know. This causes the soul to lag behind.
So, a soul cannot move forward. As held behind. And lag behinds. in the journey
towards Krishna. So, this is, these are, these are the mentality that take a
person to hell. Similarly, "nāśanam ātmanaḥ" is also a metaphor. You know.
Krishna has, 2.17, He has said "avināśi tu tad viddhi". So, He has called the
"ātma" to be "avināśi". Non-destructible. Or indestructible. So, if the "ātma"
is "avināśi". Then, how can the "ātma" beco..., Krishna talk about "nāśanam
ātmanaḥ"? So, there is, He quo..., talks about "nāśanam ātmanaḥ". So, here, what
does "nāśa" in crea..., indicate? "nāśa" represents the destruction of the
spiritual inclination of the soul. It talks about how the capacity of the soul
to live spiritually. And to perceive spiritual reality. That is lost when the
soul gets overwhelmed by these anarthas. And this "nāśanam" can be correlated
with the "ātmaha". The killer of the soul that is mentioned in the "Īśopaniṣad"
as well as in the "Bhāgavatam". You know. You know. Now, this is a metaphor.
What is Krishna telling in this verse? That "tasmād etat trayaṁ tyajet". Before,
one should give up all these three. Now, Prabhupada explains there are sane men.
You know. People who, you know, people who succumb to lust. Anger. Greed. They
become insane. But there is one, one has to be sane. And what does Prabhupada
explain?

"kill the self to such an extent that there will be no possibility of liberation
from this material entanglement."

No possibility means, it is not that permanently, it is impossible. It means
that as long as the person has, you know, person succumbs to lust. Anger. And
greed. Like that. Until that time, it will be impossible. You know. Lib...,
"possibility of liberation from this material entanglement". Now, after that,
Krishna tells:

        etair vimuktaḥ kaunteya
        tamo-dvārais tribhir naraḥ
        ācaraty ātmanaḥ śreyas
        tato yāti parāṁ gatim

So, "etair vimuktaḥ". "etair vimuktaḥ". After being independent of this,
"kaunteya". For, you know. "tato...", "tamo-dvārais tribhir naraḥ".
"tamo-dvārais". That the doors to darkness. To ignorance. You know. You know.
So, the, the "etair vimuktaḥ". After one become independent, break it from this.
"tamo-dvārais tribhir naraḥ". These three, oh, hum..., that human being.
"ācaraty". That person act..., you know, acts in what way? "ātmanaḥ śreyas". For
the wellbeing of one's soul. And thereafter, "tato yāti parāṁ gatim". And thus
attain, can attain the supreme destination. Supreme destination. So, you know,
you know, you know, you know, the, for, for us on the spirtual path, you know,
you know, con..., ofte, we are our greatest enemies. That means, you know, we
can, we often act in ways which are self-defeating. Even self-destructive. So,
that can, at a very gross level, be seen when, say, people smoke. Or drink. At
the grossest level, say, people commit suicide. Then, they are destroying
themselves physically. Literally itself. You know. Poi..., one way that they,
they, they may, you know, re..., poison. And commit suicide. But another is
that, you know, you know, they may also, actually, commit, you know, you know,
do slow sui..., slow suicide. You know. That means, they are, you know,
drinking. You know. They are drinking alcohol. Or taking drugs. Or they are, you
know, you know, you know, they are smoking. And then, doing the demand,
completely uncontrolled way. Totally addicted to it. Then, tuck. Then, they may
commit suicide. You know. They are, they may be in, they may not be intending to
die. Wanting to die. But the way they are living, they are committing slow
suicide by that. And then, so, there are others. Who may not be doing sui...,
suicide literally. But they are also acting in self-defeating ways. You know.
When we act according to lust. Anger. Greed. Often, these make us act in ways
which are harmful to us. Harmful to us, not just spiritually. But harmful
materially, also. When people, say, become lusty. And then, they want to have,
you know, they want to have promiscuous relationships. You know. With many
people. And then, they may get some terrible disease. You know. And that disease
may be fatal. It may be crippling. So, then, that is self-defeating. It is
self-destructive. Or a person may, because of greed, you know, try to manipulate
the law. And try to defraud people. Corrupt. And be corrupt. And try to def...,
you know, defrauds. And then, if that person gets caught. That person goes to
jail. So, consequences are there. You know. Some people may say, you know, there
are so many people, who are corrupt, and who do not get caught. Yes. They may
not get caught. But that is simply because, you know, they have some past good
karma. Because of which, their current karma, you know, consequences are not
coming immediately. But what current karma they are doing, the consequences will
come. Sooner. Or later. The consequences will come. The consequences will catch
up they, them. So, therefore, the, they are, all these impell us towards, you
know, terrible actions. Towards negative actions. So, when one becomes free from
this, now, it, the significant point is, you know, Krishna has used the word
"tyajet" in the previous verse. Last verse. You know. "tyajet". Give them up.
And then, here, also, uses the word "vimuktaḥ". "etair vimuktaḥ kaunteya".
Becoming free from this. What, what does it indicate? It indicates that it is
possible to become free from this. It is not impossible. It is possible to
become free from this. And once, one becomes free from this, it is like a, it is
like a free, actually, you know, you know, fever. Or the haunting of a ghost.
You know. The, when the ghost haunts a person, then the person just cannot, you
know, behave ritio..., rationally. But, you know, when the person, that gho...,
you know, is, that the ghost may be possessed. And once, the possession goes
away. That person can act calmly. Act clearly. Like that. So:

        tamo-dvārais tribhir naraḥ

You know. So, these are three gates to hell. One becomes free from them. Then,
one can think clearly. So, then, one can "śreyaḥ". Act for one's long-term
wellbeing. One can make choices that are in, you know, the, in pursuance of
one's enlightened self-interest. One will be able to pursue what is truly good
for me. And then, perceive that. And pursue that. So, perceive. And pursue. So,
both will happen. And then, gradually by this, "tato yāti parāṁ gatim". One will
attain the supreme destination. You know. So, Prabhupada explains in the
purport. He talks about the whole varnashram system. You know. Which is all
meant to elevate a person. You know. You know. You know.

"if a person is able to follow them,"

That means rules and regulations as per the varnashram:

"he will be automatically raised to the highest platform of spiritual
realization. Then he can have liberation without a doubt."

So, then:

        yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya
        vartate kāma-kārataḥ
        na sa siddhim avāpnoti
        na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim

"yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya". One who "utsṛjya". "utsṛjya" means to give up.
Reject. You know. One "śāstra-vidhim". One gives up the "vidhim" of "śāstra".
You know. That means one rejects it. Neglects it. And then, we have to act. So,
how will we act? "vartate kāma-kārataḥ". One acts bec..., because of selfish
desire. You know. You know. Then, "na sa siddhim avāpnoti". Such a person will
not attain perfection. "na sukhaṁ". One will not attain happiness. And
certainly, "na parāṁ gatim". One will not attain the supreme destination. When
one is lu..., impelled by lust, lust cannot really help us to think about a
long-term perfection. So, you know, you know, you know, a lu..., you know,
lu..., you know, lust covers our spiritual nature. So, there is no question of
"parāṁ gatim". And lust keeps us perpetually dissatisfied. More. More. More.
More. "duṣpūreṇānalena ca". Krishna has said in the Bhagavad Gita. It is a fire
like, that is insatiable. And indulgence is like a fuel. That makes the fire
blaze more. And more. And more. So, "na sukhaṁ". So, one cannot gain happiness.
And "na sa siddhim avāpnoti". One cannot get "siddhim", also. So, "siddhim" can
refer to per..., it refers to perfection. So, there are different kinds of
perfections. There are material perfections. There are spiritual per..., there
are yogic perfections. And there are spiritual perfections. So, yogic are also
material perfections, only. The various "siddhim"s. But they may not be, you
know, as gross perfection as whatever. But actually, lust makes it difficult for
a person to achieve anything. You know. Even if a person is in sports. Then,
there, also, the person has to control selfish desires. You know. Short-sighted
desires for enjoyment. If that person has to be fit. Person has to maintain
one's energy. And the person has to eat prop..., you know, in a regulated way.
Act in a regulated way. Discipline is important for success in any field. And if
the desire is unregulated, that unregulated desire will not allow a person to
do, you know, anything properly. And that is why in the Vedic culture, it was,
you know, education would normally be, you know, there would be no co-education.
The idea was in, man and woman, boy and girl are together. Then, they just get
obsessed with thoughts about each other. And then, it becomes difficult for them
to, you know, focus on anything higher. Focus on study. So, especially, as the,
com..., especially, after puberty comes up. Then, co-education can become very
desir..., you know, very, you know, di..., distracting. So, you know, it is
di..., becomes difficult to achieve. So, traditionally, you know, not just in
Vedic culture. But even in western culture, there would be not so much co...,
co-education. There would be separate education. So, you know, just one example
of "kāma-kārataḥ". Actually, how "kāma" can distract a person. You know. Now,
"śāstra-vidhim". "śāstra-vidhim" is the, the injuction of scripture. When one
gives it up, one acts according to lust. So, Prabhupada explains in the purport
that, again, Prabhupada uses the word, we should be sane.

"In the human form of life, a living entity is expected to be sane"

So, sane means, not just, you know, not just giving into short-term impulses.
Which make a person act insanely. Insane. And, you know, the word Prabhupada
writes, you know, "kāma-kārataḥ". What does it mean?

"A person who knowingly violates the rules acts in lust. He knows that this is
forbidden, but still he acts."

This is called acting whimsically. Acting whimsically. Whimsically means that
the person, you know, you know, just on, based on whims. So, whim, you know,
based on, you know, some whim. That person decides. You know. You know. So, you
know, the person just starts thinking that, oh, I feel like doing it. I will do
it right away. And then, when the person acts like that, actually, our feelings
can, you know, be our enemies. Feeling, feelings can sometime kill faster than
bullets. You know. So, why? Beause feelings can make us act in impulse ways.
Which can be distractive. Terribly distractive. So, therefore, one has to be
careful. So, of course, we say, bhakti is all about feelings. That is true. But
that does not, you know, that, those are pure. Sublime. Spiritual. Those
feelings. Right now, our material feelings can, you know, can weaken us. Can
wound us. Can even destroy us. So, we have to be cautious. Our feelings have to
be guided by our intelligence. And not just our intelligence. It has to be
Krishna's intelligence coming through scripture. So, you know, we do not deny or
reject our feelings. But we regulate and direct our feelings according to
scripture. According to intellience, based on scripture. And then, you know, so,
that means, you know, a man is attract..., feelings are attracted to a woman.
So, now, that feeling is something which comes because of the biological nature.
So, that feeling, if it is according to scripture. That means, if the man and
woman, if they are attracted to each other. You know. They reg..., you know, the
attraction is within the, you know, within the sacred bonds of marriage. Then,
that feeling is not necessarily, you know, that is, they can come together. And
they can together, you know, you know, live harm..., harmoniously materially.
And advance spiritually. So, that is accordance with scripture. But when it is
not in accordance with scripture. Then, the feeling has to be rejected. So, we
have to be, our feeling has to be regulated. And directed according to
scripture. If it is not, then those feelings can be our enemies. You know. You
know. So, that is why one has to be careful. And now, Krishna says in the last
verse, verse:

        tasmāc chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te
        kāryākārya-vyavasthitau
        jñātvā śāstra-vidhānoktaṁ
        karma kartum ihārhasi

So, "tasmāc chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te". So, therefore, according to "chāstraṁ
pramāṇaṁ". According to the, you know, you know, that decision which scriptures
make, they have made. "chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te". So, "kārya". "akārya".
"vyavasthitau". So, prop..., one should decide properly. What is "kārya"? What
is to be done. And what is "akārya"? That which is not to be done. Which is
forbidden. "vyavasthitau". One understands it. Determines it. Properly. And
then, "jñātvā śāstra-vidhānoktaṁ". After understanding this. After knowing what
is "śāstram". "vidhāna". "uktam". What has been spoken in "śāstram". "karma
kartum". That one acts according. "ihārhasi". "arhasi". That means, it, the, be,
who is you. Befits you to act accordingly. According to scripture. So, then,
now, let us try to understand why it is so important to act according to
scripture. You know. You know. You know. So, actually, yeah. So, we will come
back to the others, also. So, guidance for choosing our actions. You know.
People generally act according to those four things. The mood. The logic.
Fashion. And tradition. So, let us look at all of them one by one. Fashion
means, you know, you know, mood. Logic. Fashion. Tradition. Fashion means, oh,
you know, all of us do it. Everyone is doing it. You know. You know. Everyone is
doing it. Or, so, for example, why some people, you know, some people have, you
know, you know, some people have, so, as I said yesterday, saying about
blond hair. So, one film star gets a blond hair. And then, everybody wants to
have blond hair. Or somebody wears high heel sandals. Everybody say, I want to
wear high heels sandals. Somebody wears a particular kind of jacket. Everybody
wants to wear that kind of jacket. So, people, and people, one person does.
Second person does. The third person does. So, which everyone does it. So,
fashion means everyone has done it. So, we will do it. So, actually, fashions
are one of the most, you know, you know, you know, you know, most misleading and
incorrect ways of deciding our actions. Because fashions are no basis in truth.
Or reality. You know. You know. They are just trends. Which come and go. And
then, we bec..., when we deliver according to fashions, then we are just
becoming, you know, becoming like leaves. Whichever way the wind is blowing, we
just get blown in that way. And we will not, we will not attain any destination
by that. You know. That does not mean def..., that, a devotee has to defy and
li..., reject all fashions. The point is, the devotee has to live, have some
direction in life. And it is not that deliberately, devotee has to be
unfashionable. To be unpopular. That is not the point. The point is that the
devotee has to recognise that fashion cannot be the parameter by which I decide
what I should do in my life. Then, second can be tradition. Tradi..., so,
fashion means, everybody is doing it currently. Tradition means, oh, we have
always done it. We always done it. You know. So, when people think, you know,
that is how we have acted. You know. That is why I, we should do it. Now, now,
the tradition itself is not necessarily a parameter of truth. Because there can
be so many traditions which are wrong. You know. For example, in much of the
western world, you know, you know, for much of the recent m..., historical
memory, people have eaten meat. So, then, what ab..., the idea comes up is that
why do we, you know, why do we eat meat? Oh, we have always done it. Our par...,
parents have eaten meat. Our grandparents have eaten meat. Our great
grandparents have eaten meat. That is why we eat meat.

Now, the question comes up, yeah, whether we eat meat or not. You know, Whether
our grandparents have eaten meat or not, what does meat-eating involve? It
involves killing animals. So, the animals, you know, they have life like us.
They have, you know, you know, you know, they have consciousness like us. They
feel. You know. Now, we, not as developed as ours. But the consciousness is more
or less similar. You know. When, you know, co..., say, a cow embraces a cow, a
cow hugs and cuddles a calf in it..., in its own way. Or a kitten hugs and
cudd..., you know, is hugged and cuddled, by a kitt..., you know, cat. You know.
That is, that love, or puppy is held by its mother. Dog. Then, actually, that
is, that love is very much like a maternal love. Very similar to human lo...,
the human material love. So, they have emotions like us. And they suffer
terribly when they are killed them. So, just because somebody is doing it, you
know, and always been, the ancestors have been doing it. That does not make
it right. Now, some non-vegeterian say that, even animal, birds, anyone, you
know, plants, when we kill them, you know, there is, you know, suffering over
there. So, what is wrong with this? Actually, yes, even in plants, killing,
there is pain. And that is why, just being vegetarian is not enough. We have to
take prasad. But apart from that, also, you know, it is not, just not same. You
know. There is scientifically, intuitively, and, you know, you know,
behaviorally, we know there is a difference. Scientifically, the extent of pain
that is experienced, you know, the, you know, defers based on, you know, how
much the nervous system is developed. So, plants do not have as much developed
nervous system as animals have. That is why they suffer much lesser pain. So, a
sensitive human being, we do want to cause as less pain as possible. And
intuitively, we all know. You know. There is, you know, you know, you know, we,
if we go to a slaugh..., if somebody goes to a slaughterhouse, you know, then,
you know, there are screams. And there is blood. It is a ghastly scene over
there. Whereas if we go to a farm where harvesting is happening. It is a mood of
celebration. There is no mood like a, you know, you know, like a crematorium
over there. It is a mood of celebration. You know. People are singing. And, and
another point is that, that the cro..., the crops, they are going to fall
anyway. If they are not harvested, they will get wasted. So, you know, it is in
the mood of celebration. And jubilation over there. Emotionally. And then,
behaviorally, you know, if parents are told, you know, you know, if the school
annou..., makes an announcements. Tomorrow, we are going to take your children
for experientially session. So, we will take them to a, you know, farm where
harvesting is going to happen. How many parents will object? And if the parents
were told, tomorrow, we will experientially, only, we want to take your children
to slaughterhouse. How many parents will allow? So, we know it. You know. The,
you know, from our behavior, also, we know it. So, basic point now is, now, we
are not talking about vegetarian, non-vegetarian here. We are talking simply
about the point that just because something has been done in a tradition, does
not make it right. So, tra..., tradition alone is not the criteria for deciding
what is right or wrong. Nor is fashion.

And third could be mood. Mood means, you know, I feel like doing it. So, we
discussed how our feelings can be so misleading. You know. Tomorrow is my exam.
And today, I feel, oh, I feel like watching the movie. Now, I feel like watching
the movie. And I go and watch the movie. And then, when I come back. And when
tomorrow, I am giving the exam. And then, I, you know, cannot answer any of the
question. Then, I, you know, then I feel like beating myself. You know. So, my
feelings, if I use as a parameter, I can be very misled by that. You know. Then,
the last could be logic. Oh, it makes sense. It makes sense. That is why I will
do it. Now, logic seems to be the most logical among all, you know, most
sensible among all these parameters. But even logic is not always sound. Because
logic can mislead us. Because, you know, sometimes, we may have incomplete
understanding of things. You know. For example, if a doctor decides. Ok. This
patient has got a frac..., you know, got this fracture. There are two ways. One
is that we can just let the hand rest. And the hand will heal gradually. The
other is we can do the surgery. And by surgery, the hand will heal faster. The
doctor is, says, ok, you know, we want to recover, that patient recover faster.
So, let us do surgery. But then, you know, you know, you know, if afterwards,
the doctor finds that, you know, you know, so, doctor, that may seem to be a
logical decision over there. But after, afterwards, the finding, that patient
find that, the doctor finds the, the doctor does not know. And later on, it
finds out that, that patient has got some disea..., you know, some, you know,
health problem. Because of which, giving anesthesia is very dangerous. You know.
That person is given anesthesia. It is likely that the person will just die
because of that. So, then, doing surgery can be a disastrous decision. In that
situation. So, generally, whenever doctors do diagnosis, they have to know the
complete case history. At least, the main detail. Main, main information. Main
features. If they do not, then they take a decision. Which seems right at one
moment. But which turns out to be wrong later. So, logic also is not very
sou..., always sound. So, therefore, what we need as a guide for our actions is
scripture. Scripture is yes. It is the first. And the last. Now, the, basis for
our action. Because scripture is like a lighthouse. The others may also seem to
be like lighthouses. But the lighthouses themselves are moving. Lighthouses are
supposed to be fist, they fixed. And say, ok, here, there is, you know, pur...,
they have the safe land..., moving, landing situation. And here, that side area
is dangerous. But if the lighthouse itself moves. And where we think it was
safe. That part turns out to be rocky. And, you know, the sport that is coming,
is, is just, you know, you know, cut end. Devast..., destroyed by that. So, you
know, we can use, you know, oth.., or the other logic. And other things, also,
for, you know, as subordinate decision make, con..., decision, you know, you
know, subordinate factors in contributing towards making a deicision. But the
scriptures should be the first and the final authority. And based on that, we
make the decision. So, that is why "tasmāc chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te". With
"śāstram", one decides. "kāryākārya-vyavasthitau". You know. You know.

        jñātvā śāstra-vidhānoktaṁ
        karma kartum ihārhasi

So, then, Prabhupada talks about the basic process of devotional service.
Chanting Hare Krishna. And, you know, he talks about the pro..., "śāstra"s are
free from the four defects. It is without the four principle defects. And then,
he talks about how there are personalists. And impersonalists.

"Both of them, however, lead their lives according to the principles of the
Vedas."

Now, their understanding of what the Vedas teach may be different. In terms of
their conclusive understanding the Absolute Truth. But both follow Vedic
culture. And both say, for example, you know, protect cows. And both, you know,
respect the Vedas. And they both talk about, you know, the varnashram system. So,
in this sense, both are harmonious. At least, with the broad principle of
following scripture. And then, Prabhupada writes, aversion in:

"In human society, aversion to the principles of understanding the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the cause of all falldowns."

So, there are different kinds of falldown. Lust may cause a fall down. Greed may
cause a fall down. But the root cause of all the fall downs is the, is "aversion
to the principles of understanding". You know. Lord. So, once, we understand
Him, then we can understand everything else. And then, falls will not happen.
And then, therefore:

"That is the greatest offense of human life."

So, here, greatest is a superlative used in the sense of, you know, you know,
ex..., indicating how tragic it is. So, you know, suppose a person is given a
billion dollars. And that person just throws away the billion dollars. And then,
starts going to dustbin to look for some food to eat. Say, how tragic it is. You
know. It is not just tragic. It is, it is offensive. Somebody has given me
billion dollars. And you throw that away. And go and look for, you know,
garbage. So, like that, you know, now, sense gratification is alavai...,
available in all species of life. And, you know, here, Krishna, we have got the
human form. With the human form is, you know, offering us eternal height. And
eternal happiness. That is like, that is much more than billion dollars. And
sense gratification is like garbage. You know. Just going around. And "puna
punasca rata charvanaram". So, if somebody gives up the opportunity in human
form life. That, you know, human form of life brings to attain eternal
happiness. And then, chases after sense gratification. That person is extremely
unfortunate. And in that sense, it is offensive. And then, Prabhupada explains
towards, you know, the end of the purport that if one is guided by the spiritual
master, then by, under their guidance, one can attain the supreme destination.
So, "chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ". So, when we study scriptures. For example, now, we have
studied the Bhagavad Gita. You know. We are studying it. So that we can
understand, you know, that the principles of life. And mold our life
accordingly. And then, by this, we will be able to attain "parāṁ gatim". We will
attain the supreme perfection of life.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
