Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Itu9ru1VDMI
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are coming to the last section of the Bhagavad Gita. Where Krishna will focus on
bhakti. So, in the previous section, we discussed about how Krishna talks about
karma-yoga within the varnashram framework. Then, spiritualising that
karma-yoga. By offering, by working for His pleasure. Then, "sva-karmaṇā tam
abhyarcya". By working for worshipping him. Then, we discussed about jnana-yoga.
And then, Krishna talked it from 18.57 how, you know, 56-57, how, whatever level
one may be at, one can practice bhakti-yoga. And elevate oneself. So, let us
continue with 18.58 now. So, 18.58, we see over here. You know.

        mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi
        mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi
        atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān
        na śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi

So, you know, you know, this is, you know, one of the most directly indicative
verses, you know, in the Bhagavad Gita for the, you know, you know, for, for the
phrase "Krishna Consciousness". Sometimes, people ask this question, where does
this, you know, Krishna Consciousness term come from? It seems to, it does not
seem to be like a very directly Vedic term. Consciousness seems to be like a
modern concept. But "mac-cittaḥ". "mat" is referring to Krishna. "cittaḥ" is
consciousness. So, "mac-cittaḥ". And Krishna is very directly telling if you
become conscious of Me. "mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi". "durgā" is obstacles. All
obstacles, we will overcome. You know. How? "mat-prasādāt". By My mercy, what
will happen? "tariṣyasi". "tariṣyasi" means you will cross over all obstacles.
You will go beyond all obstacles. "atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān". If however, you
know, you know, because of "ahaṅkārān". Because of pride, you do not, you know,
do this. Then, what will happen? "na śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi". "vinaṅkṣyasi". You
will be lost. If you do not hear Me out of arrogance, you will be lost. So,
here, we see that Krishna is demonstrating, instructing by contrasting. You
know. So, this is a, in 18, 18.58 is direct reference what will happen by
practice of Krishna Consciousness. What will happen by lack of practice of
Krishna Consciousness? So, this can be phrased as "With Krishna, we flourish;
without Krishna, we perish.". So, Krishna has done this repeatedly, 3.31 and 32.
As well as 4.39-40. Both talk about faith.

        ye tv etad abhyasūyanto

And:

        ye me matam idaṁ nityam
        anutiṣṭhanti mānavāḥ

These are 31-32. And:

        śraddhāvāḻ labhate jñānaṁ

And:

        ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca

So, there, Krishna is contrasting by saying that, you know, you know, you know,
you will get one result if you have faith in Me. And you will get another
result if you do not have faith in Me. And then, after that, in 9.25, also,
Krishna is talking, is contrasting where famously, He says that, you know:

        yānti deva-vratā devān
        pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ
        bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā
        yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām

You know. So, depending on whom we choose to worship, we will get an
appropria..., accor..., a result accordingly. So, now, instructing by
contrasting indicates that th..., th..., Krishna is giving us choices. The
Bhagavad Gita is not so much a book of commandments. It is a book of choices and
consequences. Choices. Ok. These are the choice..., this, you can do this. You
can do this. You can do this. And depending on what you do, accordingly, you
will get the result. So, then, choose what you want to do. Choices. And
the consequences. You know. You know. So, here, Krishna is telling, if you
become con..., conscious of Me. "mac-cittaḥ". "sarva-durgāṇi". All obstacles.
"mat-prasādāt". So, the word "prasādāt" has, you know, come in the Bhagavad Gita
earlier. "prasādāt" means mercy. You know. "mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi". Kri..., has
used the word, "tariṣyasi" means, actually, float over. Almost. Krishna has used
the word, similar word when we talked about surrender to Him in 7.14. When He
says, you know:

        mām eva ye prapadyante
        māyām etāṁ taranti te

"taranti". "taranti" means to float over. You know. So, you know, you know, in,
material ocean is, is a dangerous ocean. And, you know, we can easily sink into
this ocean. But by Krishna's mercy, we will float over it. So, how, the, Krishna
has talked about crossing the material ocean, also, famously in:

        teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā
        mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt

"ahaṁ samuddhartā mṛtyu-saṁsāra". I am the deliverer from the ocean of material
existence. So, what does this actually mean? When we say, Krishna says, you will
pass all obstacles by My grace. Actually, you know, material world is a place of
obstacles. You know. It is not that when we become devotees, you know, suddenly,
some magic wand is blong. And obstacles go away. No. Whether we are devotees, or
whether we are non-devotees, obstacles are there for everyone. You know. The
difference is, is in attitude. The difference is in un..., con..., in
consciousness. In understanding what purpose the problems serve. You know. You
know. So, for a devotee, and a non-devotee, the problems serve different
purposes. So, suffering will come to all. You know. Non-devotees get suffering.
And their suffering simply leads to frustration. You know. Whereas, for a
devotee, you know, suffering leads to realisation. Renunciation. And devotion.
So, let us understand this difference between the two. You know. You know. You
know. What do we mean by problems or suffering? It essentially means that, you
know, we have certain plans to do things. And by that, we want to get enjoyment.
So, it is basically about enjoying. And, you know, is, as souls, we are
anandamaya. We are sat-cit-ananda. So, you know, happiness is a, is a part of
the nature of the soul. But unfortunately, this nature gets distorted when the
soul forgets that, I am actually a part of Krishna. And tries to, you know,
enjoy at the bodily level. Because of misidentification with the body. So, then,
the enjoying nature becomes limited to the material level. And there are many
obstacles which come at the material level to our plans for enjoyment. So, you
know, you know, because for a materialistic person, material life is the only
life. There is nothing beyond material life. And therefore, material enjoyment
is the only enjoyment. And if there is no enjoyment possible at the material
level, then there is no enjoyment at all. You know. So, you know, when there are
problems which obstruct or even, you know, destroy material enjoyment. Destroy
the possibilities for material enjoyment, then the end result is complete
frustration, is disappoint. So, you know, you know, that is how a person gets
blocked and trapped. Person gets lost. Because of not understanding that, you
know, you know, you know, there is an alternative, better way of enjoyment
possible. Materialistic people think that, ok, material track of enjoyment is
the only track of enjoyment available for them. And when there is, enjoyment is
not possible on that track. Then, there is simply misery. Simply misery. So, on
the other hand, for a devotee, you know, there is understanding, there is
material enjoyment. But there is a higher, richer enjoyment. Spiritual
enjoyment. That is, actually, when we serve Krishna. And please Krishna. You
know. We automatically get happiness by that. So, that is the, you know, purpose
and perfection of life. So, now, for a non-devotee, you know, because material
enjoyment is the only form of enjoyment, when there is no en..., when the
enjoyment at the material level is frustrated. Then, it leads to, is obstructed.
And then it simply leads to frustration. The frustration can lead to, people may
go into alcoholism. They may become, get depressed. They become violent. You
know. When that violence is directed towards others, people become, people beat
others. Shout at others. You know. They expre..., when their anger, their
frustration is expressed externally, it comes out as violence. And when their
exte..., ang..., their anger is expressed, the frustration is expressed
internally, then that may lead to self-pity. Inferiority complex. It may even
lead to suicide. So, either way, it leads to misery. You know. So, now, for a
devotee, when there are problems, that means on the material track of life,
there are obstacles. So, what does it lead to? It leads to realisation.
Renunciation. And devotion. Let us understand these three. Realisation.
Realisation means that a devotee understands that, actually, you know, what the
scriptures are telling is true. That when the scriptures say this world is a
place of misery, I am experiencing it now.

So, for a devotee, that which scriptures are telling us, the reality of this
world, the devotee, rea..., understands this is a reality. So, realisation
means, as we have discussed earlier to understand that that, you know, to accept
as a reality that which is, scriptures are telling is the reality. So, that this
world is a place of misery. Devotee gets realisation. And from the realisation
comes renunciation. Renunciation means, devotee understands, you know, yes, I
cannot go about trying to be the controller. And enjoyer. I have to be the
servant. Whatever situation Krishna will put me in, I will serve Him in that
situation. So, there is, you know, ren..., you know, renunciation that comes.
Renunciation of what? Not, this is not, this, the ren..., this renunciation is
not frustration. Renunciation is actually, you know, the understanding that I
cannot be the enjoyer or the controller. But that does not mean I cannot be the
servant. And as a servant, you know, I may try to plan. And, you know, do the
best service possible. But still, I am a servant. So, that renunciation means
giving up the enjoying mentality. Controlling mentality. And then, when we
become fixed in the understanding that we are His servants. Then, we see that,
actually, through service, I get greater happiness. You know. If I just, you
know, s..., focus on this idea that, Krishna, I am your servant. Please guide me
how I can serve You. Then, that att..., service attitude brings so much peace.
And even in the long run, pleasure. So, that is how we get devotion. We see,
yes, Krishna is always my master. Krishna is always there to pro..., guide and
protect me. And no matter what happens, Krishna will never leave me. You know.
So, what happens is, our attraction to Krishna increases. So, in this way, for a
devotee, and a non-devotee, both problems come. But the response is huge...,
there is a world of difference. For a non-devotee, the response is simply
frustration. For a devotee, it is rea..., renunciation. Realisation. And
devotion. You know. You know. Now, or realisation. Renunciation. Devotion. That
sequence, now, after this, further, we will, let us look at it. Now, when we say
we transcend problems, so transcending problems means not letting the problems
dominate our consciousness. But becoming, you know, Krishna Conscious. So,
transcending problems means what? Problems are there. But we do not let the
problems, you know, fill in our consciousness. So, you know, you know, you know,
as it is said over here, you know, you know, if I am in a, next to a skyscraper
building. Then, I am very tiny. And a pro..., the building seems to be giant.
But if I am in an airplane, then from the point of the airplane, where I am,
the, if the giant skyscraper also appears to be small. So, like that, when we
are, when we think that we are alone, then we feel ourselves tiny. I wonder how
will I deal with the situation. But when we become connected with Krishna, we
understand that Krishna is the greatest. And He is on our side. You know. He is
with us. Then, we do not feel, you know, puny. And tiny. Yes, we are puny and
tiny in front of Krishna. But we do not feel puny and tiny in front of the
problem. Because we understand that, yes, the problem may be tiny for me. But
not for Krishna. Krishna is with me. And He will help me deal with this. So, you
know, you know, transcending the problems means, we do not let the problem
dominate our consciousness. You know. In the Seventh Canto, in the Ninth
Chapter, at the prayers of Prahlada Maharaja to Lord "Narasiṃha" Deva. And
before that, in the Eighth Chapter towards the end, at the prayers by the
devatas to Lord "Narasiṃha" Deva. These devatas' prayers were unsuccessful. In
the sense that, they did not satisfy and pacify the Lord. They were successful
in the sense that any attempt to the glorify the Supreme Lord leads to
purification. In that sense, they were successful. But they did not satisfy the
Supreme Lord. They did not pacify Him. It was Prahlad's prayers which pacified
the Lord.

So, there, when Indra offers prayers in 7.8 to, you know, then, Seventh Canto,
Eighth Chapter, so, there, he says, my dear Lord, you know, because of
"Hiranyakashipu"'s power, and his cruelty, you know, he had started dominating
our heart. And because of which, we could not think of You, worship You, above,
offer sacrifices for Your pleasure. Now, that he has been killed. Now, that You
have very con..., mercifully killed him. Now, our hearts will become free from
this domination. And we will be able to love and serve You. We will be able to
continue our devotions, our service to you. Through sacrifices. And other
duties. You know. So, in contrast, we see, Prahlada Maharaja says that,
actually, whatever happens, I am completely fixed in Your service, my dear Lord.
So, he says that, also, I do not even want to, I am not concerned about the
miseries of material existence. I am not concerned about the, you know, you
know, He, He wa..., throughout, I am not concerned about anything. I simply want
to glorify You, my dear Lord. And I want to get others to glorify You, also. So,
we do not see in Prahlada's life that he, because Hiranyakashipu was such a, we
could say, in modern language, terr..., terrorist. A mega terrorist. You know.
He was, you know, now, today's terrorists may, say, terrorise a city. Or a
country. But Hiranyakashipu was terrorising the whole universe. And such a
terrorist, what happened to him? What did, you know, you know, the Lord do? The
Lord basically, you know, killed him effortlessly. And, you know, but when he
was there. And Prahlada was staying in the same house. And he had to bear the
brunt of the anger of the, of Hiranyakashipu. And he was tormented. And
threatened. And insulted. And attempte..., attempted to be assassinated. But
through it all, he remained determined. So, how could he remain so determined?
Because, you know, his consciousness was fixed and absorbed in Krishna.
"Narasiṃha" Deva, you know, the s..., the, he was worshipping Lord Vishnu. You
know. So, that Lord Vishnu was, remained fixed in his consciousness. It was not
that, you know, you know, Vishnu became displaced. And, you know,
"Hiranyakashipu" came in. And he was fearful. So, this is the difference between
mixed devotion. And pure devotion. So, for a devotee, when there are problems.
You know. The problems start troubling too much. Then, what it indicates is
that, we are not sheltered in Krishna properly. The more we take shelter of
Krishna, the less the problems will shake us. And that, less the problems shake
us, the more, we will be able to, we stay calm. And deal with the problems
better. So, we do not let the problems dominate our consciousness. And as it is
said over here that do not tell Krishna, you know, you know, do not tell Krishna
how big our problems are. Tell the problems how big Krishna is. You know.
Krishna is the biggest. And He, nothing can stop Him. Nothing can, as thwart
him. So, by His mercy, we can deal with any situation. And every situation. And
now, significant point is that devotee, Prabhupada m..., writes this, actually,
a devotee may be perplexed. But he is never discouraged. So, what is the
difference between perplexed and discouraged? So, Prabhupada writes this in a
"Bhāgavatam" purport. Perplexed means indecisive. Indecisive means, oh, should I
do this? Should I not do this? Maybe, I want to do this. But probably, it is not
good for me to do it. I do not know. So, perplexed means that, ok, there is this
problem. This problem. This problem. How will I deal with the situation? How
will I move forward? So, even for a devotee, sometimes, it may happen that
devotee, it may, it may not be very clear about how one should go ahead. And
serve Krishna. So, Srila Prabhupada faced this several times in his life. You
know. He worked so hard to build a league of devotees. And then, just when his
mission started to ha..., seemed to be picking up nicely, at that time, there
was a clear, there was a sort of conspiracy against him. And he was,
practically, thrown out from the place which was going to be his international
headquarter. It was in a Vjihasi. You know.

So, you know, you know, at that time, you know, you know, what was Srila
Prabhupada going to do? So, it was not that, just because somebody is a pure
devotee means that every single step is completely clear. And the road from here
to glory is straight and clear. No. That road is also be revealed to Krishn...,
revealed by Krishna to Prabhupada. As, ok, you know, how this situation, do
this. Now, this situation, do this. So, Prabhupada also uses intelligence. And
he said, ok, you know, Indians are not taking this very seriously, so, let me go
to America. And preach. In America, also, he found that people seem to be
satisfied in their own bod..., daily pleasures. And they did not want anything
higher. So, then, he went to the people who were rejecting those things. And
seeking something higher. That was the hippies. So, in this way, Srila
Prabhupada went. And he struggled, also. But, you know, at point, so, for one
time, Prabhupada was staying, you know, you know, in the bo..., in the bowery.
And then, his room partner, you know, he took drugs, and he att..., he went mad.
So, at that time, Prabhupada had to practically for the sa..., life, this person
who became, who got a drug-induced madness. He came to attack Srila Prabhupada.
You know. You know. You know. And at that time, Prabhupada was, you know, had to
practically leave, leave immediately to save his life. And when he came out on
the streets, and there, hippies laying on the grounds, senseless because of
having taken drugs overnight. And there was some bums laying here and there
doing nothing. There was a birds flittering around the trees. And, you know,
Prabhupada realised he was just as homeless as all of them. In fact, more,
because they were at least homeless. And they were, that is how they were
habituated to living. Prabhupada had come for a purpose. So, it is not that
Prabhupada was with, without hope. Or Prabhupada was having some unrealistic
hope. No. Prabhupada had the realistic hope based on the understanding that
Krishna is my protector. So, he continued serving. Ok. Then, he found that. Ok.
There was some s..., person in my programme who used to come. Maybe, I can call
him. And then, maybe, we can work out some other place for me to say. So,
Prabhupada kept moving forward. You know. So, perplexed means not knowing how to
serve. Discouraged means not feeling like serving. You know. So, e devotee may
perplexed. Because sometimes, you know, life becomes so complicated that we do,
cannot understand how should I serve at this particular point? What should I do?
But a devotee is never discouraged. That means a devotee always understands that
Krishna is my well-wisher. And the best thing that I can do in this situation is
serve Krishna. Serve Krishna. You know. So, serve Krishna means that, you know,
you know, we use all our senses. All our sources. All our wealth in serving
Krishna, nicely. And in this way, we can forward in our spiritual life.
Steadily. Strongly. So:

        mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi
        mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi

By My mercy, you will cross over all obstacles. So, if you just become Krishna
conscious, with, the problems will come. And they will perplex us. But they will
never discourage us. Because we know Krishna is with us.

        atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān

If "ahaṅkārān". So, "ahaṅkārān" essentially means that I am great. In this
context, this means that I am big enough to solve any problem that comes to me.
I do not need anyone else.

        atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān
        na śroṣyasi ...

"na śroṣyasi". That means, you know, if a person thinks that I know good enough.
I do not need any help from anyone. So, I do not hear Krishna. Then,
"vinaṅkṣyasi". One will be lost. Because what will happen? Whereas I do not hear
anyone, that means, I hear my mind. Because the mind is already there inside.
And the mind is already working to drag us down. To make our life miserable. So,
at, that the mind is there to drag us down. And we desperately need protection.
So that we are not dragged down by the mind. You know. Now, you know, after
talking about this. About how Krishna, or without Krishna, we suffer. "na
śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi". So, it is not that Krishna is a vengeful God. But rather,
Krishna gives us as much facility as is possible. So, for example, you know, you
know, you know, it may happen that a devotee, say, you know, is trying to serve
Krishna. And at that time, the devotee faces severe problems. And those problems
make the devotee's hold on the process of Krishna Consciousness weak. And that,
that time, the devotee starts reading various different, different ideas from
different, different people. And trying to make an amalgam that is suited to
oneself. So, sometimes, devotees have the idea that, you know, we should not
read any books other than Prabhupada's books. Prabhupada said books are the
basis. And he said, my books are enough. So, there is no need for reading any
other books. But there are other devotees, also, who say that, actually,
Prabhupada wrote his disciples to write. And it is a, it is the tradition within
our tradition to write. Within our tradition means, since the time of the
Goswamis. And if you look at the Madhava Sampradaya. Since the time of
"Madhvācārya". It is a tradition for some people, some scholarly people, some
literally increased people to be writers. So, now, whom do, in the past, the
people would just write for Indian audiences. You know. "Madhvācārya".
"Rāmānujācārya". Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura. They would write primarily for
an Indian audience. They did not expect the soldiers to leave their profession.
And come and stay with them. You know. They may want to correct whenever some
correction is required. And they may themselves be willing to accept
correction, also, whenever it is required. But overall, they would recognise
that this is the way, you know, they will be able to move forward in life. So,
here, "mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi". This is not a call for social observation. Or
social, you know, interaction, necessarily. But the more we become conscious of
Krishna, the more our vertical relationships become strong. And the more the
vertical relationship becomes strong, the more it gives us tolerance. And
patience. And persistence in our vertical relationship. And once the vertical
relationship is strong enough, then we can, you know, draw, draw back. And
become situated s..., calmly, steadily. And act intellegently in our material
life, also. You know. On the other hand, if our vertical relation is not strong,
then we become like, you know, a small boat. You know. In a giant ocean. A
massive, impo..., impossibly vast ocean with giant killer waves coming from all
directions. So, we just get, we, we may be able to survive these waves for a few
moments. But eventually, we will succumb to them. So, therefore, it is important
for every person to recognise that, I should not make my consciousness of
Krishna conditional to a problem free life. That means, it is not that when my
problem, my life will become problem free, then I will start becoming conscious
of Krishna. No, actually, when I become conscious of Krishna, then my life will
become problem free. So, it is important. This very vital difference to
understand if we want to become steady in our devotional life. That
"mac-cittaḥ". "mac-cittaḥ".

        mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi
        mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi

So, you know, actually, "mat-prasādāt". By Krishna's mercy, so, how does a
devotee get, you know, give out or get all these sweet things? All these
wonderful gifts? You know. You know. A devotee gets these gifts by the mercy of
Krishna. Because a devotee is dedi..., devotee is dedicated to Krishna.
Therefore, everything that may, that is emanating, as a part of the Mahabharata,
comes into the ears of Parikshit Maharaja. Whose ear, devotee. And he also
becomes enthused to speak more and more on seeing the enthusiasm of the
supre..., or the enthusiastic reciprocation of the Supreme Lord. The merciful
encouragement of the Supreme Lord. So, in this way, the Lord may, enables a
devotee to transcend all problems. And move higher and higher towards Krishna.
So, now, after describing this, Krishna will elaborate on the second part.
"vinaṅkṣyasi". If you do not become conscious of Me, you will lost, you will be
lost. So, how will one be lost? He says, there are so many people who are
Godless. Who are, who are not conscious of God. And still, they are continuing
to live no..., quite normally. So, bec..., where is the question of
"vinaṅkṣyasi"? That Krishna will answer in the next two class..., verses. So,
let us look at the next verses now. You know. You know. You know. You know. So,
before we go there, Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport here. You know. That:

"One should note very carefully that one who is not active in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is losing himself in the material whirlpool, in the ocean of birth
and death."

You know. So, material whirlpool means that, a whirlpool is a body of fortra...,
is a part within a, a river or an ocean. Where once a person goes in, tuck. One
gets sucked down. Similarly, in the material world, there can be this that
desires come. Agitations come. Frustrations come. And one gets completely sucked
in by them. And they keep us in cycle of birth. And death. You know. You know.
So, now, Krishna, the same word, "ahaṅkārān" was used in the previous line,
also.

        atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān
        na śroṣyasi ...

So, Krishna will describe what happens when, you know, "ahaṅkārān" is there. How
"vinaṅkṣyasi" takes place. You know.


        yad ahaṅkāram āśritya
        na yotsya iti manyase
        mithyaiṣa vyavasāyas te
        prakṛtis tvāṁ niyokṣyati

So, you know, instead of taking the "āśritya" of Me, if you take shelter of
"ahaṅkāram". "ahaṅkāram" means I am powerful. I am strong. I know what to do.
And I will do it myself.

        ... ahaṅkāram āśritya
        na yotsya iti manyase

If you think that I will not fight. "na yotsya". "mithyaiṣa vyavasāyas te".
"mithyaiṣa". You know. "mithyaiṣa" means this is all false. Somebody consider.
"vyavasāyas te". So, you know, you know, "vyavasāyaḥ" is determination.
Determination will become falsely directed. And "prakṛtis tvāṁ niyokṣyati".
Material nature will engage you. You know. So, material, you know, Prabhupada
explains that Arjuna was a military man. And was born of the nature of ksatriya.
You know. So, he was going to fight. Whether it is by Krishna's will. Or whether
by his own independent nature. So, we will discuss about that a little bit
later. So, what Kri..., you know, Krisna is telling, in the previous verse, He
is elaborating here. So, we will recite this verse. And then, we will discuss
the meaning of both together.

        svabhāva-jena kaunteya
        nibaddhaḥ svena karmaṇā
        kartuṁ necchasi yan mohāt
        kariṣyasy avaśo ’pi tat

So, "svabhāva-jena kaunteya". You know. You know. So, born of your own
"svabhāva". Your own nature. "nibaddhaḥ". "nibaddhaḥ" means conditioned. Or
bound. "svena karmaṇā". According to our "svabhāva", we are inclined. Almost
bound to do certain kinds of work. And "kartuṁ necchasi yan mohāt". "na",
"icchasi" means not wanting to do. So, if you sa..., if you desire now that I
will not do it, if you think that I will, I will avoid my kar..., my "svabhāva".
Or "anrikta karmaṇā". My, you know, My "svabh...", the karma that is there
according to my "svabhāva". Then, what will happen? "kariṣyasy avaśo ’pi tat".
Helplessly, you will be forced to act according to your "svabhāva" later on. You
know. So, what does this mean? You know. You know. "kariṣyasy avaśo ’pi tat".
So, Arjuna, you are saying that killing is bad. And therefore, you will not
fight. So, this is what you are thinking. But you are a ksatriya. And a
ksatriya, you know, it is their nature to fight. So, if you say that you will
become a renunciate prematurely. And you will go into the forest. And live in
the forest. And then, when you are, you think, as a mendicant, you will go and
beg for alms. Now, when you go for and beg for alms, at that time, you go and
ask for alms. And somebody says, no, go away. Then, what will happen? You will
become enraged. And you will take out your sword. And you will want to attack
that person. You know. Because for a ksatriya, to be rejected like that.
Refused. Rejected. It is, you know, it is almost impossibly insulting. And that
is why the way the Pandavas were dispossessed. And their wife was dishonored.
That was an enormous insult for them. Enormous insult. You know. You know. So,
here, again, the point which Krishna makes is that we all have to act according
to our nature. So, you know, this is, you are not, are, you are thinking you
will not act according to your nature. You will not fight now. But later on, you
will be forced to fight. "kariṣya". "kariṣyasy avaśo ’pi tat". "avaśo".
Helplessly. So, now, here, we have to be very careful. Krishna is talking about
"svabhāva". He is not talking about "vāsanā". "vāsanā" has to be regulated. What
does "vāsanā" mean? "vāsanā" means passion. So, for example, when a man and a
woman, man sees a woman. Woman sees a man. Then, natural attraction. Now, it is
not that just because the man is, feels attracted to woman. The woman feels
attracted to man. You know. They should act on that attraction. And they should,
you know, unite. No. There is the system of marriage. By which, this is
regulated. So, that is different. You know. "vāsanā"s have to be regulated. And
Krishna has talked about that very strongly. When He has said repeatedly in the
Bhagavad Gita. That one has to control one's senses. One has to regulate one's
desires. One has to discipline oneself. In 3.36 to 43, the whole section is
talking about conquering lust. So, this "svabhāva" does not refer to the desire
which are induced by lust, anger, greed, envy, pride, illusion. Actually, it
refers to the, it is a, it refers to more, our not "vāsanā". But "vṛtti".
"vṛtti" means our enate psychophysical tendencies. Our nature. You know. So,
there is a "brāhmaṇa" nature. "kṣatriya" nature. "vaiśya" nature. "śūdra"
nature. So, these are, these, one, our nature is one of these. And acting
according to our, this nature is indispensable. We have to act according to this
nature. You know. You know. Whatever be our nature, we will act according to it.

So, you know, you know, it is now, now, even while acting according to nature,
we have to act in such a way that by higher direction, we get purified. So,
"kṣatriya" has a tendency to prot..., to be chivalrous. To protect. To fight.
So, actually, a "brāhmaṇa" accepts charity. You know. Whereas a "kṣatriya" takes
taxes. It is a difference. So, now, a "kṣatriya" has to take taxes. A "kṣatriya"
has to rule. But then, all that ruling has to be done according to dharma. So,
there is raja dharma. Which is, you know, which is given in the m...,
scriptures. And which is again reiterated in the instructions by Bhishma to
Maharaja "Yudhiṣṭhira" in the 12th and 13th Parvas of the "Mahābhārata". In the
"Śānti" and the "Anuśāsana" Parvas. You know. You know. So, in the
"Mahābhārata", there is talk about, you know, this raja dharma. And the
"kṣatriya" has to reg..., also regulate. But that regulation is more to direct
one's "svabhāva". It is not to reject one's "svabhāva". So, there is a
direction. And there is a rejection. Or re..., there is repression. Repression
means, a "kṣatriya" has a nature, so, "vaiśya", say, has a nature to be
industrious. And to earn money. So, industrious, this means, does not mean only
hard-working. It also means, you know, working in a way in which, one can, you
know, produce artha. Artha is not just money. It is holistic prosperity. Of
course, it is, express itself as money, also, primarily. But, you know, you
know, now, if a person, who is "vaiśya" nature, is told to live like a
"brāhmaṇa", then that person will be miserable. You know. As a "brāhmaṇa", who
is supposed to count, who is to, supposed to study shastra. And teach shastra.
The "brāhm...", the "brāhmaṇa" will be, while studying shastra, will be
thinking, ok, this book, if I sell it, how much money will I get? Well, that is
not the purpose. You know. When we, when we have got shastra, if we are doing
book distribution, it is different. But when we are studying scripture, that is
not the, the focus is not, that time, you know, that sort of thing. So, we have
to recognise that we all have natures. And we need to act according to our
nature if we want to become purified. So, "svabhāva-jena kaunteya". Arjuna, you
have your "svabhāva". Act according to your "svabhāva". Be, and of cou..., then
you will become purified. You know. So, "kartuṁ necchasi yan mohāt". Even if one
says, I will not act, but still, I will be forced to act. So, what is happening
over here? Krishna is, you know, telling Arjuna that, as a "kṣatriya", you will
have to fight. Now, in one sense, if Krishna is telling Arjuna that you will
have to fight. And you will fight. Then, what is the point of speaking the
Bhagavad Gita? You know, So, what would have happened is, Arjuna would have
said, now, I will not fight. But then, eventually, he would have taken up
weapons. Even if he decided to become mendicant. So, if Arjuna's nature was
going to fight, you know, was to fight, and he was going to fight surely, sooner
or later, then why does Krishna have to spoke, with, the whole Bhagavad Gita?
You know. It is so that he can fight in the proper time. Place. Circumstance. He
can fight in proper consciousness. So, a soldier, in the war front, shoots an
enemy, may get a medal for that. You know. Their shoulder..., soldier gets angry
in a petty quarrel. Back at home with a neighbour. And then, shoots the
neighbour. That soldier may be hung for that. So, there is, why the difference?
Because, as now, as soldier, a soldier cannot chicken out. A soldier may have to
fight when required. So, when soldier has to fight when required, you know, but
that fighting has the, so, has the nature to fight. But that nature has to be
regulated according to higher authority. In this case, the governmental rules.
So, in general, for a "kṣatriya", it is for the scriptural principles. You know.
Of course, the governmental rules all ideally should be according to scriptural
principles, only. So, con..., so, in this way, you know, the, this, whatever is
our nature, you know, it, if it is directed properly according to time, place,
circumstance, then it will lead to our purification. And elevation. A
"kṣatriya", dha..., fighting a dharma-yuddha, will become elevated by the
practice of "dharma-yuddha". You know. This is how things work in spiritual
life. And that is the purpose of the instruction of the Bhagavad Gita. To enable
Arjuna to use the "kṣatriya" propensity in, you know, right way according to
time, place, circumstance. And thereby, get elevated. You know. So, now, after
describing this, you know, you know, Prabhupada writes in the purport that, you
know, you know:

"Everyone is under the spell of a particular combination of the modes of nature
and is acting in that way. But anyone who voluntarily engages himself under the
direction of the Supreme Lord becomes glorious."

"becomes glorious". So, you know, you know, all of us have this opportunity if
we act according to Krishna's will, we will all, we can all do wonderful things
in His service. Now, Krishna will move on to describing, ok, so, if we all have
our nature. And if we simply act according to our nature, then, you know, is
nature supreme? No, Krishna says, actually, above nature is the "īśvaraḥ", is
the Supreme Lord. You know. That He will describe in this verse.

        īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati
        bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni
        yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

So, "īśvaraḥ". "īśvaraḥ" is the Supreme Lord. "īśvaraḥ". Controller.
"sarva-bhūtānāṁ". The jiva can also be called as a "īśvaraḥ". But here, the
"īśvaraḥ" is being referred to as "sarva-bhūtānāṁ". He is situated in the, in
all living beings. Where is He situated? "hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati".
"hṛd-deśe". In the region of the heart. You know. So, it is a very clear word.
"hṛd-deśe". You know. "hṛd-deśe" means that Arjun..., the, the Lord is situated
not in the heart. But in the region of the heart. You know. And the soul
similarly is situated not in the heart. But in the region of the heart. Because
what we talk about as a heart, we use the word heart in two senses. One is the
biological heart. And the other is the metaphorical heart. Biological heart is
the heart which pumps blood. You know. Me..., and now, we, say, when they, when
two people are in love. Or on Valentine's day. Or something like that. Or even
cupid is being depicted. So, at that time, they show an arrow being shot. And
the arrow piercing into the heart. You know. So, at that time, that arrow which
pierces into the heart, does, it is not, there is no hole being created in the
biological heart. So, that refers to the metaphorical heart. And the
metaphorical heart refers to the seat of emotions. So, when we are saying that
Krishna is situated in the heart, what does it mean? It does not refer
necessarily to the biological heart. You know. You know. It is, it refers to
the, you know, you know, Krishna is telling "hṛd-deśe". In the region of the
heart. There is a soul and Supersoul are said to be next to each other in the
region of the heart. And when they are situated in the region of the heart, at
that time, say, that is why even, sometimes, a heart transplant may happen. When
a heart transplant happens, it is like a king is sitting on a crown. You know.
Or is sitting on a, sorry, a throne. Now, if a throne, you know, if one of the,
say, the foo.., you know, foot of the throne becomes, be..., gets broken. Or
gets weakened. Then, what happens is, the attendances come. And bring another
throne. And then, you know, the king just gets up. That throne is moved away.
Another throne is brought. And the king, king sets on that throne. So,
similarly, you know, you know, the soul is in the region of the heart. It is not
that soul is attached to, or bound to the heart. So, when the heart is damaged,
you know, the soul, the soul just moves aside. And the soul, Supersoul, the, and
the sou..., hea..., that heart is removed. Another heart is brought in. And
therefore, and thereafter, the person continues on. The, you know, the person
continues function, normally. The soul gets resituated in the region of the
heart. So, "hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati". Then, "bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni".
"bhrāmayan". "bhrāmayan" means directing, you know, sorry, "bhrāmayan" is
wandering. "bhrām...", "bhrāman", "bhrāman" means wandering. "bhrāmayan
sarva-bhūtāni". So, all the living entities are wandering in material existence.
So, the word "bhrāmayan" is also relate..., it can also be related with the, you
know, ver..., ver..., famous verse which Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu uses in his
instructions to the Goswamis.

        brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva
        guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

So, "brahmāṇḍa bhramite". When all over the universe, "brahmāṇ". "bhrām...",
was, Krishna is using the same word over here. "bhrām...", and all of the
universe, the living entities are wandering. They are wande..., wande..., now,
the word, you know, traveling and wandering. Wandering is a difference.
Traveling in the living means, you know, purposeful. Ok. I am traveling from
here to Mayapur. To go to the, you know, go to the Yatra over there. But
wandering means, it is aimless. So, the living entity is wandering, is large,
is, living entity's, living entity's journey is largely a wandering. Because,
you know, you know, you know, you know, when one, person wanders things, ok, let
me just get a mood going this direction. Get a mood going that direction. Get a
mood going that direction. So, like that, the living entity wanders here and
there. And there. And there. So, similarly, the Lord, or sorry, similarly, the
soul, you know, you know, wanders in material existence. That means, the soul
comes in a particular set of circumstances. And based on that, certain desires
come in the mind. And when those desires come up, then the soul starts thinking.
Oh, let me enjoy this. So, if the soul is born in, you know, Punjab, then soul
thinks, oh, "paratha"s are very nice. The soul is born in South India, then the
soul thinks, oh, you know, "dosa" is very nice. The soul is born in some other
part of the world, some other things are nice. So, like that, what happens is,
the soul gets directed according to desires. And the, all those desires are
circumstantial. They have nothing to do with the intrinsic nature of the soul.
And accordingly, one's to..., according to one's externals, sou..., soul gets
injected with certain desires. And those desires direct the wandering of the
soul. Largely speaking. So, those desires shape the wandering of the soul. Souls
are going this way. That way. "bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni". So, you know, all the
living beings are wandering. And how are they wandering? "yantrārūḍhāni māyayā".
So, "yantrārūḍhāni māyayā". "māyayā" refers to, you know, you know, ma..., made
material nature. So, the word "māyayā" can refer to illusion. "māyayā" can also
refer to material nature in general. So, you know, you know, "māyayā", "mā...",
"yantrārūḍhā". "ārūḍha" means to be situated on. Krishna has used the word
"yogārūḍha". A..., Yoga Aruruksha. In the Sixth Chapter, He uses in verses 4 and
5. You know. When He is talking about the various stages of yoga. So:

        ārurukṣor muner yogaṁ
        karma kāraṇam ucyate
        yogārūḍhasya tasyaiva
        śamaḥ kāraṇam ucyate

"ārūḍha". "ārūḍha" means to be situated on. So, it is said, Lord Vishnu is
"Garuḍa", "ārūḍha". He is situated on "Garuḍa". So, here, what is the word?
"yantrārūḍhāni". So, He is situated on the "yantra". Which is made of "māya".
Which is made of mat..., matter. Or material nature. So, that refers to our
body. So, Krishna is indicating that, you know, this body is like a machine. So,
it is a "yantra". It is a machine. Now, what is the characteristic of a
"yantra"? A "yantra" in and of itself is not conscious. It is mechanistic. It is
made of certain components. Those components are brought together. And they work
accordi..., they serve a particular function. And they generally work according
to particular laws. You know. You know. So, you know, you know, a, our legs,
say, say, say, if we have a, if we have a house. And then, we have some, you
know, supporting structure. Say, walls, or pillars for the house. Now, if what
comes above becomes too heavy, then the pillars will collapse. And this whole
house may collapse. So, similarly, you know, our, we have legs. And if a person
carries too much weight. Then, either the legs, or the back, or something may
spray. You know. Or even break. So, there are laws of how much capacity of
weight can be born. And like that, there are different laws. So, according to
science, a universe is an entirely mechanistic. Mechanistic means that it simply,
it is a mechanism. And it works according to laws. So, yes, you know, you know,
the universe is not mechanistic. But Krishna does refer to the body as
mechanistic. As in terms of the machine. But it is not only mechanistic. In the
sense that there is an interaction of mechanism and a, you know, we could say,
the supreme mechanic. The person who is overseeing. Krishna has already earlier
told that "mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ". In 9.10. You know. So, "yantra", you know,
you know, Krishna, accept this body as "yantra". And the soul is using that
"yantra". Just like, sometimes, if a child is given a, if a young person is
given a bike. Then, what the person, young person does, is just, you know, for
the fun of it, will drive the bike. And drive it very fast. And then, then, the,
you move very fast. And the bike makes a loud noise. And people turn around. You
know. Who is traveling? Then, people get a kickout of it. Oh. I am, you know,
turning, getting heads to turn. And people get, so, you know, the, often, this
traveling is just aimless. Go here. Go there. Just to show off that I have got a
bike. And I could ride fast. Or somebody has a car, then people will use the car
to do the same thing. You know. Of course, you know, people who are wealthy,
they may use their own fli..., own flight. And then, especially, if somebody can
drive a plane, then that person thinks that, you know, now, I have only
developed wings. And I have beco..., I be..., I am able to fly now. And then,
people try to attract the members of the opposite sex. Thinking that I am
something special. So, anyway, the point is that, for, for pleasure, often
people wander around. And so, "yantrārūḍhāni māyayā". So, like that, the soul is
situated on the body. And the soul is wandering here and there. And everywhere.
So, you know, you know, you know, the body is like a machine. And the body does
function mechanistically. But beyond the body, the body is not alone. That
beyond the body, that is the soul. And the soul is conscious. And the soul, as a
conscious being, affects the, affects the functioning of the body. How does the
soul affect the functioning of the body? Through its desires. Just like if
somebody is playing a video game, then, you know, the virtual reality that is in
the video game, the person, who is playing, does not have any direct connection
with that. So, the, but the, that means, that is a, you know, say, there is
some, say, some, you know, there is some police. And there is some thieves. And
they are all, the police are chasing the thieves. And thieves are trying to
elude. So, at that time, all that is in the virtual game, only. But the person,
who is playing, say, he is playing police. Then, the person is in the middle.
That person is to, say, catch the, arrest the thie..., thief. Or shoot the
thief. Or whatever. So, then, you know, the person, through the mechanisti...,
through the mechanism of the video game, by pressing a button here. By pulling a
lever here. Or by moving the cursor here. This way. That way. They can, can get
the, you know, policeman to move. And then, accordingly, the thief gets caught.
Or thief runs away. So, the point is, the connection is through the mechan...,
there is an arrangement made. You know. The arrangement is not made by the video
game player, only. Actually, there is a person who has invent..., who has, say,
developed the video game. And that person's intelligence is involved in making
the whole setup. And through that setup, this person, who is playing the video
game, the player identifies with the character in the video game. And then,
plays the game. So, similarly, Krishna is telling He is the "īśvaraḥ". He is the
"īśvaraḥ". And He is oversee..., He is present in the hearts of all living
beings. And this world, material world, is like a virtual reality. One of Srila
Prabhupada's scholarly disciples, "Sadaputa" Prabhu, you know, have, were
"Richard L. Thomps...", "Dr. Richard L. Thompson". He is a mathematician. He is
a mathematic PhD from Cornel. So, he has written a very good book called, you
know, "Maya: The World As Virtual Reality". It is a, it is a quite a, you know,
intricate scientific book, which explains, whi..., which explains many of the
puzzles and enigmas of the modern science. From the perspective of, you know,
you know, you know, you know, you know, from the perspective of, you know, Vedic
science. And Vedic insight. Vedic philosophy. Vedic insights. And then, shows
how, you know, the concept of virtual reality, when it is correlated with the
concept of maya, can give a lot of insights. Which, you know, can help, you
know, us understand even the scientific world view better.

It is not only that devotees can understand the scientific world view. Or
devotees can understand scripture. But even scientists can understand what are
the implications of scientific world view better. You know. So, coming back to
our scri..., verse, we will not go into the, too much of the technicalities
here. But, you know, each of us, depending on our "svabhāva", we, within this
video game, we have been allocated a particular role. So, you know, the thief
cannot suddenly become a police. And the police cannot become a thief. You know.
So, like that, the "kṣatriya" has to act as a "kṣatriya". The "brāhmaṇa" acts as
a "brāhmaṇa". The "vaiśya" acts like a "vaiśya". So, like that, according to our
varana, we act. And while acting according to our varana, if we act properly,
then we will become purified. So, this whole system is supervised by the Supreme
Lord. And by, under His supervision, He is situated in the heart. He has set up
the whole system. And He is directing the wanderings. So, Prabhupada uses word
directing. Actually, you know, there is no direct correlation with the word
directing in the sanskrit of the verse. The sanskrit of the verse has two basic
parts. You know. The first, A and B:

        īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati

It says that. 50:16
