Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fun4PlUnAfY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_118_-_Bhagavad_Gita_13.01-13.03_-_Understanding_the_concept_of_kshetra_from_multiple_perspectives_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=fun4PlUnAfY&redir_token=B_CXs2zBUur2XeZzHUADYxXHUX58MTU0ODQ4OTQ2OUAxNTQ4NDAzMDY5&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the Thirteenth Chapter beginning with the jnana section of the Bhagavad
Gita. Chapters 1 to 12 was about karma. And how karma leads to bhakti. Chapter
7 to 12 is about how, bhakti. And Chapters 13 to 18 is about jnana. And how
jnana leads to bhakti. So, here, the Thirteenth Chapter begins with a question
from Arjuna. And as we have discussed earlier, the, you know, you know, Tenth
Chapter, not necessarily the beginning. But in the Tenth Chapter, you know,
after Kri..., Krishna starts speaking in the eleventh verse of Chatur Shloki
Bhagavad Gita. Arjuna asks a question. And that, you know, leads the discussion
forward. So, in the 10th, 11th, 12th and 13th Chapters, the topics of discussion
are generated by Arjuna's questions. You know. So, now, we may ask, what
generates Arjuna's questions? It is not necessary that, you know, something in
the previous chapter, normally, ha..., necessarily has to lead to that question.
You know. Yes. We discussed how m..., in the, you know, tenth Chapter, you know,
you know, in the Eleventh Chapter, the question comes from the Tenth Chapter.
Eleventh Chapter. At the end of the 10th Chapter, Krishna has said that in 10.42
that "ekāṁśena sthito jagat". That by My one fragment, I pervade the whole, you
know, creation. I pervade and sustain the whole creation. So, then, based on
that, Arjuna asks the question, can you show me the "Virata rupa"? But there is
only one of the stimula, one of the stimulants for that question. Another
question is, another stimulant also is that, you know, Arjuna wants to have a,
you know, visual, verifiable demonstration of Krishna's supremacy for all time
as is pramana. As a standard. You know. You know. And then, in the Tenth Chapter
itself, the question on "vibhuti" is not necessarily immediately related with
something before. It is, you know, they are based on the understanding that, you
know, yes, Krishna, one has to think about Krishna, but it is difficult to think
about Krishna at all times. So, how can one think about Krishna within material
nature? In the Twelfth Chapter, question is not immediately related with the
Eleventh Chapter. You know. And Thirteenth Chapter question is also not
immediately related with the Twelfth Chapter. Or anything that comes before
that. The Bhagavad Gita is a discussion which happens, it, in different ways.
You know. Sometimes, when we meet, you know, a learned teacher. You know. That
learned teacher may speak on one subject. And after the class is over, we may
not restrict ourselves to asking questions only with relative, respect to that
subject. You know. If we have some general philosophical doubts, also. We may
ask those. So, similarly, when Arjuna asks questions, his questions are not
necessarily limited or connected, you know, to what was discussed earlier.
Arjuna is living in a Vedic culture. And there are many terms. Which ha..., he
has already heard. And he would like to have those terms clarified. So, we
discussed earlier how terms are verbal. And concepts are intellectual. So, both
need to be clarified. So, for example, in the Twelfth Chapter, when he asks
about, you know, who are better situ..., who are more intimately united with
Him? Those who worship the personal manifestation? Or the impersonal
manifestation? So, you know, that is a conceptual clarification. They do not
un..., necessarily have any specific terms involved. But now, here, Kri...,
Arjuna in the Thirteenth Chapter, when he asks the question, he will be using
some specific terms.

Of course, those terms are associated with concepts. But he is asking, what do
those terms mean? So, let us look at the Thirteen Chapter overview. And then, we
will go into the verses one by one. So, we have Arjuna's six questions. You
know. In the six questions. There is Kshetra. And Kshetra-jna. You know. for,
so, Arjuna, so, those questions are answered progressively by Krishna. So, the
answer to the question about what is Kshetra? And what is the Kshetra-jna? That
is, you know, from verses 2 to 7. You know. So, actually, this is the third and
fourth question which is answered first. Then, what is Jnana is answered in 8 to
12. Then, what is Jneya is answered in 13 to 19. These will be the answer to the
fifth and sixth question. And then, Krishna comes back to answer the first and
second questions. So, that is, what is Prakrti? And what is Purusha? How do they
interact? And then, how does it all come together? So, 27 to 35 is like a bonus
section. Where Krishna offers Jnana-chakshu. The eyes of knowledge. By which,
one can, you know, see reality beyond how it appears at a ma..., material level.
At, you know, material level of perception. So, to see, you know, with
philosophical vision, instead of  just material vision, that is what the last
section enables one to do. So, let us Kri..., now, look at Arjuna's questions.
And Krishna's answer.

        arjuna uvāca

        prakṛtiṁ puruṣaṁ caiva
        kṣetraṁ kṣetra-jñam eva ca
        etad veditum icchāmi
        jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ ca keśava

So, Arjuna is asking. He is asking six term. What is "prakṛtiṁ"? And what is
"puruṣaṁ"? "kṣet...", "etad veditum icchāmi". Arjuna, Krishna says. "veditum
icchāmi". This, I wish to know. "veditum" is to know. So, "kṣetraṁ kṣetra-jñam
eva ca". That the fie..., know, the "kṣetraṁ" is the field of knowledge. And the
knower. "jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ ca keśava". So, "jñānam" is literally speaking knowledge.
"jñeyam" is that which is to be known. "keśava". So, what, now, these terms are
familiar terms in the Vedic context. But do they exactly mean? That is what
Arjuna wants to know. Now, Krishna replies.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya
        kṣetram ity abhidhīyate
        etad yo vetti taṁ prāhuḥ
        kṣetra-jña iti tad-vidaḥ

"vidaḥ". So, "idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya". This body. Krishna points to Arjuna's
body. And He says, "idaṁ śarīraṁ". This body, you know, you know, is the
"kṣetram". It is called as "abhidhīyate". "abhidhīyate" means it is known as.
"etad yo vetti". One who knows it. "taṁ prāhuḥ". That en..., that entity is
known as "kṣetra-jña". "iti tad-vidaḥ". You know. So, "tad-vidaḥ" tha..., means
those who know this. "tad-vidaḥ". "vidaḥ" means to know. "tad" is that. So,
Krishna is quoting here the knowers of subject. And knowers of the subject, he
is saying, the knowers call, this body is the "kṣetram". And the, you know,
knower, as kṣetra-jña". So, in one sense, Krishna does not tell who is the
knower. He just says, one who knows it is called as the "kṣetra-jña". Now, you
know, you know, before we go into the technicalities of the verse, first, an
important with respect to pathantara. Pathantara means, you know, in, you know,
traditional culture, when, you know, there were people who were called as
co..., copiers. Or transcribers. You know. They would, you know, you know, you
know, they would, their job was, you know, that they would have to write,
rewrite the scripture. Not in terms of editing. But keeping it same. And
copying it. Because when the scriptures are, there, generation after generation,
you know, they do not last. The paper gets, you know, decayed. The paper gets
spoilt. And then, you know, we have to copy that. And there were no xerox
machines. Or something like that in the past. So, people would have to write
it manually. So, while writing manually, sometimes, that would be a
Pathantan..., so Pathantara Bheda. Bheda means difference. Pathantara means that
there are different, you know, you know, different versions of the same
manuscript. So, this is the technical word used for, this is recension. So,
recension means a different rendition of the manus..., so, manuscript. So, for
example, you know, you know, you know, you know, there will be, there may be
some renditions where some words might be slightly different. So, you know,
there is a, you know, prayer of Prahlada Maharaja where:

        naitan manas tava kathāsu

You know:

        brahmādayaḥ sura-gaṇā munayo ’tha siddhāḥ
        sattvaikatāna-gatayo vacasāṁ pravāhaiḥ
        nārādhituṁ puru-guṇair adhunāpi pipruḥ
        kiṁ toṣṭum arhati sa me harir ugra-jāteḥ

So, here, it is described that, this is the first prayer among the series of
prayers that Prahlada Maharaja offers to Lord Nrsimhadeva. And therein, he
prays that my dear Lord, you know, if, if devatas like Brahmaji, whose words
like a flow of ne..., are of like a flow of nectar, if they could not satisfy
You, I have been lowborn. How can my, my words satisfy you? "maci...", "nār...",
"ārān".

        sattvaikatāna-gatayo vacasāṁ pravāhaiḥ

So, the word here is "gatayo". "gatayo". Now, when some recensions, instead of
"gatayo", it is "matayo". Now, if we look at the overall meaning. The meaning
does not change so much. It remains the same. You know. "gat...", so, "gatayo"
means like the flow. "matayo" means is their opinion. So, either way, if the
word, you know, does not affect much the overall understanding of the verse. So,
like that, there are often recens..., different recensions, with slight, minor
variations among them. And generally, within the traditional circles, whenever
any commentary is written. For, say, Vyasatirtha. Vyasatirtha is a famous Madhva
scholar. When he writes a commentary, generally, for the first thing that he
would do is, he would deal with, you know, the issues of, you know, you know,
differences in various recensions. And he would say, ok, like this is the
recen..., this is recension. I found this verse to be like this. And this
recension, I found this verse to be like this. And this is recension. I found
this verse to be like this. And then, he would address those issues. And he
would give, ok, because this recension is a little older. Or this recension is
more coherent. Or this is the recension in which, you know, which has been,
which is more authorised. Because we have it coming down in the tradition. And
this is what has been commented on. So, then, we, I choose this recension. So,
the, it was, it is well, it is well-known possibility to erase human. And
when humans are copying things, it is always possible that some error can come
up. So, when the error comes up, at that time, you know, how is the error dealt
with? By comparing with various recensions. So, that is a natural thing which is
done. So, as to ensure that, you know, the, you know, you know, the human error
factor is minimised. You know. But overall, when the, you know, scriptures are
preserved in the tradition, then the variations and the recensions become less
and less. And especially if a book has been preserved in the tradition.
Especially for book has been commented on. You know. Then, the commentary is
normally preserved within that tradition. And along with that, the book verse is
also preserved. So, then, it becomes clear. Ok. This is the verse. Which
this particular acharya has commented on. And that way, both remain the same.
So, for example, we have Shridhar Swami's commentary which almost goes down to,
it is almost, you know, nearly, somewhere, like a thousand years old. And, you
know, on the "Bhāgavatam". And we have the "Bhagavad-gītā". The "Bhāgavatam",
today. And we see, practically, all the verses are, you know, the same. So, what
does it indicate? That for a thousand years, things have not changed. And
similarly, we have "Shankaracharya"'s "Bhagavad-gītā". And his commentary. And
similarly, we look at the "Bhagavad-gītā" which we have. And we look that, we,
he is commenting on the same verses. So, the commentaries of different acharyas
may be different. But when the commentary is preserved, along with that, the
verses are also preserved. So, we can say that, at least for a, you know,
thousand, five hundred years, Shankaracharya came almost 1400 years ago. So, the
verses of the Gita also have not changed. And which is, which is remarkable.
Which is indicative of the exter..., enormous amount of care that has been taken
for preserving the fidelity of the scripture. So, when we talk about preserving
the fidelity of the scripture, what exactly do we mean by that?

You know. That means, now, ultimately, the fideli..., the scriptures are not
just texts. Which are, you know, present in some, some manuscript. Some form of,
you know, manuscript. Or some leaves. Or some kind of paper. Or whatever. The
scriptures are also living wisdom. That is present in the hearts of those who
have, you know, internalised the preachings of the scriptures. And have molded
their life accordingly. So, why am I talking about all this right now? Because
in some, you know, generally, even secular scholars of the, of religion, those
who have studied the Bhagavad Gita, they adm..., they acknowledge that Bhagavad
Gita is one of the stablest scriptures in terms of, you know, manuscript. Or in,
in terms of, say, the, you know, agreement in various recensions. So, ma...,
there are pro..., very, very few disagreements in terms of what the content of
the Gita is. So, as I mentioned earlier, there was a commentator called Niva...,
Abhinav Gupta. You know. He tried to prove that the Bhagavad Gita, you know, he
was a Shaivite. Kashmiri Shaivite. And he tried to prove that, you know, the
Bhagavad Gita, at least to the sour..., so, conclusion that Shiva is the Supreme
Per..., Absolute Truth. Now, with his, you know, entirely untenable conclusion.
Because the word Shiva does not come also in the Bhagavad Gita so much. But even
in his commentary, there are not much differences in the verses. So, that means,
even he recognised that he cannot change. That, you know, the verses are the
same. And the verses cannot be changed. Because there are so many copies of that
book available. And if one, somebody just tries to change the, inserts some
words. Or remove some verse. Then, it creates a lot of, you know, then, it will
immediately be caught when pointed out. You know. That time, you know, although
the modern means of technology were not there. But still, you know, the verse,
you know, severe and serious intellectual, intellectual competition, you could
say. When warfare among the various schools of thought that were prevalent. And
everybody had to use logic. And scripture to establish the, you know, validity
and veracity of their school of thought. You know. So, we could, you know, we
could go, go around people. Go play. Go playing around, changing the scri...,
content of the scripture itself. So, the point is, in some recensions of the
Gita, although the Gita overall is very stable, 13.1 is not present. 13.1 is
Arjuna's question. So, now, for argument sake, even if we say, Arjuna had never
asked this question. Actually, it makes no difference. Because essentially, even
without Arjuna's question, the topic is slightly, you know, tangent. You know.
You know. Even if there is no question by Arjuna, what Krishna is going to speak
is not going to change. That the verses are there as it is. And within the
question itself begs itself. Why did the, you know, you know, you know, why did
Arjuna, Krishna suddenly start speaking on this topic of "kṣetram". And
"kṣetra-jña". And "pur...", and "jñānaṁ". And "jñeyaṁ". And "puruṣaṁ". And
"prakṛtiṁ". So, our acharyas have generally included this verse in the, you
know, in their commentaries in the Gita. In their, as a, as a, as the starting
of the, you know, you know, Chapter 13. So, some traditions called as, may not
include it. And we do not have to get into a debate over that. If we look at
the, you know, you know, you know, question, it brings some sort of context and
continuity to the topic that Krishna takes up. And, you know, without it, there
seems to be sudden, sudden shift. Sudden jump. And, you know, that is why, it
i..., it is tenable that Arjuna would have asked a question. But we do not have
to be absolutely insistent about it. If some people want to face, say, that no.
no. This verse is not there. Ok. It is not there. In the normal Gita, in the
Gita press. Gita, which is widely distributed in India. The, Arjuna's question
is often not kept over there.

So, either way, the important point is not the presence or absence of the
question. The important point is the, you know, con..., understanding the
concepts that are talk..., you know, explained over here. So, let us go to those
concepts. So, it is, so, even, so, that means even if the verse is not there as
a question. Still, then, all, what we do accept is Krishna suddenly starts
talking about different topic. Then, why does Krishna suddenly start of, talking
of a different topic? Because, you know, Krishna wants to clarify concepts
further. Krishna has explained, you know, you know, how bhakti is superior to
jnana. And so, you know, is to impersonal worship. Which is also part of jnana.
But now, Krishna wants to clarify other terms. So, there is sankhya. You know.
Sankhya. This word has come earlier in the Third, Four..., you know, Fourth and
Fifth, Third and Fifth Chapters especially. You know. You know. Sankhya has
come. You know. So, it has, you know, so, sankhya is analysis of material
nature. Into its components. So that one can go beyond an ultimately, attain
through a clear understanding of what lies beyond matter. So, the material world
has so much, you know, variety. Which is quite captivating. And bewildering.
That we just get caught up in the forms. And the appearances. But once one
understands that these un..., forms and appearances are made by some fundamental
elements. And they themselves are not very captivating. You know. If just air is
blowing along. You know. Air is not going to captivate me. Nor is water going to
captivate me. It is not that, if say, a wat..., a glass of water is going to
present, you know, captivate for me. It is not that I am going to be constantly
lost. Fascinated. Finding the whole thing irresistible. No. I will be wanting
to, you know, you know, just get a, you know, get a, you know, get drink water.
If I need it. If I am thirsty. But otherwise, I will not be at all concerned
about it. It is not going to distract me so much. So, when we look at, analyse
the material world into its components. Then, we understand, these components
are not very attractive. There is no need for me to get captivated by it, these
material things. And then, we can go beyond. And look at what is it that brings
us alive? What is it the real substance? What is it that actually is, you know,
the basis of life? And, you know, love? And that way, go f..., to the spiritual
reality where there is a soul. And there is ultimately the Supersoul. So, here,
the focus is on, you know, analysing matter. And its interaction with
consciousness. So, Srila Prabhupada called this Chapter as "Nature, the Enjoyer
and Consciousness". "Nature, the Enjoyer and Consciousness". So, now, you know,
how does this nomenclature come about? "Nature, the Enjoyer and
Consciousness". So, there is, you know, what is Krishna's question? Sorry.
Arjuna's question is? What is "kṣetraṁ"? What is "kṣetra-jñam"? What is
"puruṣaṁ"? What is "prakṛtiṁ"? What is "jñānaṁ"? And what is "jñeyaṁ"? So, in
this, if you see, generally speaking, one of them is conscious. The other is not
so much. So, "prakṛtiṁ" is not conscious. "kṣetraṁ" is not conscious. "jñeyaṁ"
is conscious. "prak...", "puruṣaṁ" is conscious. You know. And, you know,
"puruṣaṁ" is conscious. So, "jñeyaṁ". "puruṣaṁ". And "kṣetra-jñam". They are
conscious. So, now, we will, we, as we move forward, we will see how these, you
know, terms. You know. They basically refer..., there are three entities which
have been talked about. So, there is "Ja...", as we have discussed earlier. The
tattva-traya. Jiva. Jagat. Jiva. And Jagadish. So, Jagat is, refers to material
nature. So, that is "prakṛtiṁ". And "puruṣaṁ". So, it is "prakṛtiṁ". And
"kṣetra-jñ...", "kṣetraṁ". Then, Jiva i..., Jiva can be that the "prakṛtiṁ". You
know. Sorry. Jiva can be the "puruṣaṁ". Or Jiva can be the "kṣetra-jñam".
Similarly, Ishvara can be the "kṣetra-jñam". Or such a, Ishvara can be the
"kṣetraṁ". You know. It can be the "puruṣaṁ", also. We will discuss this as we
move forward. It is, right now, it might seem a little bit abstract. And
confusing. But the point is these three entities. So, "Nature" basically refers
to material nature. You know. "The Enjoyer" refers to the Jagad..., Jaga...,
Ishvara. That is Supreme Lord. And "Consciousness" refers to the Jiva. That is
why Prabhupada uses this name. You know. So, now, let us look at Srila
Prabhupada's purport. You know. So:

"That field of activity is the body."

You know. You know. You know. So, now, what is exactly the, you know, meaning of
"kṣetram"? Now, "kṣetraṁ" is a part of "prakṛtiṁ". "prakṛtiṁ" is material
nature. Now, all around me. All around you is material nature. But we cannot
control all of material nature. We can control only some of its parts. You know.
For example, if I am sitting here, I can, I am able to move my hand up and down.
But I cannot move your hand up and down. You know. I cannot, you know, control
material nature beyond what is my jurisdiction of influence. So, the "kṣetraṁ"
refers to the area of influence. So, at a phi..., preliminary level, the
"kṣetraṁ" is the bo..., body. All of us have some exp..., influence over the
body. Of course, we do not have complete influence. Or complete control over the
body. There is much that happens in the body at a subconscious level. You know.
You know. And that means not subconscious in the, psychologically subconscious.
I am talking about, here subconscious in terms of involuntary. Right now, I am
breathing. So, I am not conscious that I am breathing. So, similarly, all of you
are breathing. Inside your body, blood circulation is happening. Digestion is
happening. You know. So, all these are happening at an involuntary level. And we
are not conscious of them. But still, we do have some influence over what happens
to the body. And what we can do with the body. So, this is our ordained
"kṣetraṁ". And different living entities have different levels of "kṣetraṁ".
An amoeba has a very, very tiny "kṣetraṁ". You know. Its body, there is inside
the amoeba, is also a soul. But inside, but that soul, because of past karma, has
been given a "kṣetraṁ" with a very small influence. Of course, it may also have
its power in its own ways. You know. You know. It can, you know, it can also,
you know, you know, fulfill its needs for eating, sleeping, mating, defending.
It also has its defend mechanisms. It also has its ingestion mechanism. It also
has its reproduction mechanism. So, in that sense, it is there. But beyond that,
you know, the important thing is that we have to recognise this particular
overall understanding of scrip..., you know, scripture to be not indicative of,
you know, the, you know, specifics involved. But of the broad principles
involved. What do I mean by this? Actually, when we talk about "kṣetraṁ". The
word in a very narrow sense. The word "kṣetraṁ" can refer to a field. So,
agriculture. You know. Agriculture. A farmer has a field. That is a narrow
sense. But in a generic sense, the word, for, "kṣetraṁ" is used for many other
functions. That is also used for, you know, what is your field? That means, may,
are you engineer? Are you a doctor? Are you a business executive? Are you a, you
know, some kind of specialist? Or what? So, that is what is your field. So, the
word field has many meanings. So, that means, when I say that, you know,
somebody is an instrumentation control engineer. What does that mean? That means
that person has that, the expertise in that field, has some amount of cont...,
control and mastery in that field. So, like that, all of us have our "kṣetraṁ".
So, an eagle has been given a, by the past karma that the soul has done
earlier, the sou..., some, that particular soul has been given the body of an
eagle. And then, you know, eagle flies. Fearlessly. As a, you know, as an eagle
over there. So, like that, there are different living entities which act in
different ways. And all these living entities, which act in different ways, are
all, you know, you know, focusing on simply one thing. That one thing is the
practice of, you know, you know, spiritual, you know, they, they are trying to
fulfill their desires in terms of eating. Sleeping. Mating. And defending.

And beyond that, they are not involved, you know, in any further metaphysical
quest. But in the human form, the "kṣetraṁ" has become a little more evolved. Or
rather, our interaction with the "kṣetraṁ" has become much more involved. You
know. The scientists may say that, you know, we have brai..., more brain
substance than animals. Than monkeys. And our brain cells are capable of, you
know, more, you know, data processing. You know. That may be true. But, you
know, that is a facility that has been provided. There is, the soul that is
consciousness. Soul, the conscious soul is using this facility for doing, you
know, more, you know, more ratiocination. Ratio..., more and deep thinking. More
intellection. So, it is like, you know, a child may have a small device with a
little bit remote. So, it, the child has a toy. You press this button. The toy
starts. And then, Press the, swap the button. The toy starts. So, they are the,
the, even if there is some icey chip or something like that inside that remote
device. You know. That is a very preliminary technology. Now, if that child is
given a sophisticated laptop with all kinds of, you know, applications. The
child's intelligence will be limited. And the child will not be able to do much
more, much with that laptop. F..., why? Because the child does not have the
intelligence about how to use the laptop. So, you know, scientists did an
experiment. They had an idea that, you know, everything in, come by chance. So,
they took some monkeys. This is a, this is, this is, this a real experiment
which was done by scientists. They took some mon...,  monkeys. A ba..., dozen
monkeys. And they placed them in a sealed room with transparent wall..., walls.
And they placed twelwe computers in front of them. One computer for each monkey.
And then, their idea was, one of the scientists had made a claim that, you know,
if we just give a, give a monkey enough time. And let the monkey type. Type.
Type. Type. Then, what will happen? The monkey will, you know, actually be able
to, you know, the, go ahead. And, you know, you know, write the whole Hamlet.
The monkey will be able to write the whole Hamlet. How does that work out? The
monkey is able to write the whole Hamlet. Because the, ultimately, everything
happens by chance. So, the monkey can also keep typing. Typing. And if it keeps
typing, then it can eventually write everything. So, when it writes everything
in this way, at that time, you know, it is able to, you know, indicate. This
will be demonstration that ultimately everything can come by chance. So, even
the literary creations which are poetical. You know. Poetic. Or literary
masterpieces. You know. You know. They can also come by chance. Now, but they
put the computer. Put the monkeys in a computer in a computer lab with many
computers. What did the monkeys do? You know. Some monkeys started, you know,
playing with the computer. Some monkeys started passing urine on the computer.
Some monkeys started, you know, beating the computer. And a few monkeys started
typing on it. You know. You cannot control the typing. And then, when they type,
type, type, also. But actually, even if they did it for seven full days. All
that happened was they just got some garbage. You know. No matter how much we
tried to see what has come about, you know, the monkeys do not understand. And
because they do not understand, they cannot produce anything. So, actually, I
have written a whole article about this on my website. And in my science and
specialty book called "when monkeys started typing" So, it is analysis. And it
is, it is indicative of the point that it is not just the technological gadgetry
that is important. Along with the technological gadgetry, there has to be an
evolved intelligence. You know. Which can use that gadgetry. So, the brain is
like the gadgetry.

So, the animals may not be able to do philosophical thought. And, you know, you
know, that is because, somebody may say that is because their brain is not
developed. That is true. The brain is not developed. But the brain is just a
facility. Even if the brain is developed. Say, if an, just like if a chi...,
monkey is placed in front of a computer. That means it is given a f..., you,
device which can ha..., which has much more, more data processing capacity. But
then, it itself does not have the intelligence to use it. So, like that, the
soul, you know, is the source of consciousness. And the soul has to use the
brain. So, the human brain has much more capacity, you know, to, it is a tool.
And it has, it i..., it has a tool. It has more sophistication than the tools
which are animal brains. But still, no matter how sophisticated the tool may be.
The po..., but the, you know, artist, the artism, the person, the, who is using
the tool. That person also has to have that level of capacity. That level of
skills. So, the soul has more evolved consciousness. So, what is, this is
soul's, when we say, soul has more developed consciousness? As, that does not
refer to just the more developed brain. That refers to actually, the subtle body
is also a covering on the soul. And the subtle body, you know, that covering,
"āvṛtaṁ jñānam etena". You know. That s..., covering which is there of
the contamination of lust. Of the contamination of ignorance. That is lesser in
a human body as compared to a, you know, a non-human, subhuman body. So, the
important point recognised here is that the "kṣetraṁ" which we human beings
have, this has greater capacity for spiritual inquiry. And spiritual
realisation than, the other "kṣetraṁ"s have. So, now, this is the "kṣetraṁ". And
Prabhupada explains through the example of a painter how one should not confuse
everything. So, you know, you know, these are, the, you know, the "kṣetraṁ" and
the "kṣetra-jñam" are different. You know. The soul. And the body. Which is
operated, which is being operated by the soul, they are different. So, the body
may have greater capacity. But the soul also has greater capacity in terms of a
more refined. A more developed consciousness by which the soul can perceive
things. You know. You know. You know. You know. So, let us look at Srila
Prabhupada's purport here. You know. So, Prabhupada explains how:

"The owner is distinctly kṣetra-jña."

So, this is the, "kṣetra-jña" means I know my field. So, for example, I am, know
that, ok, I am a male. Or somebody says, I am a female. I am, I am an Indian.
All this is, this awareness is called as "kṣetra-jña". Now, you know, Prabhupada
explains the flow of the chapters, also. And after that, he moves forward. And
then, he goes into the, you know, you know, let us look at the example of the
painter. And it is, comes in the next verse. So, let us go to the next verse
now. So, first, Krishna has described that one who knows this is the
"kṣetra-jñam". So, now, who exactly is the "kṣetra-jñam"? That is 13.3. He will
describe that there are two "kṣetra-jñam" over here.

        kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi
        sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata
        kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ
        yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama

"kṣetra-jñaṁ". So, "kṣetra-jñaṁ". One who is the knower of the "kṣetra". "cāpi
māṁ viddhi". I know that I am also the "kṣetra-jñaṁ". But what, what kind of
"kṣetra-jñaṁ" am I? "sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata". "sarva-kṣetreṣu". That, you know,
you know, I know all the fields. I know all the fields. And then,
"kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ". So, that, the knowledge of "kṣetra" and
"kṣetra-jñaṁ". This knowledge. "yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama". This actually is
what I define in My understanding as knowledge. Krishna is telling. "mataṁ
mama". Now, Krishna may use the word "mataṁ mama". My opinion. In a, you know,
which might seem to decrease the weight. Oh, it is just His opinion. I will
repeat. Different people have different opinions. But, you know, you know, you
know, actually, when Krishna uses the word "mataṁ mama". We understand that He
is the Absolute Truth. And because He is the Absolute Truth, therefore, whatever
He speaks is the ultimate reality. And it, in His, His opinion actually go
insides with reality. Our opinion may also go inside with reality. But there
are varying degrees of coincidences. And there are possibilities of you,
divergences, also, of varying degree depending on how accurate our perception
is. How accurate our judgement is. But Krishna's opinion is the final authority.
Because His opinion completely go insides with reality. That is how it is. And
that is how He sees it. There is no illusion that covers Krishna. Ever. Because
illusion is His potency. And just as the cloud do not s..., cover, do not,
clouds do not cover the Sun. Similarly, the illu..., you know, illusion,
illusory energy does not cover Krishna. So, Krishna is saying matter, spirit.
Ma..., matter and, basically matter and spirit. Knowledge of these two is
know..., know..., is knowledge according to Him. So, in modern, modern science.
And godern education. General, we just, generally, we just have material
knowledge. We do not have so much spiritual knowledge. We study matter in its
various combinations. And its permutations. Krishna is saying matter and spirit.
"kṣetrajña". "kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ". That the "jñānaṁ". Just "kṣetra". And
"kṣetrajña". That is "yat taj jñānaṁ". "yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama". This is,
according to Me, knowledge. So, Krishna is telling that knowledge means to have
a broad understanding of all of reality. Matter and spirit. Now, in the
"kṣetrajña". Krishna mentions that there are two kinds of "kṣetrajña". So, it
means we should now both kind of "kṣetrajña". We should know the soul. And we
should also know the Supersoul. Who is actually the knower of all bodies. You
know. I know my body. For example, if there is some pain in my back, I will know
baout that. But actually, I do not know everything about everything. Krishna, on
the other hand, becuse He is present as the Supersoul in all living beings. He
is the "kṣetrajña" for all living beings. "kṣe...", so the, that means,
knowledge means, knowledge of matter. Knowledge of the soul. And knowledge of
the Supersoul. All three knowledges are actually called the knowle..., you know,
the complete knowledge. So, "kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi". "kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ
viddhi". That "māṁ viddhi" refers to that there is, you know, you know, Arjuna,
you should know that I am also the "kṣetra-jñaṁ". I am also the "kṣetra-jñaṁ".
How am I the "kṣetra-jñaṁ"? You know. Because Krishna is also present in all
living beings. Now, sometimes, the, you know, impersonalists try to interpret
thi..., interpret this verse to mean that the "kṣetra-jñaṁ" is also me. That
means that the previous it was there, it was said that:

        etad yo vetti taṁ prāhuḥ
        kṣetra-jña iti tad-vidaḥ

"tad-vidaḥ". So, you know, one who knows this is called as the "kṣetra-jña". So,
people extend that. And they say that, actually, "kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi".
You know. "sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata". That actually, it is I who am the
"kṣetra-jñaṁ". You know. So, they try to conflate these two verses. And they try
to say that both refer to the same reality. Both refer to the same person. And
not to different persons. And that is not, you know, true. That is misleading.
That is wrong. Why is it wrong? Because it is, you know, you know, grammatically
or logi..., and logically also, you know, it is co..., you know, incorrect. We
all know that we are not "sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata". Are we "kṣetra-jñaṁ" of all
bodies? No. Obviously, we are not "kṣetra-jñaṁ" of all bodies. You know. We are,
you know, "kṣetra-jñaṁ" of our own body. And even of our own body, we are only
partially "kṣetra-jñaṁ". We do not know everything that happens inside the body.
So, but are, we certainly do not know anything that happens in another's body.
You know. If we were all "kṣetra-jñaṁ". Then, the doctors would not need to do
any diagnosis in terms of, you know, having some sophisticated instruments. And,
you know, talking with the patients. The doctor would just, I am also in your
body. So, I can know whatever is the problem with you. You know. That will not
work. We, it does not work like that. So, even from a practical, functional
point of view, we say, I, we understand clearly that we do not know
everything that happens in everyone's bodies. And if we see also what Krishna is
telling over here. "kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi". That I am also the
"kṣetra-jñaṁ". Krishna is, you know, what He is essentially saying is that, so,
if I say that, say, X is in the room. And I am also in the room. You know. What
does it mean? It means that X and I are not the same. Because if I, otherwise I
would not use the word, also. X in the room. I am in the room. Now, that may be,
maybe am I X? That sort of question might come up. But once the word "also"
comes over there, X is in the room. I am also in the room. "ca" means also.
Then, what it indicates is that actually, these are two different entities. Both
of whom are present over here. And in this way, you know, one can understand
that Krishna is talking about two different people. So, let us look at the
purport now. You know. So, you know, Prabhupada uses this interesting word
"superknower".

"I am the superknower."

So, we know that, the, so, we, actually, this, this Supersoul is Prabhupada's,
you know, rendition. I, and not as far as I have seen, I have not seen other
spiritual teachers use this word. Just like there is superman. You know. Like
that, there is Supersoul. So, the soul with supreme capaci..., superior
capacities. As there is ordinary soul. And there is Supersoul. So, like that,
now, Prabhupada is using the word superknower, also. So, the word super is used
as a superlative, you know, to indicate, a lot of, he, somebody says that that
was an exciting match. That was a cool match. That was super cool match. So, it,
it just indiates superlativeness. Prabhupada uses these, you know, improvises
these words and uses them to indicate, you know, the, to help, to help, you
know, to indicate the philosophical truth. And also, to present in a way that
people can connect with it. Superknower. So, "sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata". He is
the, so, Prabhupada used the example of a, you know, you know, king and the
citizens. The king is the original proprietor. So, you know, in every country,
when there was a fewer rules. At that time, when there was the, not necessarily
the fewer ruler. And there was the monarchy. So, at that time, the, you know,
king would be considered to be the owner of the whole kingdom. But at the same
time, within the king's overarching ownership, there would be some, there would
also be further ownership. You know. Ok. This kingdom belongs to, this par...,
area belongs to this particular person. This area belongs to this particular
person. This area belongs to this particular person. You know. So, like that,
the area, different areas belong to different people. That is how it would be.
The Supreme Lord, so, like that, the, the, our bodies do belong to us. In one
sense. You know. What, in what sense? Yeah. They are under our control right
now. You know. That also of course is partial control. Temporary control. But
there is, some control is there. But beyond that, these bodies are not in our
control. In the sense that they belong to the Supreme Lord. So, we are not
owners. We are tenants. We are tenants. How tenants? Because a tenant has some
control over the house. But the tenant can be evicted anytime. So, like that, we
do have some control. Right now, I am able to speak. But death can come at any
moment. And I may be evicted from this body. You know. When I am evicted, then I
have to go to whatever destination I am told. That is how it will work. So, we
will be evicted accordingly. So, He is the original controller of the senses.
You know. The word "Hṛṣīkeśa" is used for, also for Krishna as Prabhupada quotes
in the purport that actually we are the controller of our senses. But Krishna
is the supercontroller. Of the ultimate controller of all the senses. So, in
this way, actually, you know, Krishna is "sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata". He is the
knower of all senses. Then, Prabhupada quotes from the Vedic literature over
here. "kṣe...":

        kṣetrāṇi hi śarīrāṇi
        bījaṁ cāpi śubhāśubhe
        tāni vetti sa yogātmā
        tataḥ kṣetra-jña ucyate

You know. "kṣetrāṇi hi śarīrāṇi". That, you know, body is called as "kṣetrā".

        kṣetrāṇi hi śarīrāṇi
        bījaṁ cāpi śubhāśubhe

So, just as in a field, seeds are sown, the, similarly, we do activities which
are "śubhā". And "āśubha". So, they become like the seeds. And "tāni vetti sa
yogātmā". "tataḥ kṣetra-jña ucyate". "tāni vetti". So, one who knows this, you
know, you know, is called as the, i..., that "yogātmā" is called as
"kṣetra-jña". So, basically, this, this sanskrit verse, which Prabhupada does
not give a reference for, it explains, you know, who is the "kṣetra". And who is
the "kṣetra-jña". 

        tāni vetti sa yogātmā

s...:

        tataḥ kṣetra-jña ucyate

"kṣetra-jña ucyate". That means that such a person is the actual "kṣetra-jña".
Now, moving forward, now, what does this refer to? This can refer to the atma.
It can also refer to the Paramatma. So, you know, we do "śubhā". "āśubha". But
we do not necessarily about what is "śubhā". And what is "āśubha". But the
Supreme Lord knows what is "śubhā". And what is "śubhāśubhe". And accordingly,
He acts. So, that is, accordingly, He gives us the rewards for our actions. He
does not act Himself. He acts indirectly just as a judge acts. So, you know, you
know, then, Prabhupada gives this example. So:

"One should not confuse the painter, the painting and the easel."

What is Prbhupada referring to over here? "the painter, the painting and the
easel.". So, he, this is an approximate example. It is not an entirely, you
know, technically, you know, you know, precise example. The point is that
ultimate doer is the Supreme Lord. So, He is like the painter. And the can...,
easel is the canvas on with the stand. And the canvas on which the painting
happens. That is material nature. And the painting is basically the, you know,
living entity who has a particular "kṣetra". So, "prakṛtiṁ" is material nature.
"kṣetra" is the particular area of material nature over which I have control.
So, ultimately, everything that is happening within material nature is
happening, you know, under the control of the Supreme Lord. So, the Lord is the
pai..., you know, painter. Phe painting is the li..., painting is the living
entity. So, and the canvas on which we, it is painted is the material nature.
Now, of course, this particular example I said, is to approximate, is not
entirely accurate because it is not incorporate the point of the agency. The
free will. The capacity for choice which the living entity has. So, here, the
living entity is compared to a, you know, you know, painting over here. The
painting does not have its own free will. But the point again is that the li...,
emphasis of this verse is to talk about how there is a superknower. How there is
a Supreme Knower who is the Supersoul. And He is the ultimate doer, also. He is
Supreme Knower. And He is the ultimate doer. Without His sanction, nothing can
happen. And Prabhupada quotes further from the "Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad":

        bhoktā bhogyaṁ preritāraṁ ca matvā/ sarvaṁ proktaṁ tri-vidhaṁ brahmam etat

So, here, Prabhupada is quoting that, "bhoktā bhogyaṁ preritāraṁ ca matvā". So,
"pretāṁ...", "preritāraṁ". Sorry. "preritāraṁ ca matvā". You know. You know. So,
the Jiva. The Supreme Lord. And material nature. All three can be used to, all
can be referred to by the word "Brahman". Because all three are ultimately
manifestations of Brahman. Of course, they are different kinds of
manifestations. But they are manifestations. You know. So, Prabhupada explains
how they are not one. They are different. And to maintaining mistake them
entirely to be one is to mis..., to misunderstand the nature of the Absolute
Truth. So, before we go into this verse now. Let us go into a bit of
technicalities. Let us look first at some other concepts. So, this may seem,
what is happening with "kṣetra" and "kṣetra-jñaṁ"? You know. So, first, I think
we have discussed this concept. You know. So, there is "Cit". "Cit" is the
original consciousness of soul. That is part of sat-cit-ananda. "Citta" is
the consciousness routed in the material world. The consciousness routed in the
material world. So, what does this "cit" and "citta" difference signify? We will
discuss this when we come to it little later. You know. But, you know, you know,
you know, with respect to our particular curr..., current understanding. You
know. The soul has original consciousness. Which is capable of perceiving
spiritual reality, also. But right now, I cannot perceive. You know. Supersoul
is sitting next to me, only. But I cannot perceive. My consciousness is locked
in matter. It is like a person watching a movie. And the person has the capacity
to look at the theater all around. But the person is so caught in watching the
movie. That person cannot perceive anything else. All that is perceived is just
the, whatever is being displayed on the movie. Theater. On the screen. Like that.
So, that is how it happens to all of us. That is how we also get caught in
illusion. Now, "Cit". And "Citta". And then, I will come back to "Cit" and
"Citta" difference. But the point is that the "kṣet...", the, why is the soul's,
you know, "kṣet..."? How does the soul get connected with the material bod...,
that the physical "kṣetra"? It is because its consciousness gets locked in a
particular area. So, in the Upanishads, there are two ways of acquiring
knowledge. There is "Vyashthi". And there is "Samashthi". So, "Vyashthi" is from
individual to universal. And "Samashthi" is from universal to individual. What
does it mean? From univer..., individual to universal. Or universal to
individual. Ok. In the point is that from individual to universal means, you
know, Prabhupada would often say, see, we are persons. I am a person. You are a
person. My father is a person. Your father is a person. Your parents are people.
Persons. Therefore, God must also be a person. So, from, that is, from
individual to universal. We observe ourselves. We look. Study ourselves. And
based in on, based on a study of ourselves, we try to infer. If I am a part of
God. So, if I have these characteristics, what will be the characteristic that
are present in the Absolute Truth? So, like that. We move from the individual to
the universal. And the other way of looking at it is, "Samashthi" is from
universal to individual. That means that we look at totality of creation. And
then, we try to think, ok, this totality of creation is like this. Then, what,
what would individual be like? So, that is how we try to figure out. You know.
This is basically two approaches to trying to understand the reality. You know.

So, you know, in our day to day experiences, we work both ways. Science makes
specific observations. And after making specific observations, it try to come
about with universal patterns. And then, for example, it, I mean, Newton
observed the fruit falling. And based on that, he came up with the laws of
motion. And once he came up with the laws of motion, after that, subsequent
motions that is observed, that is observed using a, you know, that is observed
using the frame of reference that is provided by the laws of motion. And sub...,
other similar advances in physics. So, just as, there is this process of, you
know, first, specific observations. Then, generic principles in terms of laws.
And then, you know, making sense of specific observations thereafter. So,
basically, these are two, two methods, they are methods of intellectual, methods
of understanding what is the nature of reality. So, now, moving forward, what,
what does "kṣetra" refer to? "kṣetra" is, as I said, refers to the area. The
field of activity. So, a prime minister may have, as the "kṣe...", "kṣetra", the
whole country. The prime minster can tell, ok, tell, I am going to declare an
emergency. You know. The whole functioning of the state can change accordingly.
A child may have a "kṣetra". And a child may tell that, ok, now, in my backyard,
where I am playing, I declare emergency here. So, nobody can do anything
without, without my permission. The child may have some pets. And the pets may
become very quiet. Oh. You know. Our master wants us to be disciplined. Of
course. So, that, this sort of "kṣetra" is also conditional. Which we have. The
prime minister may decide I want to make emergency. But prime minister, because
impose impergen..., emergency. But the prime minister may get a heart attack.
And die. So, that is also possible. But the important point is, you know, you
know, that, not that there is a, you know, the principle is the same. That, you
know, different people have different "kṣetra". And they try to control the
"kṣetra". So, now, when we talk about "kṣetra-jñaṁ". So, the point of "Vyashthi"
and "Samashthi" is here that just as we are knowers, the Supreme Lord is the
supreme knower. So, what we know in a very tiny, in finite, has been quantity,
the Lord knows in infinite quantity. And the similarities are, both of us are
qualitatively the same. So, now, when we look at the concept of "kṣetra-jñaṁ".
Let us look at in another way. You know. You know. So, there are different
koshas. So:

        brahma pucchaṁ pratiṣṭhā

Prabhupada will say in one of these purports over here. There is "Anna-maya".
There is "Prana-maya". There is "Jnana-maya". "Vijnana-maya". And "Ananda-maya".
What are these five koshas? The koshas are, as it is said over here, they are
objective levels of God's energy. And subjective levels of individual
realisation. There is no need to be intimidated by the terms here. A simple way
to understand this is, you know, if I am a citizen of India. Then, I have a
citizenship card. So, citizenship, you know is also an objective conc..., it is
a, it is something obje..., it is an objective reality. You know. A Pakistani
citizen is not an Indian citizen. An Egyptian citizen is not an Indian citizen.
So, citizenship is an objective reality. But at the time, while it is objective
reality, along with that, there is also subjective acceptance of that reality.
Subjective capacity to accept that reality. So, there might be a dog in India.
But the dog does not think I am an Indian. The dog does not even know that there
is something called concept called India. So, now, the dog is physically,
geographically living in the area that is called India. But, you know, the
geog..., dog, the dog does not have the conception by which it can understand
that I belong to India. Human beings on the other hand, when they have that,
they can have that subjective level of understanding. So, citizenship is a
nationality. Citizenship is an objective reality in terms that some people are
citizens. Some people may not be citizens. And then, beyond that subjective
reality, there is also the objective reality. And what is the objective reality?
That objective reality is that, you know, sorry, there is a subjective
conception, also. Whether I understand it or not. So, these five levels of
energy, five levels, five koshas. They are in this way both subjective. And
objective. Let us look at the first one. Then, we will understand what it
mean..., "Anna-maya". So, actually, the word "maya" means to be full of. So,
"Anna-maya" refers to be full of food. What does it mean? That means, you know,
at the "Anna-maya" level, the conception of life is for eating. Existence is
eating. You know. When small baby is born, the baby, as soon as the mo...,
wo..., placed near the mother. And then, starts, you know, taking the mother's
breast milk. And then, after that, because that is the source of, said that
is, uses, that is this, you know, source of nutrition. The sour..., sen...,
source of security when the, you know, you know, baby is able to put its mouth
on the mother's, you know, breast. And drink milk. You know. It gets not only
nutrition over it. It is security, is safety. There is a pattern. There is a
certain, certain sense of certainty that comes becuse of that. So, you know, you
know, from that, you know, sha..., life-saving and life-shaping experience
onwards, you know, the baby's existence is defined through the potentiality of
the presence of food. That means, for a baby, everything is food. You know.
Generally, we may, we may have seen babies. You know. They take their finger.
And they put it in their mouth. And they keep sucking it. Sucking it. Sucking
it. And sometimes when the mother is not there. Then, some other male relatives
there, then, they may just, you know, they may just put the finger in the mouth.
And baby is thinking I am, I was thirsty. So, maybe something will co..., will
come out. And I will keep sucking. Keep sucking the finger itself. So, like
that, different people, you know, suck in diff..., you know, different, so,
basically, the baby defines everything in terms of food. It is in "Anna-maya"
kosh. That means everything is food. Sometimes, the babies have to be, they have
to be, things have to be kept carefully. The baby may, you know, you know, you
know, pass its out, pass out, you know, its own waste products. And then, it may
pick it up. And put it in its mouth, also. Why? Because, now, for us, it may be
revolting to think about it, only. You know. We do not even want to get our nose
or mouth anyhere near that stuff. But, you know, for the baby, everything is
defined in terms of food. So, "Anna-maya" kosh. They see everything as potential
food.

So, now, is it that there is some kind of covering on the consciousness because
of which everything is "Anna-maya" kosha. It is not a physical covering. All
this is subtle. So, that means, a living entity can be in the "Anna-maya" kosh.
So, "Anna-maya" kosh is one level of consciousness. So, we can be in that
con...., so, it is a sub..., it is an objective reality. It is a level of
consciousness. But subjectively, some people may be in "Anna-maya" kosh. Some
people may not be in "Anna-maya" kosh. You know. Animals, also, in the initial
stages, they are in "Anna-maya" kosh. Where everything is basically
distinguished based on food. So, beyond the "Anna-maya" kosh, the next kosh is
"Prana-maya" kosh. So, in "Prana-maya" kosh, one starts seeing everything in
terms of, you know, potential food. Now, pot..., you know, you know, it is
relevance to life. So, the way baby is putting, you know, you know, everything in
the mouth. But then, maybe, it is a candle. And it puts in mouth. Aaaa. Aaa. It
starts crying after that. Then, after, it starts understanding, oh, actually,
you know, this is not the way, it, I cannot decide everything based on whether
its edibility. You know. I have to see its survival value. So, most animals are
primarily in a "Prana-maya" kosh. You know. Darwin talked about suvival of the
fittest. You know. Prabhupada accepted the principle of survival of the fittest.
But of course, Prabhupada had his own rebuttal. He said, even the fittest do not
survive. In, when they struggle for material existence, nobody survives,
actually. Everybody dies. But the point is that is a fac..., objective fact of
animal kingdom. That everybody is in the "Prana-maya" kosh. Everybody is trying
to live. And the animals are eating food. And they are also being afraid that,
now, deer may be grazing. And eating grass. At the same time, the deer is also
afraid. Maybe, some tiger will come and pounce on me. And taber..., tiger will
eat me up, also. You know. You know. So, like that is "Prana-maya" kosha. So,
generally, you know, "Prana-maya" kosh is, you know, passionate. In the modes of
passion and ignorance. And beyond that, there is "Jnana-maya". So, at this
stage, you know, first, initially, is, every, everything is seen as food. At the
level "Prana-maya", one starts understanding, ok, I have a particular existence.
And I have to maintain my existence. This is quite a gross bodily consciousness.
So, at the level of "Jnana-maya" kosha, one starts becoming of, Prabhupada says,
one becomes a philosopher. One starts becoming a, you know, becoming more aware
of ideas. And concepts. That is one is aware of the subtle body at that
particular time. And the consciousness is evolved. And one starts thinking of
one's subtle body. So, one starts thinking about one's thoughts. See, all
conscious beings think. But not all conscious beings can think about their
thinking. We need to think about our thinking. And that capacity for thinking
about our thinking requires self-awareness. Requires the capacity to distance
ourselves. Ok. Ok. I am feeling angry now. But what, I do not need to feel
angry. So, I will look at my thoughts. It is, there is nothing really so serious
that I should have become angry about this. So, thinking about our thinking.
That capacity is what characterises the "Jnana-maya" kosh. Now, that is, now, it
is fur..., that  actually, "Jnana-maya" kosh and the further koshas, further
levels, they can be experienced only by human beings. Other animals cannot
experience it so much.

So, beyond the "Jnana-maya" kosh, there is the "Vijnana-maya" kosh. At the level
of the "Vijnana-maya", now, the nomenclature may be slightly different depending
on different versions of the books that were used. But overall, the broad
understanding, the concept is similar. So, at "Vijnana-maya", one starts
becoming aware of the atma. One starts understanding that beyond the body is the
soul. And the soul is the basis of consciousness. The soul is the basis of, you
know, awareness. The soul is the basis of all the action that is happening in
the body. And beyond that, there is "Ananada-maya". In "Ananda-maya", one starts
becoming consciousness of the supreme law, Supreme Lord. When one is conscious
of the Suprme Lord, when there is supreme happiness in relationship with that.
That is what it seems to be that there is pure supreme happiness available. But
one has to become purified. So, these are different levels of consciousness. And
we have to move towards the higher levels of consciousness. And the more we rise
towards the higher levels of consciousness, the more we will be able to ha...,
actually, relish deeper stability. Deeper security. Deeper satisfaction. Because
we are, you know, we are sort of excavating the cosmic union. You know. Nor
excavating. What should I say? Peeling the cosmic union. You know. If we are
excavating a bury treasure. You know. So, union, you know, there are many layers
which are removed. And then, the nutritious part comes. So, like that, in the
initial koshas, one is caught in the, you know, you know, the peels of the
union. But as one goes towards the more advanced koshas. "Jnana-maya".
"Vijnana-maya". "Ananda-maya". Then, one goes beyond all coverings to the
substance. The real substance is what? The soul. You know. That, that the person
loves Krishna. And that we love Krishna. And Krishna loves us. And when we come
to that reality, that is the ultimate perfection of life. So, we will continue
this chapter in the next ver..., you know, next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna. 
