Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9qxKGz_hu2c
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now coming to the concluding sections of the Bhagavad Gita. Or concluding verses
of the Bhagavad Gita. So, in the previous class, we discussed about how, you
know, we can, we, if do not act according to Krishna's direction, Krishna is
telling in 18.58. Act according to My consciousness. "mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi".
If we do not, then, "niyok...", you know, then "vinaṅkṣyasi". You will be lost.
And how will we be lost? That is described in 59 and 60. He says that, "prakṛtis
tvāṁ niyokṣ...", "niyokṣyati". And then, you know, you know, material nature,
you will be forced to act according to the material nature. Because we are, you
know, you know, we are, to a large extent, you know, forced to act according to
our nature. And then, as a means to go beyond material nature, Krishna talks
about how He is the controller of material nature. 18.61. So, in the Vedic
sch..., you know, school, Vedic analysis, there is a school of thought called as
"Svabhāvavāda". You know. "Svabhāvavāda" means, our "svabhāva" is supreme. Like
we have mayavada. That means every, everything is maya. Brahmavada. Everything
is Brahman. "Svabhāvavāda" is argument. Or a school of thought that presents a
paticular arg..., you know, so, "Svabhāvavāda" means the school of thought that
present the argument that, you know, everything is controlled by "svabhāva". So,
Krishna has told in the 61st verse that He is the controller. Who is present in
all bodies. Which are made of maya.

        īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati
        bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni
        yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

So, He is saying that He is in control of the bodies. He is in control of the
living entities, also. So, how is that knowledge important? That will be
discussed in this verse now. Krishna will describe how, you know, we can turn
towards Him. You know. And so:

        tam eva śaraṇaṁ gaccha
        sarva-bhāvena bhārata
        tat-prasādāt parāṁ śāntiṁ
        sthānaṁ prāpsyasi śāśvatam

So, "tam eva śaraṇaṁ gaccha". Oh, Krishna. Krishna is telling Arjuna. Surrender
unto "tam eva". That Supreme Lord. So, here, also, because now Krishna is, you
know, progressively revealing the knowledge. So, He i..., He is, after talking
about surrender, He has gone down to material nature. And then, from material
nature, He first comes to Paramatma. And then, He will come to Bhagavan. So,
often, when Krishna refers to the Paramatma, He refers to Himself in the third
person. That is why He is referring, to that Supersoul, please surrender.

        tam eva śaraṇaṁ gaccha
        sarva-bhāvena bhārata

"sarva-bhāvena". Whole-heartedly. "gacch...", just completely surrender. So, you
know, you know, so, "sthā...", "sarva-bhāvena" has come earlier, also, in the
Bhagavad Gita. You know. You know. Especially, in 15.19, when Krishna has, when
one, Krishna says that, when one understands that Krishna is supreme.

        yo mām evam asammūḍho
        jānāti puruṣottamam
        sa sarva-vid bhajati māṁ
        sarva-bhāvena bhārata


"sarva-bhāvena". Complete, it, with all the emotions of the heart. That means,
you know, whole-heartedly. Complete love we offer to Krishna. So, Krishna is
telling, you know, surrender to that Supreme Lord, whole-heartedly. And then,
what happens? "tat-prasādāt". By His mercy, the reference to "prasād" is coming
again now. It has come earlier in, 15..., 18.58. You know.

        mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi
        mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi

So, same point that you can go ob..., beyond, obstacles by the mercy of the
Supreme Lord. By My mercy. And now, Krishna is saying, by My..., the mercy of
the, you know, of that Being who is situated in the hearts of everyone. You
know. "tat-prasādāt". What will happen? "parāṁ śāntiṁ". The supreme peace.
"sthānaṁ prāpsyasi śāśvatam". And along with that, you will get a "śāśvatam",
"sthānaṁ". You will get an eternal resting place. Eternal destination. So, in
material nature, as long as we are situated, we cannot have any eternal
destination. Whatever destination we have will be temporary. If you want an
eternal destination, we need to, you know, you know, to take shelter of the Supreme
Lord. Because He is the controller of material nature. He is the master of
material nature. And, you know, He can control material nature. And He can take
us beyond the reach of material nature, also. So, let us look at this "parāṁ
śāntiṁ". So, there is "śāntiṁ". You know. Now, "śāntiṁ" refers to peace. So,
immedia..., in the immediate battlefield context, it may refer to that, you
know, ok, you know, there will be no violence. There will be no war. There will
be peace. But Krishna is not talking about that kind of peace. You know. There
is "parāṁ śāntiṁ". There is a supreme peace. So, what is the supreme peace? You
know. There is a peace of the mind. And there is the peace of the heart. You
know. So, peace of the mind. And peace of the heart. What is the difference
between the two? Yeah. So, you know, you know, peace of the mind means that, ok,
at the mental level, there are no anxieties. Or troubles. When we go, say, to a
scenic place. And there is nice, calm atmosphere. Soothing wind. You know. And
we feel very relaxed. And peaceful. That is peace of the mind. But peace of the
heart is something which is different. It is the peace that comes from loving.
And being loved. You know. Now, when we love, and we are loved, at that time,
there is, no doubt, anxiety for the beloved. You know. But still, there is great
satisfaction. You know. So, the Bible also talks about this. That, actually, one
can have, now, the peace that "passeth all understanding". You know. By knowing
God. By surrendering to God. By loving God. The pea..., so, "passeth all
understanding". That means that peace cannot be experienced materi..., at the
material level of reality. At the material level of reality, we think of peace
only in terms of lack of anxiety. And agitation. Externally. Or internally. But
the supreme peace is, you know, that it which is not look like as peace
externally. It looks like anxiety. It looks like agitation. But, you know, it is
peace. Because the heart is satisfied. The heart rests in joy. You know. That
is what is, that is what we long for, actually, all. Even if we do not realise
it, that is what we are all longing for. Now, when Krishna talks about this kind
of peace, so, Arjuna, when he is fighting the war, he has to choose between, you
know, "śāntiṁ". And "sthānaṁ". You know. If he wants "sthānaṁ". "sthānaṁ" is a
resting place. That can refer to a kingdom. So, Arjuna has to choose if he
fights. If he win..., and wins, then he will get "sthānaṁ". He will get a
kingdom. But then, even he gets s..., "sthānaṁ", he will not get "śāntiṁ".
Because he will have to fight for that. On the other hand, if he wants "śāntiṁ",
you know, then he will have to sacrifice "sthānaṁ". You know. You know. You
know. So, Krishna is telling that, actually, if you surrender to Me, you will
get both. You know.

So, if we our, without surrendering, Arjuna acts, independently, then he will
get only one of them. But here, Krishna is telling, if you surrender to me, you
will get both. And how will you get both? You will get both in the best possible
way. Best possible way means, "parāṁ śāntiṁ". And "śāśvatam", "sthānaṁ". So,
supreme peace. The peace that will never be disturbed. Once, we return to
Krishna. And love Krishna. The, in the, and lo..., lo..., you know, live a life
of love for Krishna in the spiritual world, then there is, nothing can, that can
disrupt, you know, or destroy that love. And that life which we have got with
Krishna. Nothing. Nothing can destroy that. And similarly, you know, you know,
in this world, when we get a "śā...", "sthānaṁ", nothing is permanent. I may
have a kingdom for some time. But then, some, I may have, now, nowadays, people
hardly think about kingdoms. People think about just some, some flats. You know.
I have some, maybe I have some square feet flat. Or maybe some, if, you know,
some people are wealthy, may have row houses. Or bungalows. Maybe, a few people
have villas. But practically, very, you know, practically, nobody is able to
think in terms of kingdoms nowadays. But even if I have a kingdom, still, that
kingdom is also temporary. So, it is "aśāśvatam". And there, and even, at the
most, as long as I am alive, I can be the king. Mo..., quite often, even when I
am alive, there may be some cope. Somebody, there may be upraising. And I may be
usurped. And sometimes, if the king is overthrown, the king may be killed
ruthlessly. Or king may be imprisoned. Or king may be exiled. Exiled. And then,
you know, you know, all the power, and privilege, the king had enjoyed,
everything gets lost. Just a, you know, and it is, that is terrible humiliation
that happens. For the king who was ruling in glory. And now has to, you know,
flee in fear. So, that is the plight of the material existence. So, beyond this
plight of material existence, there is transcendental existence. And in that
transcendental existence, you know, there is the supreme reality. The supreme
reality is that, we are eternally meant to love Krishna. And rejoice in that
happiness. So, Krishna is telling, by surrender to the Supreme Lord, he will get
both. He will get "sthānaṁ". He will get the "parāṁ", "sthānaṁ". And, sorry,
"śāśvatam", "sthānaṁ". And "parāṁ śāntiṁ". So, now, after describing this, what
does this mean practically in terms of surrender? So, we will discuss about
surrender a little later. "tam eva śaraṇaṁ gaccha". You know. But, you know, you
know, here, the important point is that, you know, we all have to recognise that
we have to serve Krishna according to our nature. So, let us move back. So, what
is happening in this chapter? See, you know, you know, I will come back to this
later. Yeah. So, you know, Chapter 18, how is the progression going? The gradual
way is karma yog..., karma kanda. Jnana kanda. And then, moksha. You know.
Ultimately, leads to moksha. Moksha was:

        brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā
        na śocati na kāṅkṣati

Then, Krishna talked about rapid way, "cetasā...":

        sarva-karmāṇy api sadā
        kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ

So, from that point of 56 to 58. Now, if do not follow the gradual path. Or the
rapid path. One will get lost. Now, we, if one is not to get lost, Krishna will
now, you know, try to talk, will talk about coming to the higher level directly.
So, first, He talks about surrender to Supersoul. And then, He will talk about
surrender to the Supreme Lord. You know. You know. So, now, here, a question
comes up, you know, what do we do accor..., do we, how do we, in Kali yuga,
discover our nature? And how do we serve according to our nature? So, in
general, the important thing to recognise is that, all of us, you know, have a
nature. But it is not necessary that the nature will be, you know, nature will
be uni..., will be only one kind of nature. That means, that, yes, if a brahmana
and a brahmani unite, then it is quite likely that the son who is born, a child,
who is born, may be a brahmana. But now, there have been, you know, may, there
have been practically generations. Generations of unions which have been of
different varanas. And thereby, the resulting is that, people who are born, they
often have a mixture of various varanas. They, of course, one varana is
predominant. But still, you know, the important point i..., is not to sort of,
you know, you know, try to go into a, you know, parallelising analysis.
Parallelising analysis means, one thinks of, just so much analysis one does,
that there is paralysis by analysis. No. One does not need for that. What one
focuses on is using one's, you know, intelligence to find out what is the
activity, you know, in which we are externally competent. And internally
comfortable. And then, we do that activity. So, generally, in our devotional
life, there will be some activities which we like to do. Some activities which
we do not mind doing. And some activities we just, you know, can barely tolerate
doing. We just cannot, you know, we just feel that, if I can avoid it, it will
be very good. So, that will vary. So, general, the activities which we like to
do, we gain strength from those activities. The activities which we do not like
to do, we have to expend strength to do those activities. That we fight against
ourselves to do those activities. But either way, by doing the activities that
we are to do, you know, which we do, we can gradually grow towards Krishna if we
choose that intelligently. So, in general, we have to have some activities which
we like to do. And they give us strength and inspiration. And they help us, they
make spiritual life joyful even at our level. And then, afterwards, when we
become purified, then we are not so much controlled by our material nature.
Then, whatever we want to do, we can do for Krishna's sake. And we get joy in
that. Of course, even pure devotees have their individuality. And their
individuality, you know, you know, is such that it pleases Krishna. So, if we
look at the pastimes of, intimate pastimes of Krishna with His gopas and gopis
that is descr..., that is described. You know. They all got, every gopa and gopi
has, you know, his or her own individual nature. And their nature, and their
service according to the nature pleases Krishna. So, there is spiritual
individuality, we are not talking about that right now. We are talking about our
material nature. Our material individuality. Which has to be purified and
elevated.

So, which has to, when we, how do we purify our material individuality? By
making, you know, you know, by, you know, we purify our material individuality
by, you know, engaging in service in a proper way. So, we do not have to re...,
the, our material nature does not require rejection. Or repression. Rejection
means imagining that, oh, I do not have this nature, only. And repression means
ok, I have, but I try to curb it. Curb it. Curb it. That will also not work.
There has to be expression. And direction. I have to express my material nature.
If I have a brahmanical nature, I have to act as a brahmana. But then, there has
to be direction. As a brahmana, I may want, I may want to read all kinds of
books. But no, we should study scri..., primarily scripture. And books that help
us to understand scripture. And then, we, you know, you know, you know, then,
so, there is direction required. So, in this way, when we talk about "śaraṇaṁ".
So, when we, we can, talking about surrender to the Absolute Truth, that does
not necessarily mean giving up everything material. It simply means that we, you
know, take His guidance about how best to serve Kri..., Him. So, the principle
of varnashram dharma is, you know, to help us surrender to the Supreme Lord. So,
varnashram dharma offers us a particular way by which we can gradually surrender
to the Supreme Lord. So, that is within Vedic varnashram at a gradual. And
"daivi varṇāśrama", it is rapid. Vedic varnashram is, one primarily acts
according to one's varna. In Vedic, in "daivi varṇāśrama", one acts according
to, you know, one acts primarily as a vaishnava, so, as soon, vaishnava,
vaishnavi, serving Krishna. And within that, one chooses how best one can serve
Krishna as per time, place, circumstance. So, as per, and of course, not just
time, place, circumstance. According to one's "svabhāva", also. So, you know,
the primary focus in, in "daivi varṇāśrama" is that ok, I am a soul. I have an
eternal relationship with Krishna. I am meant to serve Krishna. But how I will
serve Krishna? That will vary according to time, place, circumstance. So, now,
here, Krishna tells that, now, in this way, you should surrender. You know. He
says surrender. Now, after describing surrender, then what happens next? Let us
look at it. Yes. Yeah. "iti te". You know. So, 18.63 we come to now.

        iti te jñānam ākhyātaṁ
        guhyād guhya-taraṁ mayā
        vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa
        yathecchasi tathā kuru

So, "iti te jñānam ākhyātaṁ". I have spoken this. And what kind of knowledge is
this? "guhyād guhya-taraṁ mayā". "guhyād" is "guhya". Confidential.
"guhya-taraṁ". It is confidential. And more confidential, also. That is "guhyād
guhya-taraṁ". So, there is good, better, best. So, like that, the superlative.
So, this is second level. There is more confidential knowledge. Now, after,
con..., telling this confidential knowledge, what is, what should Arjuna do?
"vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa". "vimṛśyaitad". Immersion. Immersion on means absorption.
Contemplation. Serious intellectual, you know, thought about it. You know. The
world often uses intellection. Intellectual contemplation, you know, is called
intellection or mentation. Not meditation. Mentation. Mentation means
contemplation. So, "vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa". "aśeṣeṇa". And, meditate thoroughly.
Con..., think seriously. Deliberate deeply. Do not leave any stone under. You
know. Deliberate. "vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa". And then, after that, "yathecchasi
tathā kuru". "yathā". "icchasi". As is your desire, you know, "tathā kuru". You
know. So, you can act. So, here, we see, the Bhagavad Gita, as I said earlier,
it does not hand down commandments. It gives choices. So, the Bhagavad Gita is
telling us, you know, telling Arjuna over here. And through Arjuna, all of us,
that, you know, you know, act for the pleasure of Krishna. That, you know, that
is what Bhagavad Gita's message is. But it does not, you know, it is that, act
for the pleasure of Krishna is, indirectly mentioned in the previous verse. "tam
eva śaraṇaṁ gaccha". But the Bhagavad Gita does not impose this message
dogmatically. What does it say? You know. It says, ok, this is what I told you.
If it makes sense, now, act accordingly. If it does not make sense, then you
have the free will. You can choose how you want to act. So, that freedom,
Krishna never takes away from us. Krishna always may give, offers a freedom of
how we should act. So, we always have free will. And the whole purpose of
Krishna is to guide us how to use our free will properly. Just like, you know,
if a small child, you know, somehow finds a, say, thousand rupee note. Then,
child finds a thousand, the child, child may not even understand what is value.
Now, with the thousand rupee notes, the child can get so many valuable things.
But child may think that, oh, thousand, I, what, the child thinks is valuable
is, maybe one chocolate. Now, chocolate may be worth just two rupees or five
rupees. You know. But the child may just give away those thousand rupees for the
sake of a two rupee or a five rupee worth object. Then, the parent does not want
to take away the thousand rupees from the child. But if the child has a thousand
rupees, the parent wants to guide. See, this is so valuable. Use it properly.
Then, you will get much more. So, similarly, we, Krishna gives us directions.
The purpose of Krishna's directions is not to deprive us of our freedom. But to
ensure that our, you know, you know, that we do not deprive ourselves in the
name of freedom. You know. What does it mean? Not deprive us of our freedom. But
we do not deprive ourselves in the name of freedom. Now, the child may say, I
want to be free. And in the name of freedom, the child may actually just
underutilise a thousand rupee object. A thou..., a thousand rupee note for just,
the, you know, you know, a few rupees, worth of ob..., objects. So, therefore,
in the name of freedom, child may say, I want to be free. But in the name of
freedom, the child will deprive him, himself or herself. Because the child does
not understand the value. Similarly, we have got the human form of life. And the
human form of life is, you know, "su-labhaṁ su-durlabhaṁ". "su-labhaṁ".
Actually, we, we do not know pray in a lower specy that I get a human form of
life. We just get it. That is Krishna's mercy. When we get the human form of
life, "su-labhaṁ su-durlabhaṁ". So, you know, you know, this human form of life
is "su-durlabhaṁ". It is very rare. And, "lab...", you know:

        labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte
        mānuṣyam artha-dam anityam apīha dhīraḥ

"mānuṣyam artha-dam". It is temporary. But "artha-dam". It is truly valuable. It
can grant us. That is, that which is just truly "artha-pūrṇa". That is what?
"artha". What is our "artha"? That is the "paramārtha". The supreme "artha". We
can get eternal happiness through this. So, therefore:

        tūrṇaṁ yateta na pated anu-mṛtyu yāvan
        niḥśreyasāya viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt

So, "tūrṇaṁ yateta". You know. Endeavor immediately. "tūrṇaṁ yateta na pated
anu-mṛtyu yāvan". "na pated". Befo..., the "na pated". "a na pated". Immediately
endeavor before this body falls. And this body is capable of falling at any
time. "anu-mṛtyu yāvan". It can fall at any time. And therefore, you know, when
we have to endeavor, "viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt". "niḥśreyasāya". Endeavor for
transcendence. Endeavor for eternal existence. "viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt".
"viṣayaḥ" can be got everywhere. So, you know, you know, now, essentially again,
the point which we are discussing is:

        vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa
        yathecchasi tathā kuru

Deliberate. And then, decide what is to be, what you want to do. Act
accordingly. Act according to your desire. So, you know, you know, the Bhagavad
Gita is telling, you know, it is giving an elaborate analysis. So, all the
preceeding verses. They comprise an analysis. And this analysis is meant to
guide Arjuna towards the best action. So, you know, it, when Krishna gives us
some directions, it is not to deprive us of our freedom. But it is to sp..., to
save us, stop us depriving ourselves in the name of freedom. What we can get out
of life, we will get so much lesser if we, you know, you know, do not take
Krishna's guidance. Just like a child will get so much lesser out of a
thousa..., or thousand rupee note. So, to enable us to get the best bargain out
of life, Krishna wants us to, you know, choose. And choose intelligently. So,
but ultimately, it is, it is, you know, our free will. Krishna is never going to
take away the free will from us. So, at this point, more or less, Krishna has
sort of completed the instructions. Just like a teacher, you know, you know, who
is, you know, giving a class, you know, says, now, you can decide what you want
to do. So, now, that means, the owners has shifted from the teacher to the
students. So, like that, the student, the owner shifts on Arjuna. And the
acharyas describe that at this point, especially, Visv..., Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura says that Arjuna goes into deep thought. And he starts
thinking, what should I do? How should I act? You know. Krishna has told this in
the Second Chapter. And that in the Seventh Chapter. And that in the Eleventh
Chapter. And that in the Fifteenth Chapter. Now, he is contemplating very
seriously about what all should I do? What should I do? You know. You know. And
there is so much. There is, Arju..., so much that has been spoken. And
discussed. And analysed. So, Arjuna goes into grave thought. And seeing this,
Krishna's heart overflows with compassion. Krishna tells Arjuna, actually,
Arjuna, you do not have to think so deeply about things. You know. I see your
sincerity. I know. You do, you are not whimsical. You are not
independent-minded. You, actually, you want to do what is best for you. And you
have beaten me that you know that what I want for you is the best. So,
therefore, you know, I will guide you about what to do. I will guide you. So,
then, that guidance, Krishna provides in the next verse. So, here, the word
"aśeṣeṇa" means, Krishna is telling Arjuna, you can contemplate for as long as
you want. You know. As long as you want. You know. But there is an implication,
also, you know, how long will you contemplate? Actually, the living entity has
been trying to think about what will give me happiness for so many lifetime.
That lifetime after lifetime. But as always come to false conclusions. Ok. Maybe
this, or that, or that will give me happi..., but none, happiness. But none of
that gives happiness. So, therefore, "vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa". So, contemplate. But
when Arjuna goes deep into contemplation. And is unable to decide, you know, so,
Krishna makes things even more clear.

        sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ
        śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ
        iṣṭo ’si me dṛḍham iti
        tato vakṣyāmi te hitam

So, it is a very beautiful verse. And this indicates why this section is the
conclusion of the Gita. "sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ". "sarva-guhyatamaṁ". This is
the most confidential knowledge. "sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ". So, "guhya",
prev..., previous verse was "guhya-taraṁ". Now, it is "guhyatamaṁ". It means
most. Good. Better. Best. So, this is the best. "sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ".
"bhūyaḥ" means again. "śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ". "śṛṇu". Oh, hear, Arjuna.
"paramaṁ vacaḥ". These are the supreme words. "iṣṭo ’si me dṛḍham iti". "iṣṭaḥ".
"iṣṭaḥ" means dear. You are very dear to me. You are strongly loved by me.
"dṛḍham". "dṛḍham" means determined. So, Krishna is determined to love us. "tato
vakṣyāmi te hitam". Therefore, "hitam". For your benefit, I am speaking these
things. So, you know, you know, this is, this verse indicates that Krishna, what
He is speaking, is a very intimate expression of His heart. You know. Krishna is not
like a teacher, who just give, who will detach, will give some instruction to
the students, which are, really does not, you know, you know, in educational
institutes where teaching is a paid profession. The teachers are not really very
deeply concerned about their students. There is some relationship between the
teacher and students. But nothing very serious. So, it is not like that. This
relationship between, you know, Krishna and Arjuna. Krishna is telling that,
"iṣṭo ’si me dṛḍham iti". You are very strongly loved by Me. In fact, I am
determined to love you. So, you know, actually, we are determined to forget
Krishna. In fact, ma..., in many ways, modern progress, you know, progress
actually means inventing newer and newer ways to forget Krishna. Of course, the,
the results of progress can also be used to serve Krishna. That is true. But
still, in many way, in many ways, what happens is, the more there is progress,
the more people tend to forget Krishna. Because they start thinking about, about
how to live separate from Krishna. And how to, you know, or not live, they may
not think about Krishna, also. But how they live separate from Krishna is that
they get involved. And en..., and lost in newer and newer forms of illusion. So,
for example, in the past, if people wanted entertainment, maybe, they would have
to go to some dance performance. Or some, they would sing. And generally, their
dances would be, say, in the Vedic culture, they would be Bharatanatyam. Where
Lord's pastimes would be depicted. Or otherwise, there would be, you know, there
would be, you know, some Hari Katha. Hari Kirtan. Hari, you know, so like that,
most of the entertainment was connected with Krishna. But then, now, we have got
television. And television, there are hundreds, over hundred channels. And
practically, there may be hundred channels. But, you know, knowledge about God,
you know, pure devotional knowledge about God is very rarely available anywhere.
And then, there is internet. And there are video games. And there are so many
newer and newer ways of forgetting Krishna. So, this is unfortunate. So, what
Krishna is telling over here, I am determined to love you. So, we ufortunately
have directed our intelligence away from Krishna. And because of which, we are
determined to forget Him. But, you know, by Krishna's mercy, we can turn towards
Him. We can learn to love Him. And we can, you know, reciprocate with His
determination to love us. So, Krishna is telling, "iṣṭo ’si me dṛḍham iti". So,
I am determined to love you. So, lifetime after lifetime, after lifetime,
Krishna never leaves us and goes away. He remains in our heart forever waiting.
You know. Forever waiting for us to turn towards Him. So, you know, as we have
discussed earlier, we, general, also, pris...:

        mādṛk prapanna-paśu-pāśa-vimokṣaṇāya
        muktāya bhūri-karuṇāya namo ’layāya

So, he says, "alayāya". My dear Lord, You are present in my heart. And You are
"bhūri-karuṇāya". You are immensely merciful. Greatly merciful. You know. Gopis,
in the famous Gopi Gita, saying "bhūri-dā janāḥ". You do great good to everyone.
You are the welfare worker for everyone. Or later, the "bhūri-dā janāḥ", they
are talking about devotees over there. But the word "bhūri" means good. Or
great, greatly good. So, "bhūri-karuṇāya". Your mercy is greatly good. It is,
you know, so, what is the "bhūr...", "bhūri-karuṇāya"? "alayāya". That you never
get tired. You are forever striving to do good to others. So, Krishna is, "iṣṭo
’si me dṛḍham iti". And how is Krishna expressing His determined affection?
"tato vakṣyāmi te hitam". "te hitam". Therefore, for your benefit, I am speaking
these words. So, Krishna is not speaking for His own benefit. You know. Just
like a sinc..., a good doctor, when speaks some instruction, that is for the
benefit of the patients. So, "tato vakṣyāmi te hitam". Some people think that,
oh, Krishna, you know, you know, Krishna needs us. Krishna wants us to serve
Him. No. Krishna does not need us. Actually, we need to serve Him. Because by
serving Him, we will become happy. And Krishna is also making
"sarva-guhyatamaṁ". Most confidential knowledge. "bhūyaḥ". Now, why is He using
the word "bhūyaḥ"? Because the knowledge about bhakti, which He is going to
give, He has given it earlier. So, earlier also, Krishna has used the word
"guhyatamaṁ" in, you know, you know, in, you know, firstly, in 9.1 and 9.2. 9.1,
He says:

        rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ

So, the, sorry, now, "idaṁ tu", so, 9.1 is, "rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ" is 9.2. And
9.1 is:

        idaṁ tu te guhya-tamaṁ
        pravakṣyāmy anasūyave

So, "guhya-tamaṁ". Most confidential knowledge. So, Ninth Chapter was going to
talk about, the title itself is "rāja-guhyaṁ" yoga. Most confidential knowledge.
But if we see, there is the knowledge of bhakt..., about bhakti. And "ananyāś
cintayanto māṁ" is 9.22. "patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ" is 9.26. And then, you
know, "man-manā bhava mad-bhakto" is 9.34. So, it is clearly, bhakti verses are
there. So, that is "guhyatamaṁ". And then, similarly, Krishna has also used the
similar, you know, you know, you know, re..., describer for describing in 15.20.
You know. In 15.20, Krishna says that, you know:

        iti guhya-tamaṁ śāstram
        idam uktaṁ mayānagha

"iti guhya-tamaṁ śāstram". In this way, the most confidential knowledge, I have
told you. That is why Krishna is using the word "bhūyaḥ". So, "guhyatamaṁ", He
has used in 9.1. As well as in 15.20. And, you know, but even when Krishna has
used that, He, Krishna is using double glorifiers over here. You know. "iti",
"te", "guhya", "it...":

        sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ
        śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ

So, "paramaṁ vacaḥ" are the supreme words. "paramaṁ vacaḥ". So, it is like,
first, most confidential knowledge. And supreme words. So, both are
superlatives. Which highlight how glorious is the knowledge that Krishna is
speaking. Supreme words. "paramaṁ vacaḥ". You know. Answer, Krishna has used
this word "paramaṁ vacaḥ", also, earlier. In this, in the start of the Tenth
Chapter. He says, 10.1:

        bhūya eva mahā-bāho
        śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ

"śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ". Oh, Arjuna. Hear My supreme words. And we see Tenth
Chapter, what does it contain? 10.8 to 11 is Chatur Shloki Bhagavad Gita. And
that is clearly bhakti. You know. "mac-cittā mad", "mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā".
And "dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ". 10.9 and 10. So, basically, this knowledge,
wherever Krishna has used these describers. "sarva-guhyatamaṁ". "guhya". So,
"guhyatamaṁ". Or "paramaṁ vacaḥ". Thereafter, He has described bhakti, only. But
nowhere in the Bhagavad Gita is such a combined and concentrated combination of
superlatives used. So, you know, combination means, we discuss, all the verses
were, "guhyatamaṁ" is used. "paramaṁ vacaḥ" is used. But this is one verse where
"guhyatamaṁ" and "paramaṁ vacaḥ" are both used in the same verse. And then, not
only that, further, there is, so, there is glorification of the knowledge. And
there is also empha..., expression about the intimacy of the relationship.
"iṣṭaḥ". "dṛḍham". "hitam". So, you know, you are very dear to Me. I am speaking
for your benefit. You know. So, this verse is very important to understand the
importance of what is going to come afterwards. You know. You know. To
understand the importance of what is going to come afterwards. So, this verse
indicates that Krishna is telling Arjuna that what I, this, what I am going to
speak to you now. The most confidential knowledge. The supreme instruction. And
I am going to speak to you because you are very dear to Me. And I want your
benefit. So, all this indicates that what is going to come again, come in the
future verses, is extremely special. Is extremely exalted. So, let us look at
what comes in the next verse. You know. You know. So:

        man-manā bhava mad-bhakto
        mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru
        mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te
        pratijāne priyo ’si me

"man-manā bhava mad-bhakto". You know. "man-manā bhava". That always think about
Me. "bhava mad-bhakto". Become My devotee. You know. "mad-yājī". Worship Me.
"māṁ namaskuru". Offer your obeisances unto Me. "mām". "mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ
te". "satyaṁ te". You will certainly come to Me. "pratijāne priyo ’si me". You
know. This, I declare. Because you are very dear to Me. Now, this verse is very
important. You know. Again, because it is describing the supreme instruction.
But is also describing Arjuna, Krishna's affection. So, the first two lines of
this verse are similar to 9.4..., 34. 9.4..., 34:

        man-manā bhava mad-bhakto
        mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

So, fix your mind on Me. That refers to the mind, of course. "mad". "man".
"man-manā bhava mad-bhakto". Offer your heart to Me. "mad-yājī". Worship Me. And
"māṁ namaskuru". That refers to our body. So, basically, these four are meant to
indicate that we offer our entire existence to Krishna. When we offer our entire
existence to Krishna. When we offer our entire existence to Krishna, then that
is what has been told in 9.34. And that is also recommended over here. But the
difference over here is that, there, it was, you know:

        mām evaiṣyasi yuktvaivam
        ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ

"mām evaiṣyasi". You will come back to Me. "yuktvaivam". By being, staying
engaged like this. "ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ". If your heart and soul are like this
engaged, then your "ātmā", if your "ātmā" is "mat-parāyaṇaḥ". Is "parāyaṇaḥ"
towards Me, is devoted to Me, then you will come back to Me. So, but Krishna
is telling over here something different. What is He telling? You know. You
know. He, there, if we look at the words, they are, the onus is on the devotee.
On Arjuna. So, you do like this, then "mām evaiṣyasi". You will come, "mām
evaiṣyasi" was there. You will come back to Me. But how? "yuktvaivam". By being
engaged in this way, and again, Krishna further clarifies, what does engagement
in this way mean? "ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ". By being completely devoted, you
know, whole and soul to Me. "ātmānaṁ". But here, Krishna's emphasis is
different. There, you know, you know, in any relationship, there are two
aspects. If there is relationship between two people, A and B. So, for the
relationship to be successful, what A is ready to offer to the relationship is
important. And what B is ready to offer to the relationship is also important.
So, in that 9.34, Krishna is emphasising what the devotee needs to offer in that
relationship. "ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ". But here, in 9, 18.65, Krishna is
telling what I bring in to that relationship. So, what does He bring in to the
relationship? Krishna is telling over here that, pra..., you know, "mām", "mām
evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te". "satyaṁ te". I am speaking the truth to you. What is? "mām
evaiṣyasi". You will certainly come back to Me. "mām evaiṣyasi". So, "satyaṁ".
Truth. So, "sat...", you know, why does He say, I will speak the truth? Because
it is such an extraordinary thing. You know. Bhak..., actually, bhakti appears
to very simple. You know. Think of Krishna. Worship Krishna. It is simply, very
simple things. How can by doing these things, one attain the supreme perfection
of life? The perfection of going back to the spiritual world. How can one attain
that? So, Krishna is telling, yes, it is possible. "mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te".
This is the truth. Be confident about it. And "pratijāne priyo ’si me". "priyo
’si me". You are very, very dear to Me. "priyo ’si me". You know. You are very
dear to Me. And I am, "pratijāne". Declaring this. "pratijāne". Now, actually,
the word "pratijāne" is like a proclamation. A promise. A declaration. A public
affirmation. A public declaration. You know. So, you know, the word "pratijāne"
was used earlier, you know, in the Bhagavad Gita. You know. You know. You know.
By Krishna, in 9.31. You know. You know. Therein, He said that:

        kaunteya pratijānīhi
        na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

Oh, "kaunteya". Oh, Arjuna. "pratijānīhi". Declare to the world that My devotee
will never perish. So, there, Krishna has made the declaration to the whole
world. But now, here, Krishna is making a declaration to everyone. He is saying,
I make the declaration to you, Arjuna. And you are a devotee. And this applies
to all those who aspire on the path of devotion. All those who cultivate the
aspiration for pure devotion. And I, I, ultimately, it refers to all living
beings. Because all living beings are potentially devotees of Krishna. Within
everyone's heart, ultimately, you know, there is devotion to Krishna. That
simply, that devotion is misdirected towards worldly things. So, here, Krishna
is telling, I, oh, Arjuna, I love you. And I want you to attain perfection. And
to help you to attain that perfection, I guarantee you. You just do these
things. You redirect your heart towards Me. And if you just do the redirection
of the heart towards Me, I will ensure that you will come back to Me. So,
Krishna is "pratijāne". Proclaiming. So, when there is a proclamation, then
there is a greater assurance. You know. Suppose, somebody makes a promise. You
know. If you do this, then I will give you this. So, normally, whenever there is
promise made, if it is just an informal oral promise, then it may not be taken
so seriously. But if that person wants to take a promise seriously, then what
may happen is, person may call, ok, call witnesses. Call witnesses. So, I tell
it publicly. That I will do this, this, this, for the person. So, when there are
witnesses, then it becomes much more serious. That particular promise. And if
somebody goes out. And declares publicly. You know. Announcements. Or
advertisements. Or the so..., nowadays, we have social media. Somebody declares,
you know, if you do this, this, this, then I will give this, this, this. You
know. So, suppose, somebody is, you know, lost her, her, somebody's relative is
lost. And then, when the relative is lost, at that time, you know, you know, the
person wants to, his, his, person declares, you know, if somebody can find my
relative. And give me the address. Then, I will give, say, you know, you know,
10 lakh rupees. Or whatever. Amount I will give. So, now, if somebody may just
tail this informally. And when somebody gives the information, he says, I have
never said that. One may deny it. But if somebody makes a public announement
like that. Then, it becomes a matter of honor. Yes. I have said that. I will do
that for you. Otherwise, it becomes a matter of disgrace. Dis..., prom..., may,
may promised. What is the vo..., value of your promise? So, like that, what
Krishna is telling, "pratijāne". I am making a public proclamation. That you
just do this, this, this. You will come back to Me. And for Krishna, if we may
think that it is just a matter of honor. No, it is not just a matter of honor.
It is a matter of the heart. It is, "pratijāne" is a matter of honor. But
"pra...", "priyo ’si me". It is a matter of the heart. So, actually, I love you.
And naturally, therefore, I will take you back to Me. So, therefore, you know,
if you do this, I will do this for you. This is a matter of honor. And a matter
of the heart. You know. Krishna will definitely take us back to Him. So, this
is, these are very, Krishna is actually baring His heart for us. He is revealing
the intimate emotions that are present in His heart. So that we can, you know,
offer our heart to Him. So that we can turn towards Him. And this is the supreme
sweetness of Krishna being manifested in the Bhagavad Gita. The Bhagavad Gita is
more of an analytical book. But even within that analysis, the Bhagavad Gita
also gives us a profound, you know, you know, you know, profoundly moving
devotional conclusion. Devotional conclusion. And that devotional conclusion is
expressed over here. You know. So, now, at this point, Arjuna is still thinking,
ok, Krishna had told Arjuna in 63, "vimṛśyaitad". Think deliberately. Then
Krishna said, no, I will give the most confidential knowledge. And now, Krishna
has given, 65, the confidential knowledge. So, then, the question comes up. But
yes, You were telling me to do this. But there are so many other things, also,
which can be done. And it is not that they are adharmic. They can be dharmic,
also. There are so many other things that the person can do. So, what should I
do exactly? So, that, you know, Krishna addresses in the next verse. So, you
know, these two are often, the, one of the off, off, most quoted verses of the
Gita. And here, we see, this is a very famous verse.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja
        ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo
        mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

So, "sarva-dharmān parityajya". "sarva-dharmān parityajya". Give up all
varieties of religion. "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". Come. Cold. "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ
vraja". But surrender unto Me. Alone. And "ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo". I will
free you from all sinful reactions. "mokṣayiṣyāmi". "mokṣa". I will free you.
"mā śucaḥ". Do not fear. Do not doubt. Do not hesitate. Whole-heartedly, do
this. So, let us look at these words line by line. "sarva-dharmān parityajya".
"parityajya" means to give up. This is actually quite a radical declaration.
Because the idea is, Arjuna, Krishna has come to protect dharma. You know. To
pre..., reestablish dharma. So, dharma:

        paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ
        vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām
        dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya
        sambhavāmi yuge yuge

Krishna has told in, you know, 4.8 that, you know, you know, you know, 4.7 and
8. 4.7, He says that:

        yadā yadā hi dharmasya
        glānir bhavati bhārata
        abhyutthānam adharmasya
        tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

So, when dharma goes down, I come. And why do I come? To establish dharma. So,
then, why is Krishna telling over here give up dharma? "sarva-dharmān
parityajya". So, actually, what Krishna is telling is that give up all varieties
of dharma apart from the dharma of "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". Apart from the
dharma of surrender to Me. Of pure devotion to Me. And not just surrender or
pure devotion. But unde..., undistracted, undeluted, whole-hearted pure
devotion. "mām ekaṁ". "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". Just surrender to Me, alone. You
know. So, why Me alone? Because if, because, you know, love is a matter of the
heart. And when love is, you know, when that devotional love is directed towards
too many thing. Too many people. Too many things. Then, it cannot be
whole-hearted. So, you know, there is one God. And we have to have, put our
faith in the one Supreme Lord. Yes, He can have many representatives. And we can
be His representatives, also. But that does not mean that they are, you know,
they are objects of devotion for us. They may be objects of respect for us. No
doubt. Because we see them, also, as servants of the Lord. And in many ways,
they are more exalted servants than us. So, naturally, we respect them. But
still, even after we respect them, they are still, you know, in this world,
only. And they re..., you know, they, their blessings cannot take us beyond this
world. Their blessings cannot grant us pure love. You know. So, which, which is
the password to the spiritual world. So, therefore, you know, you know, what
Krishna is telling is that, you know, "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". So, there can be
many, many dharmas. But give up all varieties of dharma. And just surrender to
Me, alone. So, now, we have to understand if we look at the Bhagavad Gita at the
end, you know, did Arjuna become adharmic? No. Arjuna still remained a devotee.
And he practiced life as a devotee. You know. But, sorry, you know, sorry, he
remained dharmic. And what did he do as a dharma? He actually did, he did the
ksatriya dharma. You know. So, you know, the, if we look at the "Udyoga Parva"
in the Rama..., in the Mahabharata. There is the "Udyoga Parva" is the Fifth
Parva. You know. There is, so, dish..., Bhagavad Gita is coming in the Sixth
Parva. That is the "Bhishma Parva". So, there is the "Adi Parva". Then, the
"Sambhava Parva". "Adi Parva" is the childhood of the, of ksatr..., of, it
brings the li..., describes the life of Bhishma. And everyone. And then,
childhood of Pandavas. And Kauravas. "Sambhava Parva" describes the, you know,
the disgra..., the dishonor, and, you know, of Draupadi. Then, there is "Vana
Parva". Where there is the exile of the Pandavas. Then, there is a "Virata
Parva". Where the Pandavas live in, you know, incognito. And then, the Fifth
Parva is the "Udyoga Parva". So, in "Udyoga Parva", you know, there is the
attempt to avoid war. So, Krishna comes as Shanti Dut. And before that, there
are various messengers sent. U..., Drupada first sends his messenger, you know,
as a brah.., a brahmin to, you know, Virata. Actually, Virata and Drupada. They
both, you know, come together. Because Arjuna has been staying, the Pandavas
have been staying in Virata's kingdom. And Drupada also comes over there. So, a
brahman messenger goes through as a, you know, peace messenger. And then,
"Sañjaya" sends somebody for peace. And then, Krishna Himself goes. Sorry, not
"Sañj...", "Sañ...", "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" sends "Sañjaya" for peace. So, "Udyoga
Parva", all this is described. So, in "Udyoga Parva", when the Pandavas are
discussing whether there should be a war or not. So, at that time, you know, is
described what is the defining, underlying conflict. It is a conflict between
ksatriya dharma. And kula dharma. So, ksatriya dharma is that, a warrior has to
fight. You know. Wherever there is injustice, the warrior has to counter that
injustice. And the ksatriya requires land to rule. Ruling is the prescribed duty
for ksatriya. So, there is ksatriya dharma. And then, there is kula dharma. Kula
dharma is what? The duty to one's family. To one's dynasty. So, as per kula
dharma, one should not attack one's relatives. One should protect one's
relatives. In fact, you know, in this world, if we did not, if, without our
family, without a, you know, co..., you know, without our relatives, we would be
completely lonely. Now, of course, even with our relatives, you know, we are
lonely. In the sense that we come alone to this world. And we go alone out of
this world. Our only eternal relationship is with Krishna. So, our family
relationships, they become meaningful and fruitful when they help us to develop
our spirit..., devotional relationship with Krishna. So, that is what is
desirable, ultimately. But still, the point is that, in the Vedic culture, this,
there is "para-dharmaḥ". And there is "apara-dharmaḥ". So, "para-dharmaḥ" is our
pure devotional relationship with Krishna. And the "dharmaḥ" that helps us to
develop pure devotional spi..., relationships. That is:

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
        smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

The nine activities of devotional service. "apara-dharmaḥ" can be various
things. You know. There can be the duty to the family. Duty to the dynasty. Duty
to this, you know, country. Duty to the humanity. Like that, there can be
various duties. So, you know, you know, now, you know, for Arjuna, the conflict
was between ksatriya dharma and kula dharma. So, should I protect my family
members? Whatever be the cost? Or should I fight whatever be the cost? So, what
should I do among these two? So, this was, this, you know, there is a discussion
which, you know, goes on and on. And all, the Pandavas, they are not eager for
the war. But they realise that the war is inevitable. And then, they enter into
the war. They embark on the war. So, at that time, you know, that, the conflict
is resolved pragmatically. But here, the, pragmatically means, practically, it
is decided, that Duryodhana is so obstinate. So, how can, you know, how can, you
know, there be peace when somebody is so obstinate? The Pandavas are ready to
vi..., satisfied even with just five villages. But even that, Duryodhana is not
ready to give. So, you know, Duryodhana's obstinacy is seen as, it, it is sort
of, you know, it, you know, it pragmatically resolves. The pro..., conflict.
Because with the other party is utterly uncompromising. Is utterly, you know,
callous and insensitive about the concerns of oneself. Then, one is not ready.
One is not at all, you know, inclined to, you know, placate that party. So, that
is what it happens. So, pragmatically, it gets resolved. But in the Bhagavad
Gita, this co..., this dialect, this conflict between ksatriya dharma and kula
dharma, it is resolved philosophically. By telling that, actually, both dharmas
are "apara-dharmaḥ"s. You know. And the "para-dharmaḥ" is a dharma of "man-manā
bhava mad-bhakto". Is of pure devotion to Krishna. And you should follow
"para-dharmaḥ". So, that is what Krishna is telling.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

means, "sarva-dharmān parityajya" means, give up all "apara-dharmaḥ"s. "mām ekaṁ
śaraṇaṁ vraja" means accept the "para-dharmaḥ". The "para-dharmaḥ" is of pure
devotional service. So, accept that "para-dharmaḥ". And when you accept that
"para-dharmaḥ". What will happen by that? "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". But then,
you take shelter of Me. But then, how do we take shelter of Krishna? When we,
you know, now, shel..., you know, that is also elaborate subject which we cannot
go into here. But shelter also has to be taken in this world. We have to do
certain activities in this world. Suppose, I say I surrender to Krishna.
Suppose, you know, people think of, surrender means, say, I am doing some, I
ha..., I have a family. And I have, I am living in the world. And I decide that,
you know, I will, I will give up my job. I will give up my family. And I just
ren..., renounce everything for Krishna's sake. Ok. What after that? After that,
I have to do something. You know. Somebody takes, you know, becomes a
brahmacari. Or somebody becomes a sannyasi. Then, that person still has dharma.
That person has to do brahmacarya dharma. Or sannyasa dharma. So, whatever
dharma one has, one has to do that dharma. So, "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja" does not
mean that one has to become adharmic. "sarva-dharmān parityajya" does not mean
that one has to become adharmic. But rather, one has to accept that dharma which
helps one to do "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". So, there can be var..., various
dharmas, also. For example, you know, young person can have a dharma to the
parents. Can have a dharma to, you know, other, to other relatives. Can have a
dharma to society. Sometimes, people say that, ok, if some, sometimes, when
people say that young, young, you know, boys are becoming brahmacaris, so, they
may say that, you know, you, what about your, you know, country? You know. The
country, you know, you, you spend, you will lost, so, you, your country spent
so much money for providing you engineer education. And you wasted engineering
seat. So, actually speaking, India lost an engineering seat when you became a
monk. Seven people asked this. When most devotee, when a devotee has the answer
that, actually, it is, he says, not India which lost an engineering seat. It is
America which lost an engineering seat. Now, what happens is, most people who do
engineering, especially, they, they do it from good colleagues, they often go to
America. And then, with their intelligence, they are serving America. So, of
course, the point is that, at a "apara-dharmaḥ" level, that is a valid reality.
Yes, we have a, we are, we are living in a country. And in the country, if the
country has provided us certain facilities, then we also have certain duties for
the country. But that is "apara-dharmaḥ". So, if one gives up "apara-dharmaḥ".
And becomes, you know, say, alcoholic. Or a drug addict. You know. Then, that is
truly a wasting of engineering seat. You know. Got such good education. And
then, just squandered all away. So, from, you know, "apara-dharmaḥ", if one goes
to adharma, then that is wastage. But then, if somebody is going from
"apara-dharmaḥ" to "para-dharmaḥ", then that is glorious. To go from
"apara-dharmaḥ" to "para-dharmaḥ". So, yes, some, the country may have done
something from me, for me. Country may have done lot for me. But how did the
country do it for me? You know. The country is not an independent entity. The
country had natural resources. The, how are those resources coming from? They
are coming from Krishna. That means what the country has done for me, it is
Krisna who has done for me through the country. So, if I am not serving Krishna,
then I have a duty to the country which I have to fulfill. But if I am serving
Krishna, then I, I may not serve the country. Of course, you know, when people
become brahmacaris, often, they do a great service to the country, also. Because
they are preserving the country's culture. The country's, you know, national
spiritual heritage. And, you know, you know, in that sense, that service to
country is also done.

But the point is that, you know, when we talk about "sarva-dharmān parityajya
mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja", what it means is that, one, you know, gives up those
dharmas which are pratikul to "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". Which are unfavorable
for surrendering to Krishna. And we accept that dharma which is favorable for
surrendering to Krishna. So, by accepting this dharma which is favorable for
surrender to Krishna, we make spiritual advancement. So, for Arjuna, the kula
dharma was unfavorable. The ksatriya dharma was favorable. So, Arjuna, at the
end of the Bhagavad Gita, acts as a ksatriya. But that is external. Arjuna is
adopting ksatriya dharma so that he can practice the "para-dharmaḥ" of bhakti.
So, Arjuna is not a ksatriya who is doing bhakti-yoga. He is a bhakta who is
practicing ksatriya dharma. So, the priority is clea..., has to be clear. First,
I am a devotee. And then, I may be engineer. I may be a doctor. I may be a
housewife. I may be a, you know, you know, I may be a temple president. I may be
a, you know, counsellor. I may be a guru. First, I am a, I am a servant of
Krishna. I am a devotee. And then, I can have various roles which may be in the
material world. Or which may be in Krishna's institution, also. So, you know:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

means we accept that which will enable us to surrender to Krishna. You know. So,
now, you know, you know, Parikshit Maharaja had big responsibilities as a king.
But when the time came, what did he realise? That now, I am going to die in
seven days. So, he just gave up all dharmas. And surrendered to Krishna. He took
up dharma of exclusive hearing and chanting. So, similarly, as devotees, what is
this verse telling? "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". Just surrender to Me. You know.
So, now, in, now, you know, there are, you know, the, in the Vaishnava
scriptures, you know, Bhaktivinoda Thakur also elaborates on this, is described
that surrender can be influe..., six elements.

        ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ
        prātikūlyasya varjanam
        rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso
        goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā
        ātma-nikṣepa-kārpaṇye
        ṣaḍ-vidhā śaraṇāgatiḥ

So, among these six, you know, the first two are important. In term, because
they are actions. And the remaining four are emotions. You know. For example,
"rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso". The faith that Krishna will always protect me. Now, you
know, I, it is not that I can, by our, some sentime..., some mental adjustment,
I can have that faith. No. That faith gradually grows as we see Krishna
protecting us we, over a period of time. So, "rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso". That faith
is an emotion. "ātma-nikṣe...", you know, "goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā". "goptṛtve
varaṇaṁ". That Krishna is my maintainer. So, "rakṣiṣyatīti" means when there is
great danger, Krishna will protect me. "rakṣiṣ...", "āt...", you know,
"goptṛtve" means, in general, Krishna is my maintainer. You know.
"ātma-nikṣepa-kārpaṇye". "ātma-nikṣepa" means, my whole existence is dependent
on Krishna. "kārpaṇye". So, actually, without Krishna. I am useless. I am
workless. I cannot do anything. Utter humility in front of Krishna. So, all
these are emotions. And they are desirable emotions. Which we should try to
cultivate. But that cultivation ha..., is something which is progressive. It is
not, you know, it is not like a switching on, off a light. In one moment, it
happens. It happens over a period of time. You know. It is, you know, like an
analogue growth. Not a digital switch. So, you know, what we have to do is, you
know, for that ana..., an..., analogue change, gradual development, for that,
the actions are important.

        ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ
        prātikūlyasya varjanam

What is favorable for bhakti, I will accept that. What is unfavorable for
bhakti, I will reject that. And in this way, a devotee acts. So, surrender is
not just passive. Say, when Draupadi, the, often, when we talk about surrender,
the example of surrender is Draupadi raising her hands. And surrendering to
Krishna. And Krish..., her, is, she, her saari is being disrobed. And she is
being disrobed. And then, Krishna provides unlimited saari. Yes, that is
definitely an expression of surrender. But then, you know, the, actually, fl...,
liter..., literally speaking, that was not what Gopi..., Draupadi was doing all
her life. When there is extreme danger. Then, there is nothing that one can do,
then a devotee just depends completely on Krishna. But at other times, a
devotee, you know, knows that, you know, I have to serve Krishna. And therefore,
devotee makes intelligent choices. Should I do this? Or should I do that? How
should I act in my life? So, in this way, a devotee chooses the proper action.
So, "ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ". So, for Arjuna, the "ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ" is to
put aside, you know, to accept ksatriya dharma. And "prātikūlyasya varjanam" is
to put aside the kula dharma. The kula dharma is the, the duty of protecting
one's family members. So, in this way, now, Arjuna may still have a question
that, but still, you know, I have my family member..., family members. My
relatives. There are venerable elders. Like Bhishma Pitamah. And "Droṇa". My
sti..., marshall teacher. How can I attack them? In the name of ksatriya dharma?
Kri..., you know, won't, won't there be sinful reaction? Krishna says no. Even
if there is sinful reaction, He says:

        ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo
        mokṣayiṣyāmi ...

That I have not, free you from all sinful reactions. So, when for the sake of
Krishna, we have to give up some lower prin..., lower real..., lower moral
principle to adopt a higher moral principle, then Krishna assures that, you
know, I will protect you from sinful reactions. So, "ahaṁ tvāṁ". "mokṣayiṣyāmi".
So, do not bother about. "mā śucaḥ". Do not fear. So, here, Krishna's devo...,
will, affection is overflowing completely. You know. Earlier, in the Seventh
Chapter, you know, in 7.28, Krishna has said that, you know, actually, to become
fixed in devotion, one has to become free from all sinful reactions.

        yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ
        janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

"anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ". One has to, you know, end one's sinful reactions by acting
piously. Consistently. For many lifetimes. "janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām".

        te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

They become free from the duality of illusion.

        bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

And they can fix themselves in, you know, "dṛḍha-vratāḥ". In determined
devotion. But here, Krishna is telling, even if you are not "anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ",
does not matter. Even if there is "pāpaṁ", you just come to Me.

        ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo
        mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

I will free you from sinful reactions. So, this is actually Krishna's love
coming out. Whole-hearted love coming out. So, you know, Krishna, He tells
Arjuna here that, if you, you know, you know, just like a mother. The mother
tain..., trains a child. Then, the child maybe is growing up, mother trains the
baby. You know. When you have to respond to nature, you know, you should go to
the washroom. And there, you should do, respond. And then, the child is foolish.
And the child does not understand. Or does not learn. And the child soils a
cloth. And the mother gets annoyed. You know. The child, mother sees the child
has soiled the cloth. You should, you know, first clean yourself. Only then, you
come to me. Now, if the child is, you know, child becomes helpless. And mamma, I
do not know what to do. He just calls out. And then, what happens? Then, mother,
you know, love overflows. She says come. I will clean you up. So, like that,
when Krishna is telling, "yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ". Krishna is telling, first,
clean yourself. Then, you come to Me. But when the devotee says, I am helpless,
then Krishna says:

        ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo
        mokṣayiṣyāmi ...

Do not worry. I will protect you. I will protect you. Just come to Me. Just come
to Me. You know. So, in this way, Krishna expresses His intense love for His
devotee. And the Bhagavad Gita, especially, this verse, 18.66 reveals how
Krishna, you know, offers, reveals His love for us. And invites us to love Him.
Thus, the Bhagavad Gita is essentially a message of love. A message of, you
know, a call for love. A revelation of love. And a call for love. Krishna
reveals His love. And invites us to reciprocate with that love. Then, further,
we will discuss this verse. And then, the phalashruti that comes off the, the 
Bhagavad Gita, that we will discuss in our next class.

Thank you very much. Srimad Bhagavad Gita ki jaya. Hare Krishna.
