Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=svwCox1DYfY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=svwCox1DYfY&redir_token=P4Xwd0YOAN4WlfkhGeNWRcH37bt8MTU0ODQ4OTg1MUAxNTQ4NDAzNDUx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_132_-_Bhagavad_Gita_16.07-16.10_-_The_errors_and_disasters_of_demoniac_modern_times_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the 16th Chapter. We discussed the, you know, divine qualities. And then,
we came to the point where we just started the demoniac qualities. So, Krishna
has until now described that divine qualities lead to liberation. And the
demoniac qualities lead to, you know, bondage. So, you know, now, we will,
li..., disc..., list the demoniac qualities. Let us start the discussion. 16.7
onwards, we will see.

        pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
        janā na vidur āsurāḥ
        na śaucaṁ nāpi cācāro
        na satyaṁ teṣu vidyate

So, "pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca". That, you know, acting properly. And acting
impropely. Prabhupada translates "pravṛttiṁ" and "nivṛttiṁ" simply. As "janā na
vidur āsurāḥ". So, the demoniac people "na vidur". They do not know. "na śaucaṁ
nāpi cācāro". And they do not have cleanliness. Nor do they have proper
behavior. "na cācāro". "na satyaṁ teṣu vidyate". And there is no truthfulness
among them, also. So, Krishna starts by describing, first and foremost, that,
you know, they, they, their behavior is not guided. Now, what guides their
behavior. Actually, normal, what, our behavior should be guided by scripture.
So, only when our behavior guided by scripture, then can, you know, we be acting
properly. Just as a sick patien..., as a specific, patient who is sick needs to
be guided by the doctor's, you know, guidelines. Similarly, they are all sick in
material existence. And scriptures are given to help us, you know, to help guide
us. So that we can reco..., re..., recover spiritually. And reclaim our eternal
spiritual happiness. And loving relationship with Krishna. So, you know,
"pravṛttiṁ". And "nivṛttiṁ". So, it is, so, scriptures tell us certain things to
do. And certain things to avoid. Certain prescriptions. And certain
proscription. So, "Do's and Don'ts". So, now, you know, you know, the demoniac
people do not care for them.

        viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva
        āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ

So, scriptures say that that the, you know, "viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva". Who are
the devatas? Those who are the devotees of Lord Vishnu. And those who are
opposite to that. That means those who are opposed Lord Vishnu, you know, they
are the demons. And what is the opposition to Lord Vishnu? You know. Vishnu is
not directly present in this world all the time. He co..., sometimes comes for
incarna..., as incarnations. And those who oppose Him are demons. But, you know,
you know, those who oppose the, you know, you know, you know, words of Lord
Vishnu. They are also of a demoniac men..., mentality. Now, the, the, in the
previous verse, it was said, you know, "dvāv imau puruṣau loke". Sorry. No.

        dvau bhūta-sargau loke ’smin
        daiva āsura eva ca

So, both, you know, the..., these two verses, you know, you know, start with
"dvau". We discussed in 15.16 there are two kinds of "puruṣau"s. And, here, it
is, there, two kinds of living beings. So, both verses start with the same
theme. But there is a difference, you know, what is being talked about. There,
it has talked about fallible, infallible. Here, it is talking about, you know,
that is talking, conditioned, liberated. Here, it is talking about two people,
neither, the, even, not necessarily be liberated. Even the godly are not
necessarily liberated. Some of those be godly qualities may be liberated. But
many of them are not li..., you know, they are on the path to liberation.
Krishna has said, "daivī sampad vimokṣāya". "daivī sampad" will lead to
liberation. So, you know, when Krishna classifies this. There are divine. And
there are demoniac. So, what does it imply? Is it that everybody who is not
divine is demoniac? You know. So, when Prabhupada was asked this question.
Prabhupada was clear about the point. You know. The, we have to be careful when
we, what we mean by the word demoniac. We should not think demoniac means, you
know, some person who has two thorns coming out of the head. And maybe some, you
know, fangs coming out of the mouth. And hid..., a hideous-looking face. No.
That is the car..., you know, c..., stereotype, that is a caricature of a demon.
Demons do not necessarily have to be like that. You know. So, Jayadvaita
Maharaja wrote an article on BTG, where he said, you know, who is a demon?
So, he said that, actually, you know, your local politician might be a demon.
Your postman might be a demon. Your grocer might be a demon. Your neighbour
might be a demon. You might be a demon. So, what does it mean? It is more of a
mentality. Now, if we see in the Mahabharata, you know, it, the, the Ramayana,
is a war between the humans. And "rākṣasa"s. So, "Rāvaṇa" is a "rākṣasa". But
the Mahabharata is a war between humans, only. Kauravas and Pandavas are both
humans. And actually, "rākṣasa"s are there on both sides. So, you know, you
know, you know, "Bhīma"'s son, "Ghaṭotkaca", is born from "Hiḍimbī" who was a
Rakshasi. And therefore, he is a "rākṣasa". And, you know, on the opposite side,
there was a "rākṣasa", you know, called, named "Alambuṣā". So, he was a relative
of the "Bakāsura". Not the "Bakāsura" from the Krishna lila. But the "Bakāsura"
who was killed by "Bhīma". "Bakāsura" who had a voracious appetite. So, you
know, you know, and then, he was a relative, and then, he wanted to take
revenge. So, that is why he said to fight in this war against "Bhīma". So,
either way, there were "rākṣasa"s on both sides. You know. And there were humans
who were fighting the war. They were the, you know, prot..., main protagonists.
Main opponents were humans. But then, Duryodhana, although he may not have a
body like a "rākṣasa". That Duryodhana had a, you know, "āsurī" mentality. So,
there is a divine mentality. And there is, you know, demoniac mentality. Now,
within the demoniac mentality, also, there are people who are overtly demoniac.
And there are people who are under demoniac influence. So, had, many people are
godless today. Not because they deliberately, at least, from the slight
perspective, want to be godless. That is because they are living in a
sociocultural situation where they are not given knowledge about scripture. And
because, they, when they are not given knowledge about God. Then, they
naturally, you know, you know, do not come to know about Him. You know. Some
people may be "jignasu" who actually, you know, endeavor to know about God. But
many people do not. And that is how they stay in ignorance. And under the spell
of ignorance, they, you know, have to, you know, they often act be...,
godlessly. They act anti-scripturally. This happens sometimes, unfortunately.
So, this can be corrected. And that is what will be the theme of the, you know,
chapter at the end. That "chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ". Act according to "śāstram". But
here, Krishna is telling that the demoniac, the characteristic in general is
that they, their, they conduct is not in accordance to scripture.

        pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
        janā na vidur āsurāḥ

So, in today's society, people think that, you know, scripture is just some
old-fashioned, outdated, you know, you know, prescientific, you know, mythology.
Or just some more, you know, some imagine..., may, metaphor crea...,
metaphorically created for ima..., for morality or whatever. They do not
consider it as a, you know, you know, for what it is. Actually, the scriptures
are a manual for living. And when we do not use the manual, the, at best, we
underuse a gadget. At worst, we may, you know, we may misuse. And we may even
cause, you know, distraction of the gadget. Or we may cause distraction of
ourselves. You know. If somebody, you know, uses an electronic device. Maybe,
in an pro..., improper way, the device may have some co..., circutry which may
catch fire. Which may explode. Or whatever. So, you know, not necessarily
eletronic devices. Different kinds of devices. The point is that the manual
helps us to use it best. So, the scriptures are the manual. The demoniac:

        pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
        janā na vidur āsurāḥ

They do not follow scripture at all. And, you know, the, Prabhupada explains in
the purport that, you know, you know, you know, the, Prabhupada is, they are not
in cleanli..., in, Prabhupada is, usually, whenever talks about cleanliness, he
talks about, in terms of, cleanliness by chanting Hare Krishna. And then,
Prabhupada quotes "Manu-saṁhitā". So, which is the war of the human race. And
when Prabhupada talks about women, you know, you know, now, you know,
"Manu-saṁhitā" ha..., you know, has, when, you know, when Prabhupada uses
"Manu-saṁ...", refers to "Manu-saṁhitā", he is primarily referring to a
principle. You know. There are many instructions, "Manu-saṁhitā", which Srila
Prabhupada would not even try to implement in today's society. Because today's
society, the culture, cultural situation is significantly different from the
situation earlier. So, there are many, you know, statements which are, you know,
which seem to be very castist. Or sexist. If we do not understand their
context. You know. "Bhaktivinoda Thakur" also said that, you know, the
"Manu-saṁhitā" today has been inte..., you know, what we have has been
interpolated. By, you know, brahmanas who wanted to promote, you know, the, you
know, their own, you know, position. And that is why, you know, it is, you know,
it, the specifics of the "Brahma", "Brahma-saṁhitā" may, may have been
undermined. But, you know, you know, Prabhupada is referring to the, you know,
if we look at Prabhupada's, you know, not just statements, but his example,
also. Prabhupada did not directly try to implement everything from
"Manu-saṁhitā". In his, you know, you know, you know, in his, you know, in
ISKCON. He recognised the nuances and the necessities of today's realities. And
he, he was an expert at presenting according to time. Place. Circumstance. But
the principle has to be always recognised. The principle is what? That, you
know, you know, you know, that, we are meant to live in harmony with God's
guidelines. And Go..., those, Krishna's guidelines are very important. You know.
For overall spiritual advancement. You know. You know. And, you know, in that
way, we can move forward, you know, in making spiritual advancement. Now,
regarding the position of women, you know, it is a very important point that,
you know, you know, this issue repeatedly keeps coming up. And in today's, you
know, scenario where women often want equal rights. So, the statement is of
Srila Prabhupada where he talks about women needing protection may seem to be,
you know, seem to be thro..., you know, throw back to pastimes. But the point
is, it is not a throw back. The point is that everybody has to, you know, be
situated in a way that is best situated for spiritual advancement. So, the best
role for women is, you know, when they are contributing in the way that they are
made for. Psychophysically. So, nobody can play, take the place of a mother. So,
or father cannot take place of a mother. Not just physically. But also
emotionally. You know. The kind of love that the mother can give the child. So,
motherhood has been, you know, you know, you know, you know, trivialised. In,
all, and, you know, you know, sexuality has been glamorised in today's society.
So, if, basically, women, you know, can have, you know, a woman can, you know,
you know, you know, have two sets of identities. Practically. Self-identity. It
can be a sexual identity. Or a maternal identity. So, you know, you know, the
Vedic culture emphasised that women take up the maternal identity. That is why
women are referred to as matajis. So, the idea, when women take up the maternal,
maternal identity that means that, they, you know, they take up the role of
mothers. They will become mothers even if they are not mothers right now. And
when they take up that role. That role is a role, which t..., actually, they can,
they, now, both the sexual identity and the maternal identity, neither of them
is eternal. It is both, both are body based only. At the level of the soul, they
are also parts of Krishna. And they are devotees of Krishna. A..., as, according
to the svarupa, whatever it may be. But if we look at the two roles. The sexual
role. And the maternal role. Then, the, as maternal role is far more conducive
for spiritual advancement. And far more conducive for material harmony, also.
The sexual, you know, a woman takes up the sexual role. That means a woman
considers, you know, when society treats women primarily as a, you know, as,
you know, for its, for, as a, you know, you know, from with, the point of view
of sexual identity. And, you know, women also think, identify themselves based
on their, you know, as a modern sex appeal. Then, what happens is, it creates
insecurity, even within a woman. Because how long is the sex appeal going to
last? You know. Woman may look beautiful now. But after a, woman who has lived
only for att..., you know, attracting the attention of others based on, you
know, sex appeal. You know. As the body ages. And the sex appeal goes away.
Then, the women feel lonely. And even if the sex appeal is there, you know, you
know, the women, her, used. Women feel used. For their bodies. So, you know, the
sexuality is an aspect of life. But we have discussed the difference between
sexualisa..., sexuality and sexualisation. This is reducing a person to just a
sexual creature. That is sexualisation. And, you know, you know, that is
extremely undesirable. But when we have, you know, images in today's society.
Which, you know, you know, which, you know, highlight the, you know, you know,
female form. And various levels of dressing. And undressing. And then, you know,
this sort of imaginary, you know, you know, st..., perpetuates a stereotype of a
woman primarily as a, you know, as a sexual, you know, you know, being. And the,
you know, that identity is deleterious. It is extremely harmful. It is harmful
for women themselves. Because it creates insecurity. You know. It is harmful for
men. Because it agitates them. And it is harmful for, you know, children.
Because, you know, with that, when then women wants to have that identity. You
know. Or the society wants women to have that identity, then, you know,
motherhood does not very easy. So, there are so many complications why women do
not want to become mothers. Because in the body, the, during pregnancy, the body
does not look attractive. And then afterwards, one has to spend so much time
taking care of the child. And, you know, people have so many ideas about, when
we, this one identity becomes too highlighted, then everything else becomes
trivialised. And it has been widely known that children who do not get, you
know, sociologists to talk about it repeatedly that children who do not get, you
know, the love of their mothers. Often, they grow up to be disturbed. And
distr..., you know, disturbed youth. Who disturb society. Internal. You know.
So, and, from a, for a, for a woman, motherhood is a re..., unique privilege
which is given, given by God.

You know. Why should a woman give up this unique privi..., God-given privilege?
And try to become copycats of men? You know. All the women may claim that we
want independence from men. Which is, you know, which is how the whole, you
know, feminist movement is often portrayed. But what is the idea of an
independence. The idea of independence essentially boils down to the idea of
women becoming copycat of men. You know. What women, men are doing. Women say
that, you know, we will do all that. So, now, some, now, whether they can do it
or not, that is not an issue. You know, Women, you know, can become, become
determined and say, we will, we will succeed in these sports. We will succeed in
that field. We will succeed in that field. Now, we, the point here is not
whether they can. Or they cannot. The point is that, that, you know, what is
the, you know, you know, purpose of life, you know, what is the role that we
have to play. And how can we play it best? That is the important thing to
recognise. So, if we forg..., you know, the, you know, if we forget that
purpose, then we can make a mess of everything. So, the purpose is that, this
life is temporary. And the body that we have is just like a dress. And while we
are in this body, we, this world is not a destination. You know. It is, it is
not the destination. It is the station. And it is station along which we have to
pass. So, the, you know, we pass the life in this world in such a way that we
can make maximum spiritual advancement. And return to Krishna for eternal
happiness. So, for, when a woman takes the maternal role, that means, you know,
the woman can actually, you know, live, in a way, a, a woman can be a mother
throughout one's lifetime. You know. A woman, woman, woman may not have sexual
appeal throughout, you know, life. But, you know, the maternal care is eternal,
is innate to the, you know, psycho..., so, psychophysical disposition of a
mother. And the woman can, you know, offer that throughout one's life. So, you
know, you know, the dressing. The conduct. The behavior. You know. The, the
lifestyle. All that. If it is more maternal, then the woman can also be more
peaceful. And men can also be more peaceful. Now, you know, you know, sometimes,
you know, this is taken to, this sort of thing is taken to extremes. And when,
you know, when some crimes happen against women, women are blamed. You know.
That is not the point over here. You know. When crimes happen against the women,
it is men who have to be bla..., you know, the per..., it is the perpetrators
of the crime who have to be blamed. Whatever be the, you know, situation. You
know. But the important point to recognise is that, you know, you know, you
know, why should women, you know, self-identify themselves in provocat..., you
know, in, as, as sexual creatures. And become, and provoke others. You know.
Actually, you know, the, you know, the idea is, when Prabhupada says women
should be protected under, you know, you know, un..., husband. Or child. Son. Or
pa..., father. The idea is that then that is the best way they can contribute
according to their unique psychophysical dispositi..., distinct to
psychophysical disposition. To society. And actually, they can also get
fulfillment by that. So:

        na śaucaṁ nāpi cācāro
        na satyaṁ teṣu vidyate

So, you know, that is what, now, Prabhupada talks about, you know, the role of
women. And thereafter, you know, he should talk about, you know, let us talk
about next verse. So:

"the social condition of the demoniac people is very miserable."

Prabhupada writes. So:

        asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te
        jagad āhur anīśvaram
        aparaspara-sambhūtaṁ
        kim anyat kāma-haitukam

So, "asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te". This world is unreal. And it is without any
foundation. "jagad āhur anīśvaram". That it has no "īśvaram".
"aparaspara-sambhūtaṁ". You know. You know. "aparaspara-sambhūtaṁ". That
actually, you know, it is just created by mutual contact. Without any further
cause. "kim anyat kāma-haitukam". It is reduced to lust only. And there is no
other cause. So, what is Krishna referring to over here? He is moving, you know,
from activity to mentality. So, previous verses, previous verse talked about
activities. You know. In terms of how they behave. You know. You know.
"pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca". So, now, activity, quality, mentality, all these are
interrelated. It is not that there has to be a watertight division. Between this
is an activity. And this is quality. This is mentality. They all are diffused
together in the n..., array, in the outline of the Bhagavad Gita, given over
here. But "asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te". So, they say "asatyam". This world is
unreal. So, this is referring, referring to, you know, generally, it refers to
mayavadis. "asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te". The "apratiṣṭhaṁ te" means it has no
foundation beyond. So, there are different sc..., approaches to this world. You
know. So, some people say that, ok, this world is false. Some others say, ok,
this world may be real. But it has no foundation to it. There is nothing beyond
this world. And then, some others say:

        jagad āhur anīśvaram

Some people say, ok, there is no God beyond this world. So, this world is
unreal. This world is foundationless. And this world is ga..., you know, this
world has no God in control. There is no God in control. So, these are basically
different Godless ideas. Then, naturally, the question comes up, ok, then what
is the purpose of existence? You know. Then, you know, "kim anyat
kāma-haitukam". Actually, it has arisen from lust. And it is meant for lust,
only. It is just meant for fulfilling desires. So, you know, if we look at this
historically. You know. The idea of refuting God. And the, you know, remaining,
you know, and becoming defiant of God's authority. It is not new. Atheism has
been there throughout history. You know. Because there are always people who
want to rebel against God. And this world is a facility for those people to
either reform. Or continue the rebellion. So, some souls can choose to continue
that rebellion. And that is how, you know, there are alwa..., there are always
be atheistic people. And we should not think that the Indian culture, we cannot
whitewash the Indian culture. Some people say that, oh, because the Britishers
came, you know, Indian culture got spoiled. Or because the muslims came, the
Indian culture got spoiled. Actually, yes, they, they, they, there is foreigner
in..., invaders, invaders did do a lot of damage. No doubt about it. But we
should not, you know, have the idea that in, you know, in Satya, in previous
ages, everything was ro..., rosy-cozy. No. There were problems there, also.
Actually, if we compare with the classical age. Classical age means when, you
know, the Greek civilisation was there in Europe. And Greco-Roma..., Greco-Roman
civilisation was there. And there were other civilisation, other parts of the
world. So, among the classical languages, sanskrit has produced the world's
largest storey, store of atheistic literature. You know. More than Greek. More
than Roman. More than all these other. You know. More than others. Other
civilisations. And their respected languages. Sanskrit is produced huge, you
know, you know, number of atheistic literature. How did atheistic scripture
came from? They came from Buddhism. And Jainism. So, Buddhism and Jainism were
basically rebel religions. You know. They rebelled, they rebelled against, you
know, the Vedic authority. But it is interesting that Buddhism and Jainism were
atheistic without becoming grossly materialistic. You know. It is very
interesting. Normally, we think of, we equate atheism with materialism. You
know. So, Buddhi... Buddhism and Jainism, if we look at their philosophy, they
have some ideas of the, they may even worship some Gods. But their ultimate idea
is there is no absolute controller. And Buddha is also according to the Jains.
Buddhists. Or the "tīrthaṅkara" is according to Jains. They are, you know, you
know, the enlightened beings. They are not the Absolute Truth. They, they are
not, you know, the Absolute Truth is some kind of shanti. Passive. You know. So,
nirvana. Like that. Complete negation of reality. I have given a series of
classes on Krishna Consciousness and world religions. So, there, I have
talked about different religions. I will not go into that over here. But at this
point, suffice it to say that, you know, atheism has been there, ev..., all
times. Of course, in Jainism and Buddhism, they were not culturally at odds so
much with, you know, the mainstream Vedic culture. You know. They also had a,
you know, renunciates. They also had the concept of, you know, regulation of
one's material engagements. So that one can perceive a reality beyond this
world. And the understanding that this world is a place of misery. And one
needs to get out of this world if one wants to become free from misery. But, you
know, you know, so, Prabhupada writes that the Buddhism. Impersonalism. And
Vaishnavism. All three are common, I have a comm..., the common understanding
that this world is a place of misery. And trying to enjoying this world
increases the misery. But we can, have to get out of the world. Now, what is
there? What is the, beyond that, beyond the world? There are different opinions
for that. So, anyway, atheism has been there throughout history. But in the
modern times, atheism has become intellectually glamorised. And, you know, where
has the glamor of atheism come from? It has come from science. Or rather, it has
not come from science. Atheism has stolen, you know, that glamor from science.
You know. Atheism has, you know, masqueraded in scientific garb.

So, there are many, you know, so, many people think that to be scientific means
to be atheistic. Actually, science is just a tool for acquiring knowledge. And
that tool can be used positively. To go towards God. That tool can be used
negatively to go away from God. Science is basically study of nature. Now, from
the study of nature, one can either infer towards the transcendental controller.
Or one can, you know, infer towards the rejection. The denial of a
transcendental controller. So, science is basically like a map. Or a mirror. Or
a microscope. You know. Basically, the tool for studying nature. It is not just
a physical tool. It is an intellectual tool. You know. So, it has, has some, you
know, there is a methology of studying. There are apprentice used for studying.
All that is there. But the important point is that because, you know, scien...,
there have been, you know, theories which deny the existence of God. Which
reject God. Because of that, there, you know, and these theories are portrayed
as scientific. Actually, they are not scientific. They are at best
pseudoscientific. So, these theories, you know, which claim to explain
everything about creation, you know, without needing any reference to God. You
know. So, these theories have actually led to, you know, led to people, you
know, thinking that to be religious, we have to be atheistic. And because of
such thinking, because of thinking that to be religious, we have to be
atheistic, they often give up religion. And when they give up religion, what
happens is that they end up, you know, you know, becoming atheistic. When, you
know, because of their attraction to science. So:

        asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te
        jagad āhur anīśvaram

"jagad āhur anīśvaram". That there is no "īśvaram" in control of the world. And,
you know, that was, you know, we have discussed earlier about, you know,
athei..., atheism. You know. Theism. Deism. And atheism. So, you know, prior to,
you know, you know, you know, Newton's times. You know. The, the world was, it
is understood by theistic. Theistic means that there is a, God is the creator.
God is the controller. That was the mainstream understanding. But then, you
know, Newton proposed the laws of motion. And subsequently, more and more
phen..., phenomena started being explained in terms of laws. Therefore, the idea
was, ok, the laws are governing, you know, the behavior of matter. Then, there
is no need, no need, role or room for God. So, you know, you know, therefore,
you know, in the functioning of the universe. So, the idea can be that God may
be the creator. But God is not the controller. So, that is, you know, deism. God
is the creator. But not the controller. And that continued until Darwin's time.
And then, Darwin proposed the theory of evolution. Then, that was actually, even
at Darwin's time. He has, Darwin also said that, the ex..., exis..., evidence
for his theory is extremely flimsy. But he said, in fut..., future research will
be able to find the evidence. But anyway, his point was, you know, we, his
theory, although they would not be so flimsy. You know. Anyway, the, if we
consider survival of the fittest, then, you know, Darwin's theory is actually
unfit to survive. You know. The evin..., evidence is so flimsy for it. And not
only the evidence flimsy, even the theory itself is flimsy. I am not going into
that subject here. But the important point is that the theory became popular if
we look at the history of science. Because it became a bulwark for atheism. You
know. It became a, you know, it, intellectual basis for atheists to, you know,
reject God. And not only reject God. But to revile God. Revile means to
criticise as old-fashioned. Criticise as mythological. Criticise as
unscientific. So, it became a tool for, you know, beating down God. And it
became widely accepted. You know. And it, once it became accepted, you know, you
know, you know, you know, so, atheism aquired scientific glamor. And, you know,
you know, you know, you know, theism, belief in God started to seem, to be
mainly, many people to be unscientific. But it is not. You know. Science is a
tool. And there are many of the greatest scientists in the world. Have used
science. And have, from science, inferred the existence of God. By their
scientific studies. So, anyway, what happened after this was, once atheism comes
up. There is no God. Then, there is no basis for right or wrong. So, what is the
level, if there is no next life? There is no higher reality. There is no higher
controller. Then, I can do whatever I want to do. And if I can get away with it,
if I am clever enough. If I am powerful enough to get away with it, then who is
there to stop me? I am perfect. So, that is the idea that comes up. It is such
an idea. The floodgates for immortality get opened. So, the atheists' ultimate
secret is that, you know, you know, actually, does not even have to be a secret.
But often, it is, it is that, you know, there is nothing wrong. If something
gives me enjoyment, let me do it. That is all. So, that is how immorality has
come up. And we see, within 50 to 100 years after, you know, you know, you know,
theory of evolution being proposed. 1859 was the time when, you know, you know,
Darwin wrote his book. You know. "On the Origin of Species". Then, "Sigmund
Freud" came along in 50 to 100 years after, I think, 50 years after that. And he
came up with his al..., theory of his sexuality. You know. Perverse theories
where he said that, actually, everything is just based on sexuality. And, you
know, he sexualised everything. And when sexualised everything, he said,
actually, the purpose of, you know, he made religions seem to be like a disease
on neurosis. You know. And when he made religion seem to like a disease,
He said, actually, you know, we have to become sexually free. You know. Whatever
sexual urges are there, act on them. And, you know, and, he had some when he was
a child, he had some sexual attraction to his mother. Which, of course, he could
not act on because of social resea..., social morality. And then, he
extrapolated from his experience. And he said that, actually, all boys have
sexual attraction towards their mothers. And all girls have sexual attraction
towards their parent..., father. And because pare..., parents, because they are
not, people are not allowed to act on the sexual attractions, so, there are so
many problems which come up in society. So, then, he said, actually, everything
is based on sex.

        kim anyat kāma-haitukam

And now, we understand that sex is a predominant force in material life. But the
idea that everything is reduced to sexuality. That is a distortion. Of reality.
Perversion of reality. And the re..., and his idea was, ok, have free sexual
expression. And once he opened the floodgates. Once his, you know, ideas. Which
were, which were more of his creative speculation, imagination than any
scientific inference. They thought to be scientific. And thought as scientific.
And the result was that, you know, then, you know, you know, you know, you know,
scie..., you know, you know, you know, you know, free se..., is then
sexualisation. What is called as sexual freedom. What is called as sexual
expression. That these are all just words for, attractive seeming words for, you
know, immorality. So, these became again, they acquired a scientific glamor. You
know. It is scientific. You know. There is no rules and regulations. Just enjoy.
What happened? "kim anyat kāma-haitukam". That now, we have, you know, such a
devastating consequences. Now, divorces have skyrocketed. Children are, so many
children are born outside of marriages. And a whole of society has become
extremely, you know, extremely, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
know, troubled because of this. So, if, so, the whole result has been that, so,
people are suffering more and more. And because they are suffering more and
more, you know, you know, "kim anyat kāma-haitukam". "kim anyat kāma-haitukam"
is that what other, what else is there apart from sex which is the goal of life.
Now, Prabhupada makes an interesting point that:

"factually, although the demons say that life is a dream, they are very expert
in enjoying this dream."

What does he mean by this? You know. That the impersonalists, many, many people
fancy impersonalism. They say that, they fancy impersonalism. That means that,
they, you know, they like the idea, oh, there is, you know, just an original
reality in which we all have to become one. And this world is false. But even
these people who consider the world to be false, actually, they are expert in,
they want to enjoy this world. You know. They do not want any regulations. In
their, you know, you know, you know, conduct in this world. You know. Just as
the whole world is an illusion. And you can act in whichever you want. So, we
will act for enjoyment. World, it makes no difference how we act. But, yes, you
know, if this world is false. Then, we have to, want to get more and more
entangled in this world. We shoud want to be, should want to get disentangled
from the world. But they do not do that. So, you know, there was this double
standards in their, you know, philosophy. And their actions. In, this world is
unreal. We want to come out of the unreal. Why are we engaging in desires? And,
you know, wherever we expanding the desires in the activities? That increase our
engagement in their tree. So, is this world a dream? You know. It is a dream.
But in what sense? You know. You know. It is in the sense that it is temporary.
But while it is there, it is real for us. You know. The world is, you know, real
in the sense that the matt..., matter is the energy of Krishna. And the, the,
you know, you know, we are in the material world right now. So, we cannot wish
away either the material world. Nor can we wish away our entanglement with the
material world. There is a process that has to be followed. By which we can get
out of this world. So, you know, dream does not, not, dream consis..., conveys
temporality. Not necessarily unreality. You know. You know. And that
temporality, temporality means temporariness. Temporality applies even for, you
know, you know, the waking stage. You know. What the world that we are
experiencing right now is also temporary. Our bodily condition is also
temporary. You know. We have not been in this body forever. So, you know, when
we say that the world is like a dream. That does not necessarily mean that the
dream is false and so world is false. No. Just like the dream is temporary. And
should not be taken too seriously. This world is temporary. And should not be
taken too seriously. But we have to go beyond this world through a process. Not
just by wishing it away. And that process involves regulating of our conduct.
The demons do not want to regulate their conduct. They just enjoy. Whatever they
want to enjoy. And that is unfortunate. So, now, let us go to the next verse.
You know.

        etāṁ dṛṣṭim avaṣṭabhya
        naṣṭātmāno ’lpa-buddhayaḥ
        prabhavanty ugra-karmāṇaḥ
        kṣayāya jagato ’hitāḥ

So, "etāṁ dṛṣṭim". This "dṛṣṭim". This vision. This understanding. What is that
vis..., you know, understanding? "kim anyat kāma-haitukam". There is no other,
there is no God. And there is no other purpose apart from sex. "etāṁ dṛṣṭim
avaṣṭabhya". Once they have accepted such a vision. "naṣṭātmāno ’lpa-buddhayaḥ".
You know. You know. You know. "naṣṭātmāno". The soul is lost. And
"’lpa-buddhayaḥ". You know. The people are less intelligent. And what happens?
"prabhavanty ugra-karmāṇaḥ". So, they flourish in doing "ugra-karmā".
"ugra-karmā" is terrible activities. You know. Painful activities. You know.
Painful for them. Painful for others. And "kṣayāya jagato ’hitāḥ". So, "jagato
’hitāḥ". "’hitāḥ" is unbeneficial. And, you know, "kṣayāya" is destructive. So,
their overall activities are, you know, you know, at, at best unbeneficial. At
worst, they are devastatingly destructive. You know. You know. So, "etāṁ dṛṣṭim
avaṣṭabhya". You know. You know. So, what happens when people, you know, succumb
to, you know, you know, you know, im..., you know, to atheism and immorality?
They, then, that "etāṁ dṛṣṭim avaṣṭabhya". So, the soul is lost. You know.
"dṛ...", "naṣṭātmāno". So, this "naṣṭā" is in the metaphorical sense. Actually,
the soul can never be destroyed. We have discussed about "ātma-ha". Killers of
the soul. In the Isopanishad. So, the soul cannot be killed. But "naṣṭātmāno".
The soul's spiritual awareness. The soul's spiritual, you know, inclinations are
killed because of excessive material. "naṣṭātmāno ’lpa-buddhayaḥ".
"’lpa-buddhayaḥ" means because are having very less intelligence.
"’lpa-buddhayaḥ". And, you know, what is it, so, they, they may have
intelligence. But their intelligence is, you know, you know, restricted to the
realm of matter. You know. Restricted to the realm of matter. Even the
earthbound are dirtbound. Dirt is insufficiency. Inadequacy. So, the earthbound
are the dirtbound. The earthbound means those whose vision is limited to not
ju..., to earth, earth is it, representive of matter and material world. Those
who think, oh, you know, here, this is where we have to live. And this is where
we have to enjoy. And this is, there is nothing more to do in life. So, the
earthbound are dirtbound. Dirt means shortage. So, what happens is, if we think
that this world is the only place for enjoyment, then, you know, we want to
enjoy as much as possible. But the fundamental paradox in economics is the
paradox for, you know, fundamental problem in economics is the problem for
everyone. That there are limited resources. And there are unlimited desires. So,
how can unlimited desires be satisfied with limited roses..., resources? They
cannot be satisfied. So, that is why, you know, there are "haves" and "have
nots". And the resources of the world are unequally distributed. And the "have
nots", you know, feel dissatisfied. They feel dirtbound. You know. Oh, I want
more. And more. And more. And more. And actually, the "have"s, they have a, have
a lot. But even if they are dirtbound. Because they have greed. And the greed
makes the wealthy needy. Greed makes the wealthy needy. You know. I need more.
Need more. Need, they do not need it. But they think that they need it. And they
feel they cannot live without it. So, in this way, as long as the person has a
materialistic vision of life, no matter how much that person has, still the
feeling will be, I want more. More. More. And one will stay disbe...,
dissatisfied. So, one will do all kinds of terrible work to try to somehow
fulfill the desires. You know. Just cannot fulfill the desires. Because the
desires are so complex. And the desires are so entangling. And the desires are
so insatiable. So, you know, what will happen is that the person will be, you
know, you know, "ugra-karmāṇaḥ". Working fu..., working, you know, furiously.
You know. In a fr..., almost like a frenzy to get more. And more. And more. And
more. And never be satisied. In a modern society is, you know, lives can be
described in three word..., you know, WWS. You know. WWS is world wide
stupidity. What does this WWS? You know. People do. What will they do? You know.
People, they have to work. You know. They ha..., work six hours. Eight, not six
hours. Eight hours. Now, ten hours. Twelwe hours. Fourteen hours. They work. And
then, you know, I mean, they come back after work. What do they do? People spend
their leisure time primarily in two activities. One is, they come home. And
watch TV. And wat..., and they watch TV. What happens? You know. The TV is
filled with, there are many programmes. Programmes also show wealthy people.
Sexually attractive people. And that fills them with lust and greed. Want more.
More. And then, there are so many advertisements. Now, essentially, what is
advertisement? Advertisement is basically telling us, you know, it may say, you
know, take this product. But when it is saying take, take this product,
indirectly, it is saying, that is bad. You know. Your hairstyle is wrong. Your
shoes are wrong. Your dress is wrong. Your watch is wrong. Your cellphone is
wrong. Your house is wrong. And what should you do? Change it. Get a new one.

So, naturally, when people watch, they watch TV. That is the major activities
that they do when they come home. Then, after that, they have to go and shop.
So, shop. Purchase this. Purchase that. Purchase that. Purchase that. You know.
There is a whole addiction called as shopaholism. Shopaholism means addiction
to shopping. People just cannot shop, you know, stop shopping. I want that. I
want that. I want that. I want that. And then, the shopaholics, they just, you
know, spend, they just spend their money like anything. And now, even if it,
today's society is so entangling. If you do not have money, still have credit
card. If you do not have credit card, you know, take further loans. Just spend
money. And people be..., get bound. Now, naturally, if we spend money, then we
have to work more. And when we work more, we feel more tired. And we feel I need
a break. And then, when we come home, we want to watch more TV. And when we
watch more TV, then what happens? We feel, oh, I want to purchase this. And we
go and shop more. And then, it just becomes an entanglement. Work. Watch. Shop.
WWS. World Wide Stupidity. That is how it is. You know. "ugr...",
"ugra-karmāṇaḥ". So, people have to work so, you know, so painfully. You know.
Often. You know. It is "ugra-karmāṇaḥ". "kṣayāya jagato ’hitāḥ". "kṣayāya".
Prabhupada here talks about weapons of mass destruction. So, human intelligence
should be used to do benefit to other living beings. But here, human
intelligence be used to make such weapons. You know. There are amount of
weapons of mass destruction that are there. The whole earth can, you know, or
the population of the earth can be wiped out, actually. You know. So, it is, it,
terrible. And, you know, now, the human creativity to be used for such a
destructive purpose. Human intelligence. It is a great tragedy. So, why are
these weapons happening? Now, we may say that in the past, there were also
weapons of mass destruction. You know. But they were not wea..., they were, they
were powerful weapons like "Brahmāstra" and others. But they were not primarily
weapons of mass destruction. You know. "Brahmāstra" is primarily used to, it was
so precise that it would kill the embryo in the womb without killing even the
mother. So, it was a certainly app..., you know, weapon of powerful
destruction. But it was not a weapon of mass destruction. Now, mass destruction
could happen if the weapon is, you know, if say, as one "Brahmāstra" and to,
another "Brahmāstra" comes together. And improperly, it comes together. That can
create a problem. That is why Arjuna was anxious when "Aśvatthāmā" had a
"Brahmāstra". And it was about to be deployed. So, very expertly, both had to be
withdrawn. That can be done. So, today's weapons are weapons of indiscriminate
destruction. You know. Indiscriminate. Anyone and everyone may be destroyed. And
terrorism which is there today, terrorism is the opposite of ksatriya mentality.
Ksatriyas, actually, you know, they will fight with their opponents who are
equal. Who are equipped. And who are engaged. Who are alert. So, today, the, you
know, terrorists attack people who are not equal. You know. That they attack
civilians. They are not equipped. So, they do not have any weapons. They are not
engaged, also. They are not alert. You know. In the civil..., you know, I mean,
the civilians are, civilians are just going along. Maybe in a shopping mall. Or
in a theater. Or in a co..., commercial complex. Business office. And suddenly,
the machine gun, with machine guns, people attack. Or throw bombs. Or, you know,
send an airplanes into the towers. So, this is, you know, all horrible. So,
"ugra-karmāṇaḥ". So, of course, terrorism is a complex issue, you know, in
general. But the point is, you know, there have always been people throughout
history who were, you know, you know, who were having destructive mindsets.

But in Kali Yuga, these people with destructive mindsets have been en..., en..,
given such, have the chan..., you know, ha..., it is, you know, they have got
access or they may get access to such horrible, horribly destructive weapons.
That by the clicking of one button, by some pervert, you know, thousands of
people can die. Which is the great misfortune. So, "kṣayāya jagato ’hitāḥ".
Weapons of mass destruction. And now, weapons of mass destruction are so, they
are so destructive that they are not even destruct..., destroyable easily. That
means they can cause destruction. But if we decide we do not want them. We want
to destroy them. Often, it is difficult to destroy them, also. Because
sometimes, you know, scientists have to decide what to do. Some, you know, with
these, we decide that we do not want these weapons. So, if we bury them under
the ground, then it will, you know, you know, is, it will pollu..., poison the
soil. If we burn them, it will poison the atmosphere. If we throw it in the
ocean, then, you know, you know, it will poison the water, only. And there are
fish in that. And we will not be able to eat the fish. The aquatic life, you
know, ecosystem will get disrupted. So, there are some proposals now that, you
know, these weapons of mass destruction, you know, they should be put in a
rocket. On, in a, on top of a rocket and they should be just thrown out in the
outer space. So, you know, we are not, we are not satisfied with polluting the
earth. Pollute outer space now. Send the pollution in outer space now. Now, of
course, there are devatas. You know. Tuck. They will send it down again. Just
like "Trishanku" was sent down from above. They will be sent down over here. So,
anyway, you know, I am just state..., speaking this a lighter way. The point
here is that, you know, you know, "kṣayāya jagato ’hitāḥ". So, Prabhupada also
talks about these weapons of mass destruction. So, the demoniac create such
things. So, human intelligence should be used to do good to others. Not harm to
others. And unfortunately, the best human intelligence today is being used for
such, you know, harmful things. Now, we cannot blame science entirely for this.
You know. At the start of the Second World War, you know, technology came really
to big play. Because from, in the First World War, airplanes were not so much
there. So, trench warfare was there. Both the armies would, you know, dig, you
know, trenches. And stay. You know. Deadlocked in front of each other. But once
the planes came in, the trenches would bec..., transform into graves. You know.
Under the ground. We will put you permanently under the ground. With a bomb from
above. So, technology came into a big play in Second World War. So, what
happened, there were many scientists, principle scientists, they said, we cannot
use our intelligence to, you know, kill, to wea..., make weapons, we will kill
our fellow human beings. So, they resigned. But then, there are other people.
You know. Money rules. You know. Money, ultimately, money is what matters for
most people. So, other people came up. And took up the rule. And, you know, you
know, Einstein himself bitterly regretted the, you know, you know, the letter
that he sent to president Eisenhower saying that, you know, Japan, you know,
that Germany may be having weapon, you know, nuclear weapons. So, America should
develop the nuclear weapons. Eventually, when Japan was bombed. And the extent
of destruction that happened, you know, after that, that was one of the biggest
regrets of Einstein's life. So, it is very sadly, you know, sadly symbolic that
the, you know, greatest insight of, that the best insight. Or the best brain,
best scientific brain of the scientific, of the 20th century led to the worst
destruction. The best, you know, the Einstein is widely considered to be the
best brain of the 20th century. At least, from the material perspective. And his
best insight was, 'e' is equal to double mc square. 'e' is equal to mc square.
The interchangability of matter and energy. And what that lead to, that was the
basis by which the, you know, nuclear bomb was de..., the atom bomb was
developed. And that led to one of the worst man-made destructions. So, it is
unfortunate. So, so, there will always be people with destructive mentality. But
today, those people can have such terrible power that they can wreak havoc
everywhere. So, "kṣayāya jagato ’hitāḥ". So, Srila Prabhupada writes, for also
talks about animal killing, also, such people, brutalistic people, they "are
considered to be advancement of human civilization,"

"Such materialistic inventions are considered to be advancement of human
civilization, but the result is that people grow more and more violent and more
and more cruel, cruel to animals and cruel to other human beings.

You know. So, "pāruṣyam". With harshness. The cruelty is seen. Then:

        kāmam āśritya duṣpūraṁ
        dambha-māna-madānvitāḥ
        mohād gṛhītvāsad-grāhān
        pravartante ’śuci-vratāḥ

So, "kāmam āśritya". So, "kāmam" is there in everyone. But here, what is
happening, they are taking "āśrayaḥ" of "kāmam". So, the, so, "kāmam" becomes
their whole, you know, you know, whole, whole and soul of life. You know.
Instead taking "āśrayaḥ" of Krishna, they take shelter of, "āśrayaḥ" of "kāmam".
What does it mean to take "āśrayaḥ" of "kāmam"? You know. People have this idea
there is no problem so big that sex cannot solve it. The idea was just, whatever
is the problem, just have sex. The problem will get solved. You know. Forget
it all. You know. It does not get solved. I just gets postponed. And it, often,
it becomes, not just postponed. It becomes aggravated further. You know. So,
because often se..., you know, to get pleasure through sex, if one wants to keep
getting pleasure, then one has to increase the, you know, co..., threshold
level. You know. Do more and more different kinds of sex. And, you know, with
more partners. And then, you know, you know, that is why this "kāmam āśritya
duṣpūraṁ". "duṣpūraṁ". That which can never be satisfied. So, everybody has
lust. And there is a civilised way in which that lust can be en..., you know,
you know, lust can be engaged. And purified. That is through marriage. Dharma,
artha, kama, moksha was the progression in Vedic cucture. And marriage has been
there in other cultures, also. But here, "kāmam āśritya duṣpūraṁ". They
sheltic..., shelter of kama. They think that, yes, you know, you know, through
kama, you know, we will solve our problems. Actually, that devotees understand
there is no problem so big that Krishna cannot solve it. But the, you know, you
know, you know, the Ved..., the peo..., these demoniac godless people think that
there is no problem that, you know, sex cannot solve. So, just, you know, enjoy.
"dambha-māna-madānvitāḥ". So, that is "kāmam āśritya duṣpūraṁ". This kind of,
you know, devotion to "kāmam". You know. Taking shelter of "kāmam". That is, you
know, disastrous. You know. So, there are so many diseases. And so many
divor..., divorces. And so many sexual crimes that happen because of, you know,
uncontrolled lust. And people think that fulfilling lust is the goal of life.
So, "dambha-māna-madānvitāḥ". That they are filled with arrogance. And pride.
You know. You know. You know. And prestige. So, you know, you know, our acharyas
talk about se..., for, gross sex. And subtle sex. Subtle sex is the desire for
honor. And "mohād gṛhītvāsad-grāhān". "mohāt". With, because of illusion, what
happens? "gṛhītvā". They accept "āsad-grāhān". They accept that which is "asat".
That which is temporary. They accept it. And they think this is real. This is
true, this is et..., almost eternal. You know. If all the movies, they often end
with "and they lived happily forever". So, "they lived happily forever" is a
white light. And it is exactly opposite of "duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam". Happily.
"duḥkhālayam". And forever. "aśāśvatam". So, it is a white light. But people
accept it. And people want to believe it. Yes. This is how it will be. This is,
you know, how we will enjoy. "mohād gṛhītvāsad-grāhān". That they accept it as
true. And then, "pravartante ’śuci-vratāḥ". "pravartante". "pravartante" means
they engage in. In, what do they engage in? "’śuci-vratāḥ". "’śuci-vratāḥ" is
unclean vows. So, "Baladeva Vidyabhushana" explains that, you know, this can
refer to, the, you know, left-handed tantra. You know. The left-handed tant...,
the, you know, left-handed tantra is where people engage in, you know, sex. In
all sort of indiscriminate ways. And they think that sex is a means to spiritual
advancement. And, you know, they do black magic. And all those things like that.
So, that, it, when they, you know, you know, you know, use this, you know, this
kind of, they do inauspicious activities. And they do it with determination.
Make a "vratāḥ" of it. "’śuci-vratāḥ". That is, you know, you know, that is, you
know, disastrous. So, "’śuci-vratāḥ". You know. People have the idea that, you
know, you know, there i..., there is, you know, w..., with, with this "Guinness"
book of "World Records". So, it is there. Where they have put, w..., different
kinds of records. So, what kind of records do they have? You know. Ma..., all
different kinds of records. So, one record is, say, you know, you know, there
are couples who kiss each other. And how long can you kiss? How long can you
just keep your lap..., lips next to each other's lips? So, the record was that
some couple in Thailand kept kissing each other for 47 hours. Now, even from the
point of view of, you know, basic human hygiene. You know. The mouth secretes
saliva. And there is no pleasure over there. Just, you know, sticking the mouth
together for ty..., 47 hours. But just for the sake of a record. And then, all
the newspapers said it was a big splash in the newspapers. So, this is
"’śuci-vratāḥ".

So, actually, you know, doing that which is completely perverse. So, you know,
you know, you know, you know, devou..., you know, this sort of things happen
because people have just no, you know, it all starts with, you know, "jan...":

        pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
        janā na vidur āsurāḥ

People have no reference point for understanding what life is meant for. And how
life is to be lived. So, there are so many, you know, so many e..., examples of
"’śuci-vratāḥ". We will not go into the specifics. But, you know, when people do
not have, you know, reference point to scriptures. Then, you know, this is what
happen. You know. There was some model in, you know, model in India. So, when
India has, you know, the world cup was there. So, at the time of India's world
cup finals, the model said that, you know, if India wins, then for the Indian
national team's, you know, pleasure, I will strip myself completely. And then,
that became a big headline in newspapers. And now, he, some, what happens? When
people do not have a bal..., moral balance, mor..., moral reference, then, you
know, then they become imbalanced. So, you know, there i..., there i..., there,
the, against, to fight, you know, you know, violence against animals, you know,
cruelty against animals in slaughterhouses and other places, there is an
organisation called "PETA". Which does a lot of good work. People fo..., ethical
treatment of animals. But they go overboard in their devotion to animals. And in
order to attract advertisements, or to get, attract publicity for their cause,
they often have women exhibiting their bodies. And then, they will have pictures
where they have parts of women. And then, they will show some animal. And they
show the parts of, you know, animals, also. And they say, oh, just as I have
bodily parts. The animals also have bodily parts. Just as you will not eat me,
do not eat the animal, also. And they expose the female form. And those women
who expose their bodies for the cause of animals, they are considered, oh, you
are so selfless. Now, it is not selfless. It is braveless. So, anyway, what
happened was, you know, the, you know, you know, when this woman, when this
model said that I will strip for the Indian cricketers. So, this, some PETA
people in India said that, you know, why, those cricketers are so filthy reach.
Why are you stripping for them? If you want to strip, strip for the poor
animals. You know. Strip for the cause of protecting animals. So, there is just
no more reference reft for people to decide what is right. And what is wrong.
"’śuci-vratāḥ". "’śuci-vratāḥ". So, peo..., all, this "mohād gṛhītvāsad-grāhān".
So, you know, you know, Krishna will c..., now further in the next verse it
describe, how sense grat..., you know, gratification and wealth. These are the
primary infatuations of the mat..., you know, demoniac people. That we will
discuss in the next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
