Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jkf3N5Eacy0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_126_-_Bhagavad_Gita_14.19-14.27_-_Transcending_the_modes_-_the_inner_characteristics%2C_outer_behavior_and_the_process_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=s5-r4XNxPxN6SR77Ut_RUrngP1Z8MTU0ODQ4OTcwM0AxNTQ4NDAzMzAz&event=video_description&v=jkf3N5Eacy0

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the, you know, 14th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita discussing the last
section. Let us look at the sections of the Gita. 14th Chapter. You know. You
know. So, how it, the soul is conditioned by the modes is verses 1 to 13. Verses
14 to 18 is effect of conditioning by the modes. And verses 19 to 27 talks about
transcending the modes. So, we are just looking, we have looked at verse 19.
Which sa..., you know, said how a person has to understand that, you know, you
know, there is a doer beyond nature. And one, you know, then one can go beyond
the modes. So, now, Krishna is going to describe, in the next verse, a further
element in this. So, let us look at 14.20.

        guṇān etān atītya trīn
        dehī deha-samudbhavān
        janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair
        vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute

You know. You know. You know. "guṇān etān". You know. So, "guṇān etān". All
these modes, "atītya trīn". "atītya" means to go beyond. "trīn" is three. When
one goes beyond the three modes:

        guṇān etān atītya trīn
        dehī deha-samudbhavān

"dehī". You know. You know. You know. The person who is in the body,
"deha-samudbhavān". So, that which is born with the body.
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair". So, Krishna has talked about
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-". So, Krishna refers back to that by talking about
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā" over here. Basically, them, it refers to the miseries of
material existence. You know. The, so, these miseries are born with the body.
"dehī deha-samudbhavān". That with the body, these miseries come. And
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair". The miseries of, you know, birth. Old age. And
death. "vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute". One becomes liberated from them. And one attains
eternity. "vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute". You know. You know. You know. Now, Krishna is
telling, basically, over here that, you know, when, when one goes beyond the
three modes, then one goes beyond the miseries which are, of birth. Old age. And
death. You know. Death. That are, you know, born with the body. That appear with
the body. And one attains, you know, immortality. One attains liberated. And
attains immortality. "vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute". So, Krishna has used the word
"’mṛtam aśnute". Or similar words, you know, several times in the Bhagavad Gita.
In the Second Chapter, in 2.50, Krishna has said:

        yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete
        puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha
        sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ
        so ’mṛtatvāya kalpate

So, Krishna said, one who stays equipoised in happiness and distress, such a
person attains immortality. You know. So, that is "’mṛtam-tattva". Now, you
know, specifically, "’mṛtam aśnute". You know. So, Krishna has used this in
13.13. When He talks about, you know:

        jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi
        yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute
        anādi mat-paraṁ brahma
        na sat tan nāsad ucyate

So, "jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi". That I will explain the "jñeyaṁ" to you. And
by knowing this "jñeyaṁ", that, what will happen? You know. "yaj jñātvāmṛtam
aśnute". You will attain "amṛtam". You will attain immortality. So, Krishna has
used this word "’mṛtam aśnute" several times. And, you know, you know, the same
phrase "’mṛtam aśnute" comes also, has come also in the Isopanishad. You know.

        avidyayā mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā
        vidyayāmṛtam aśnute 

So:

        vidyāṁ cāvidyāṁ ca yas
        tad vedobhayaḿ saha

In the Isopanishad, when Krishna, you know, when the Isopanishad talks about
"vidyām". And "avidyām". Verses 9, 10, and 11. So, there, verse 11 says that
both "vidyām" and "avidyām" should be cultivated by knowledge of "avidyām", one
goes beyond material things. Beyond material existence. And by knowledge of
"vidyām", one attains immortality. So, in this way, "vidyayāmṛtam aśnute". So,
"amṛtam". So, "amṛtam" does not necessarily, just referred, used, referred to
nectar. The word "amṛtam" speficically, you know, you know, you know, in many,
many, you know, food products may have the word "amṛtam" attached to it. You
know. "amṛtam" butter. "amṛtam" medicine. "amṛtam" this. "amṛtam" that. But
actually, you know, none of that is "amṛtam". None of that can ma..., miss, the,
make one immortal. So, often, the word, wo..., "amṛtam" is also used not just in
terms, in the sense of immortality. It is also used in the sense of something
which is delicious. So, you know, you know, you know, just like in, we often use
the word nectar. So, the idea of nectar is something which is delicious. And
something which also prolongs life. So, "amṛtam" is nectar. But when Krishna is
talking here about, you know, "’mṛtam aśnute". He is talking not so much in
terms of the heavenly nectar which tastes delicious. That is one part of it.
That, you know, this is, you know, delicious. It is relishable. But more
importantly is that it is transcendental. That it is eternal. It is that, it is
basically referring to eternity. The idea is that, you know, the, you know, you
know, the relationship between the "amṛtam". The drink and "amṛtam". And the
concept "amṛtam". Concept of "amṛtam" is eternality. Eternity. Immortality. Is
that this immortality is supposed to lead to that immortality. That means, by
drinking the nectar, one attains the supreme immortality. Now, does that happen?
May or may not happen. That will vary. Depending on person to person. But the
important point is, you know, you know, that is what is the goal. So, to attain
immortality. Now, how does one attain immortality? By the, you know, by
realising one's eternal nature. So, we know that, actually, there is the
heavenly svarga. The heavenly svarga. The, the heavenly nectar. The svargi
"amṛtam" does not actually lead to immortality. It simply prolongs life. You
know. You know. When the churning, the milk ocean is done to get the nectar,
that nectar does not actually grant immortality. We have discussed about,
earlier about various levels. So, you know, "amṛa" is not the same as "mṛtya".
So, there is "mṛtya". There is "amṛa". There is chiran jiva. And there is nitya.
We have discussed this earlier. You know. So, "amṛa tva", you know, is just a
very long lifetime like the devatas have as compared to what we human beings
have. But anyway, that is not what is talked about over here. Here, it is the,
co..., understanding of, you know, a state of, state beyond death. A state
beyond destruction. So, how will one und..., attain that? When one goes
beyond, one transcends the modes. So, Krishna is telling over here that, you
know, transcend the modes. Then, one will attain immortality. You know. You
know. So, that means, the modes are what? Keep us in ma..., ma..., ma..., keep
us bound to material existence. And going beyond the modes liberates us from
material existence. So, "guṇān etān atītya trīn". By going beyond these modes,
one will attain immortality. And Krishna has earlier also used, the, talked
about, now, Krishna has talked about the miseries several times. You know. He
has talked about, you know, you know, the, you know, "janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-".
Twenty items of jnana. In 13.8-12. And then, after that, He has also talked
about, you know, it in, you know:

        jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya
        mām āśritya yatanti ye
        te brahma tad viduḥ kṛtsnam
        adhyātmaṁ karma cākhilam

In 7.29, Krishna has talked about "jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya". That those who want,
you know, freedom. Those who want liberation from old age and, you know, death.
So, you know, these, the two, you know, Krishna basically is referring to the
miseries of material existence. So, sometimes, it may refer to them, in two,
sometimes, it may refer to them in three. And sometimes in four. So, in 7.29,
He refers to three. Two. "jarā" and "maraṇa". Old age and death. Here, He says,
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-". So, you know, "janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair". Rather.
not "vyādhi-" is not here. Here, the word "vyādhi-" does not come.
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-" comes in 13.8 to 12. And then,
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair". So, basically, this is re..., you know, this has
sometimes this cycle. "janma-mṛtyu" cycle, it says. The cycle of birth and
death. Yes. Within that, there is cycle of old age, also. There is the cycle of
disease, also. So, there, it may be refer..., you know, the, it is a way to
offer referring to it. Sometimes, may use two di..., two may be used to, refer,
two remain, you know, two miseries may be referred to. Or three miseries may be
referred to. Or four miseries may be referred to. Basic point is that there is a
miseries of material existence. And "vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute". You know. You know.
Now, after describing this, you know, you know, Krishna has more or less, you
know, you know, completed His discussion. You know. So, reason, or remember that
the 14th Chapter did not start, you know, with, you know, any specific question
of, you know, you know, Krishna. Of Arjuna. You know. Krishna has completed
speaking in the Thirt..., Fifteen, in, in the 13th Chapter about how, if one
understands the difference between "kṣetraṁ" and "kṣetra-jñam". Then, and one
attains, understand the process of, you know, you know, you know, liberation.
From it through "jñāna-cakṣu". Then, one will attain, one will go beyond matter.
One will go, one will attain the supreme destination. So, there, you know, you
know, you know, what binds the "kṣetraṁ" to the "kṣetra-jñam". What binds the
soul to the body, you know, the body and the soul together is the modes. Krishna
has talked about them in 13.22. In, you know, you know, you know:

        puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi
        bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān
        kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya
        sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

"guṇa-saṅgo ’sya". So, because of contact with the modes. Attachment to the
modes. Association with the modes. So, that, what are those "guṇā"s? How do they
bind? So, Krishna speaks of His own impetus. To explain the concepts more
clearly to Arjuna. So, in the 14th Chapter, at the beginning, Arjuna does not
ask a question. But here, Arjuna will ask a question now. You know. You know.
Krishna has analysed the modes. He has talked about the three modes. And then,
he has talked about the state beyond the three modes. Now, Arjuna will ask
specifically how can one transcend the three modes? And attain the destination
that is beyond the modes? So:

        arjuna uvāca

        kair liṅgais trīn guṇān etān
        atīto bhavati prabho
        kim-ācāraḥ kathaṁ caitāṁs
        trīn guṇān ativartate

"kair liṅgais". "kaiḥ", "liṅgaiḥ" is means, what other characteristics. The
"liṅgaiḥ" means characteristics. So, the, you know, word "liṅgaiḥ" also means
gender. But basically, gender is also bodily characteristic. You know. When a
baby is born, then by, then, you know, what, then by its bodily characteristics,
the gender is known. You know. So, basically, "liṅgaiḥ" can mean gender.
"liṅgaiḥ" can also mean characteristic. You know. So, "kair liṅgais". What other
characteristics? "trīn guṇān etān". "trīn guṇān etān". You know. You know. That
these three "guṇā", the three modes are there. "atīto bhavati prabho". "atīto"
means when, you know, somebody, how, how can, you know, what, what are the
characteristics of one who has transcended the modes? "kim-ācāraḥ". "kim-ācāraḥ"
means, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
what is the behavior? So, first, more or less refers to, the "liṅgaiḥ" refers to
the internal characteristic. "ācāraḥ" refers to the external characteristic.
That is the behavior. And:

        kim-ācāraḥ kathaṁ caitāṁs
        trīn guṇān ativartate

And how can one go beyond the three modes? "kathaṁ". You know. You know. You
know. You know. You know. So, how can one go beyond the modes? You know. That is
by, you know, you know, you know, the pra..., you now, that Krishna will answer
that is by the practice of devotional service. So, basically, there are three
questions over here. You know. The first question is "kair liṅgais". You know.
You know. You know. You know. "kair liṅgais" means what are the
characteristics? That refers to more or less internal characteristics. That will
be answered in verse 22. And 23. Then, you know, you know, you know, 24-25 will
answer "kim-ācāraḥ". And, you know, you know, how are the behavior of such a
person? Then, 25 will answer, you know, sorry, sorry, 26 will answer "kathaṁ
caitāṁs". How can one transcend the modes? You know. You know. Arjuna's question
is natural. You know. You know. Anythin decade is that Arjuna is seriously
contemplating what Krishna is speaking. You know. When a student hears about,
when a small child hears, that, ok, you know, so and so forth, and you know, he
scored such very good marks in the exam. And he topped in that exam. And he, you
know, and became this. This. This. Attained all these laurels. Then, the
question naturally comes up, ok, if that has happened, then how did the person
do it? How did the person attain so many marks? How did the person get so much
benefit? You know. You know. So, the answer for that is, by the, you know,
practice of, you know, you know, you know, by the practice of, you know, you
know, by the practice of studying regularly. In an intelligent, disciplined,
dedicated way. You know. That person attained it. So, similarly, how did one
attain this? By the practice of, you know, by certain practices. Normally, you
know, when we hear about certain heroes. Certain successes. Certain, you know,
you know, models of excellence. Then, naturally, the thought comes in our mind.
Maybe, I can become like that. So, Krishna has heard about, Krishna has spoken
to Arjuna about transcending the three modes. Naturally, Arjuna asks, ok, you
know, you know, you know, can, you know, you know, how, can I transcend the
modes? How do I know who has transcended the modes? And implied in the, idea
also that, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, ok, who,
if Arjuna is in the battlefield. Can Arjuna on the battlefield transcend the
modes? Is that possible? So, that is, all these questions are, you know, there.
And they basically indicate that Arjuna is seriously contemplating whatever He
is speaking. That is why Prabhupada says:

"Arjuna’s questions are very appropriate."

It is an interesting adjective. Appropriate. The appropriate means relevant.
Intelligent. You know. And, you know, important. So, you know, you know, you
know, you know, you know, they are appropriate questions. You know. Now, let us
see what is Krishna's answer. So, Prabhupada com..., combines four verses over
here. In his, in, in, and gives one purport to those four verses. So, the, as I
mentioned, 22 and 23 are, are, are referring, answering the question, "kair
liṅgais". And 24 and 25 are answering "kim-ācāraḥ". So, let us look at these
verses. F..., one by one.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        prakāśaṁ ca pravṛttiṁ ca
        moham eva ca pāṇḍava
        na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni
        na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati

You know. You know. So, prakāśaṁ ca pravṛttiṁ ca". "prakā". So, now, what is
Krishna referring to over here? You know. "prakāśaṁ", as we have discussed
earlier, is the characteristic of the mode of goodness. You know. You know. You
know. You know. Krishna has, you know, used this, you know, to refer to, you
know, you know, you know, the mode, the mode of goodness in 14.11:

        sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin
        prakāśa upajāyate

So, you know, "prakāśa" is the characteristic of mode, goodness. Then:

        lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ

In 14.12, Krishna has said "pravṛttir ārambhaḥ". "pravṛttir" is action. Act...,
passionate action according to one's own inclinations. "prav...", passion, that
action. That is "pravṛttir". You know. You know. "prakāśaṁ ca pravṛttiṁ ca". And
"moham eva ca pāṇḍava". "moham eva ca". "moham eva ca" means, there is illusion,
also. So, now, illusion, you know, is the characteristic of the mode of
ignorance. In 14.13, Krishna has said "aprakāśo ’pravṛttiś ca". "moham eva ca
pāṇḍava". So, you know, so, there, also, the word was, "moha" was there.
"aprakāśaḥ". "’pravṛ". "aprakāśo ’pravṛttiś". So, no "prakāśaḥ". No "pravṛttiḥ".
But "moha" is there. So, here, Krishna is giving all three. You know. So, the,
the that means He is saying that these three are the characteristic of the three
modes. And He is using one-one word to represent each of the modes. That when
all these come:

        prakāśaṁ ca pravṛttiṁ ca
        moham eva ca pāṇḍava

When any of these emotions come. When we feel illuminated. When we feel
passionate. You know Hyperactive. And do this. Do this. Do this. And then,
"moham". What anyone has to do. Just do not bother about all these things. When
all this happens, you know, "na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni". You know. You know. That
when this happens, one does not resent. And "na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati". Let me,
when it comes, one does not resent it. When it goes, one does not crave for it.

        na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni
        na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati

You know. In this way, when one lives, then:

        udāsīna-vad āsīno
        guṇair yo na vicālyate

"udāsīna-vad āsīno". You know. How is one situated? "udāsīna". Now, it is
interesting. Krishna has used almost the same phrase, you know, to, you know, to
refer to his own situation. You know. You know. He has said that "udāsīna-vad
āsīno". In, you know, you know, 9.9. You know:

        na ca māṁ tāni karmāṇi
        nibadhnanti dhanañ-jaya 
        udāsīna-vad āsīnam
        asaktaṁ teṣu karmasu

He says "udāsīna-vad āsīnam", That, actually, one is situated detached. As if
detached. "udāsīna". "guṇair yo na vicālyate". You know. You know. You know. So,
Krishna has said that means, just as the Supersoul is situated li..., detached,
similarly, the soul becomes situated detached. "udāsīna-vad āsīnam". You know.
You know. You know. You know. So, when one is situated like this. "udāsīna-vad
āsīnam". Then, what happens? You know. Actually, when one is situated thus:

        na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni
        na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati

"na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni". That, that means, you know, you know, when one
observes. But one does not get excited by it. One understand, ok, now, I am,
you know, now, the mode of passion is coming. Now, the mode of ignorance is
coming. One understands. But one does not get excited by it. One does not get
agitated by it. One neither craves for it. Nor laments about it. That means
basically, one has to, observes. So, here, Krishna is talking about a very
important concept. The learning to become "guṇaiḥ ". You know. Become observers
of our own thoughts. You know. Now, we, by default, observe the world around
us. We may not con..., con..., contemplate on what we observe. But we observe.
If we are sitting in a room. You know. If a door opens. And somebody come...,
Naturally, we see, who is coming in. The door opens, some..., somebody goes
over, see who went out. If, so, naturally, we observe this. So, just as we
observe the outer world around us, you know, the Bhagavad Gita is telling us
over here. Becau..., let, to observe the inner world. Now, what do we mean by
the inner world? We have discussed earlier, the inner world means that the
mental world. You know. You know. We, generally, people think inside us,
everything is spiritual. No. It, there, it, the inner, there is men..., there is
mental. And then, there is spiritual. So, you know, you know, you know, what is
spiritual is not necessarily, what..., whatever, whatever is internal is not
necessarily spiritual. You know. Whatever is internal may be, also be material.
And that is why, for, to understand the difference, you know, you know, you
know, you know, we have to become observers. So, that means, sometimes, at, when
our thoughts also come in. Lu..., lust comes in. When greed comes in. When anger
comes in. We have to recognise that these are not our thoughts. In the sense that
they are, they are within us. So, we can say they are mine. But no. Not
necessarily. You know. It is, it is not that, you know, everybody who i..., is
in our house is ours. There may be strangers there. There may be trespassers
there. There may be thieves there. So, it, it is, just because somebody is
present in our house does not make that person, you know, you know, our family
member. That does not person, that may, does not make that person belong to our
house. Similarly, it is not that every thought that is present inside us is our
thought. It is present inside us. But it is not our thought. So, when we
understand that, I, as a soul, am different from the body. Then, that
understanding of the soul being different from the body enables us to observe
dispassionately. When we observe dispassionately, you know, then by that
dispassionate observation, we can learn. We can see. Ok. This person is coming
in. This person is going out. Ok, we observe. So, similarly, ok, this thought
came in. This thought went out. So, it is only, when we get excited about
thoughts. Say, when lust comes in. It is only when we get excited about lust,
that lust gains some control over us. I..., as Krishna has used the world
earlier, "sa", "na kāma-kāmī". "kāma-kāmī" means one who is a desirer of
desires. So, that means desires may come in, you know, since something which,
you know, so, desires may come in means something which can arouse our desires.
That sort of thoughts come in. Temptations comes in. But then, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know, we do not have to succumb to them. We can
say no to them. You know. And when we say no to them, then they have to go. They
cannot stay there for very long. You know. You know. That is how it is.

        udāsīna-vad āsīno
        guṇair yo na vicālyate
        guṇā vartanta ity evaṁ
        yo ’vatiṣṭhati neṅgate

"guṇā vartanta ity evaṁ". Understand that these are the modes. "yo ’vatiṣṭhati
neṅgate". One understands that, "’vatiṣṭhati". One does not get oneself get
shaken. Why? You know. Because one knows that these are the modes. This is not
the real transcendental per..., these are not my actual thoughts. These are
simply the intrusions of the modes. The intrusions of the modes. And, you know,
you know, they cannot stay for very long with me. You know. They, they will just
go off. You know. So, therefore, what shoud I do? I should just observe them.
And let them go. So, when they go away like that over a period of time, you
know, they will stop visiting. So, basically, the idea is, become detached
observers. Now, is it possible, we may say, when my thoughts come, can, how can
I observe my thoughts? Actually, it is possible. The way to observe our
thoughts is, you know, by cultivating some goodness. You know. In passion, we
are so excited that we cannot ob..., we are just too caught up in the external
world. Yeah. I am here. I am there. I am going here. I am going there. So, you
know, even in the external world, actually, what we observe is what excites and
enjoy..., what, what, what promises enjoyment. We do not observe the external
world, also, fully. But when we come to goodness, we start observing the
external world more. You know. Start observing. Oh, this is like this. This is
like this. This is like this. And then, we start learning based on that. You
know. You know. You know. You know. You know. We start learning means, we start
observing. We start, you know, realising. Oh, this like this. This is like this.
And that is how we move forward in our spiritual life. So, just as, we can
observe our external world, we can train ourselves to observe externally. So,
similarly, we can train ourselves to observe internally. And by such
observation, we identify, you know, which thoughts are actually meant to be, you
know, which are the, which thoughts are actually intruders. You know. Which
would be, you know, just sho..., you know, you know, neglected. And which
thoughts are actually our own thoughts. Which need to be cultivated and
nourished. When we understand this difference, then based on that, we move
forward in our spiritual life. You know. So, you know, now, Krishna has said
that, in this way, observe. You know. In general, it may not be very easy to
observe our thoughts. But, you know, you know, we can do it in many ways. One of
the ways is by, say, writing our own journal. So, when we start writing our
journal, you know, when we say, did something, you know, you know, which is
undesirable. You know. We got angry with someone. Or we succumb to any anartha
in a way that did, we did not want to succumb to. Then, afterwards, we can say,
ok, what was my thought process? What was? You know. You know. It is one thing
to just beat ourselves down saying, you know, I am so fallen. I am this. I am so
conditioned. I am this. I am that. You know. That sort of, you know, it is not
meant to, you know, you know, that does not serve any purpose. See, the purpose
of, you know, spiritual standards is not to beat us down. You know. It i..., the
purpose of, the purpose of, the principles of bhakti is to give us wings to fly.
It is not to burden us down with guilt. It is not to weigh us down. You know.
You know. You know. You know. Why? What? So, you know, what is meant to be the
wings are also a weight. You know. The, you know, you know, see, if a person
does not have wings. And then, that person suddenly, you know, we are put, you
know, given two extra wings. Now, I can say, oh, these wings. They are such a
big weight. And to carry my own body. And I have got some additional weight to
carry with me. But the purpose of the wings is not to add to the weight. If we
know how to use the wings, then the wings will enable us to fly. So, the wings,
actually, once we start flying, then, you know, the, they are a blessing. They
are not at all a burden. You know. You know. You know. Without the wings, in
fact, you know, the whole body becomes a burden. You know. You know. So,
whereas, you know, when tier wings were cut off, then your tier fell of. Could
not fly. So, the wing, the wings are not a weight. Wings enable us to, you know,
fly around whatever be the remaining body of the weight. You know.

Similarly, the scriptural principles are not meant to burden us down by adding
weight to, to our, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, to our
life. But it is, by, by, you know, bur..., by adding and additional weight to.
And burdening us. They are actually meant to give us wings by which we can fly.
You know. When we fly higher and higher to spiritual levels of consciusness.
That is what the wings are meant for. You know. You know. You know. You know.
So, you know, when we contemplate, you know, you know, by contemplation, we will
understand, ok, at this time, I thought like this. I thought like that. So, ok,
this, what was? This thought was wrong. How did I succumb? You know. Ok. First,
this temp..., thought came. And this temptation came. Then, this happened. And
this happened. And then, you know, we will look at the fall down sequence. Then,
I say, you know, ok, this was what I did wrong. At this time, when this thought
came, I could have do..., chosen this reaction. Instead of choosing this
reaction, I chose this reaction. Ok. This is where I can change. Now, we may
say, oh, I know. I should not have done it. Yes. We all know I should not have
done it. But I did it. But we have to see, what, you know, that just knowing
that I should not have done it. And beating ourselves of not of much use. You
know. What were the thoughts that went through our mind because of which we said
yes to that which we would have said no? We should have said no? You know. So,
that to analyse is what Krishna is talking about over here. Becoming observers.
So, even if we cannot become observers. While the thoughts are coming. We can at
least become observers later. Ok. What was I thinking at that time? Then, I, ok,
this thought came. And then, then, came. Then, we can, you know, actually sketch
the mind deceiving us. You know. We know, often know, you know, from the
scriptures that the mind cheats us. But we do not know how exactly the mind
cheats us. We do not know how exactly the mind deludes us. To know how the mind
deludes us, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, we need to be able
to recognise. You know. That the mind is our, not our enemy. That the mind is
right there with us. The mind normally acts as our enemy. The mind can act as
our friend when it has become purify..., it becomes purified. But, you know, you
know, friend or enemy, the mind is there. And the mind, you know, we have to
deal with it. We cannot wish the mind away. So, by becoming more discerning. By
becoming more carefully, can critically observer, you know, obser...,
observational. Ok. What is happening? What am I actually doing? We can learn.
And we can move forward in our spiritual life that way. You know. So, one by one
by one, we take steps forward. So, how do we become internal observers? If not
in action, then in retrospection. Ok. What, what, at that time, what happened?
How did I think? And as gradually, as we train ourselves, then not only in
retrospection, in action, also, we will be able to think. So, for example, I am
speaking right now. You know. So, when I am speaking, I am, you know, conscious
of what I am speaking. At the same time, at a subconscious level, I am also
thinking about, you know, you know, what are the next things that I am going to
speak. So, I know this general pattern that I am going to speak based on the,
you know, flow of the Gita's chapters. So, we can have this, also. That means we
can be, you know, you know, we can be doing multitasking internally. Not
necessarily in terms of doing multiple things at one moment. At one moment, we
may do one thing. But while we are doing one action, we can al..., we can also
be aware of other things. Which we are. All the time. You know. For example,
right now, if the fan is on overhead, we are aware of that. Even when we are
hearing things. So, we are also aware that, ok, the chair I am sitting on, is it
comfortable? Or is it not comfortable? Do I have any pain in my back? So, we
have the capacity of being conscious of many things. So, same way, while doing
our actions, also, we can be conscious of our thoughts. You know. And actually,
becoming conscious of our thoughts is, you know, very, very helpful. You know.
It is, we could call this as to become conscious of our consciousness. To become
conscious of our consciousness. Ok. Now, I am feeling lazy. Now, I am feeling
sleepy. What does this mean? You know. This means there is a mode of ignorance.
Mode of ignorance is trying to catch me. I will not let myself get caught by the
mode of ignorance. So, like that, we can think. And we can learn. And by that,
we can move forward. So, now, Kri..., this is how, you know, we can observe our
ouw minds. Now, after describing how we can observe our own minds, Krishna moves
forward. And describes further how we can observe the behavior of those who have
transcended the modes. That means, how, by behavior, we can infer who has
transcended the modes. You know.

        sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ sva-sthaḥ
        sama-loṣṭāśma-kāñcanaḥ
        tulya-priyāpriyo dhīras
        tulya-nindātma-saṁstutiḥ

        mānāpamānayos tulyas
        tulyo mitrāri-pakṣayoḥ
        sarvārambha-parityāgī
        guṇātītaḥ sa ucyate

You know. You know. You know. "sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ sva-sthaḥ".
"sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ sva-sthaḥ". That in happiness and in distress, "sva-sthaḥ",
well-situted. Same situ..., situated. "sva-sthaḥ" means, you know, "sva" is, you
know, one's own. "sthaḥ" is situated. "sva-sthaḥ" is situated in one's own
nature. "sva-sthaḥ". "sva-sthaḥ". So, you know, you know, you know, you know:

        sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ sva-sthaḥ
        sama-loṣṭāśma-kāñcanaḥ
        tulya-priyāpriyo dhīras
        tulya-nindātma-saṁstutiḥ

"sama-loṣṭāśma-kāñcanaḥ". "sama-loṣṭāśma-kāñcanaḥ". That means, in, equipoised
in, amidst, you know, you know, you know, stones. And pebbles. And gold. And
everything. "tulya-priyāpriyo dhīras". Whenever one, whatever one gets his, you
know, favorable or unfavorable.

        tulya-priyāpriyo dhīras
        tulya-nindātma-saṁstutiḥ

That, "nindā" is criticism. "stutiḥ" is, you know, you know, praise. You know.
You know. "mānāpamānayos tulyas". So, now, what is the difference between
"nindā" and "stu...", "nindā", "stutiḥ"? And "mānāpamāna"? So, "nindā" and
"stutiḥ", you know, you know, you know, is in terms of what others are doing.
And "mānāpamāna" is in terms of what we are perceiving. You know. Generally
speaking, when somebody does "stutiḥ", we feel "māna". And when somebody does
"nindā", we feel "āpamāna". But the two are not the same. You know. Sometimes,
somebody may do "stutiḥ". But, you know, you know, if we are expecting more
"stutiḥ. We are expecting more praise. Then, you know, a failure. That is
actually an insult. You know. If somebody is, say, a PhD. And he is, you know,
this person has done adjacy. You know. What? You know. You know. The other
person may want to praise. Just as person has done adjacy. And as comp..., if,
if it is, you know, say, it is a place where people are not even adja...,
adjacy. That might be a good thing. But s..., the point is that
"nindātma-saṁstutiḥ" and "mānāp...", "māna" are not the same thing.
"nindātma-saṁstutiḥ" is in terms of, you know, you know, you know, the actions
of others. What are, how are they speaking? And "mānāp...", "mānā" is in terms
of the per..., our perceptions. So, Krishna is telling, in both, equal. Equal in
both. That means "nindā" and "stutiḥ" also equal. And "mānā", "mānā" also equal.
When works, someone works in this way. "mānāp...", "mānāpamānayos tulyas". So,
then, you know, what happens by that? You know. One can sta..., you know, all
these are the characteristic of one who is tran..., transcendental. "tulyo
mitrāri-pakṣayoḥ". Krishna has talked about being equipoised towards friends and
enemies earlier, also. Especially in, just at the start of the Sixth Chapter. In
6.9, when He said that. You know. You know.

        suhṛn-mitrāry-udāsīna-
        madhyastha-dveṣya-bandhuṣu
        sādhuṣv api ca pāpeṣu
        sama-buddhir viśiṣyate

So, be equipoised to the, it is, all kinds of people. So, same point here.
"tulyo mitrāri-pakṣayoḥ". So, "mitrā". "ari". "ari" is enemy. "mitrā" is friend.
"pakṣayoḥ". "pakṣayoḥ" is, you know, to all kinds of parties. And
"sarvārambha-parityāgī". As we have discussed, the "sarvārambha-parityāgī" is
also phrase which comes several times in the Gita. So, "guṇātītaḥ sa ucyate".
Such a person is "guṇātītaḥ". You know. You know. So, essentially, the common
denominator in all these characteristics is what? To be equipoised. To be calm.
To be, you know, to be equal towards things. That means to not get too excited
by material things. To not get excited by material things. To know that beyond
matter is spirit. And to recognise that s..., the spiritual reality is the
ultimate reality. It is, the material reality is the temporary reality. You
know. You know. You know. You know. You know. So, you know, now, when Krishna
talks about all this, what is the essential point that is being talked about?
The essential point is that, He is saying, you know, you know, you know, that
these are the characteristics, internal, external, by which one can transcend
the modes. So, you know, why equipoised? Because we understand that, you know,
eve..., all the varieties that are seen in material nature, are basically the
products of the material dualities. This is good. This is bad. This is
attractive. This is an unattractive. All these dualities are created by material
nature. And because they are created by material nature, so, you know, you know,
because they are created by material nature, they can no longer, you know, you
know, attract a person who is transcendental. And at the same time, a person who
wants to become transcendental should try to minimise the attraction towards
them. So, that way, we can go beyond the artificial dualities of material
existence. Towards the transcendental realities. And with their own
transcendental variety, ultimately. Here, Krishna is not only talking about
transcedental variety. Because the topic is, you know, not that. The topic is
the three modes of material nature. It is the modes of material nature create
material varieties. So, in this way, Krishna is saying go beyond these. So, when
He talks about going beyond these, you know, you know, let us look at Srila
Prabhupada's purport. You know. So, Prabhupada says how:

"How does he become aloof? He does not desire to enjoy the body, nor does he
desire to get out of it."

Not desiring to enjoy. Not desiring to get out. You know. You know. And then,
there, one becomes automatically free. You know. Social, similarly:

"Social and political issues do not affect him, because he knows the situation
of temporary upheavals and disturbances."

"he knows the situation of temporary upheavals and disturbances."

And this way, a person stays transcendental. You know. You know. So, now, after
describing the "liṅgaiḥ". And the "ācāraḥ". Now, Krishna does, Kri..., is,
Kri..., answer the question "kathaṁ caitāṁs". How does one transcend the modes?
So, this is well-known verse. Prabhupada would often quote this. 

        māṁ ca yo ’vyabhicāreṇa
        bhakti-yogena sevate
        sa guṇān samatītyaitān
        brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

So, "māṁ ca yo ’vyabhicāreṇa". "’vyabhicāreṇa". So, ’vyabhicāreṇa", you know,
you know, you kno,w we often use the word in terms of the regulative principles.
Know "’vyabhicāreṇa". That means know, you know, relationships outside marriage.
No illicit relationships. You know. So, now, you know, here, Krishna is using
the word "’vyabhicāreṇa" in terms of distraction. That means there is something
which is the right path. And there are temptations which take us towards the
wrong path. So, "avyabhicāreṇa" means one does not go towards the wrong path.
"māṁ ca yo ’vyabhicāreṇa". "vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevate". You know. So,
without becoming distracted, you know, you know, "bhakti-yogena sevate". So,
this is the, this is the only verse in the Bhagavad Gita where Krishna uses the
word "bhakti-yoga" directly. The concept of "bhakti" is used, you know, the word
"bhakti" is used many times. The word "yoga" is also used many times. But
"bhakti-yoga" as the combined word coming together, this is the only verse in
the Bhagavad Gita. You know. You know. So:

        bhakti-yogena sevate
        sa guṇān samatītyaitān

"sa guṇān samatītyaitān". Such a person goes beyond the modes. And then,
"brahma-bhūyāya kalpate". Attains the Brahman. You know. The "Brahman" platform.
So, by, by practicing "avyabhicāreṇa", unfailing devotional service, you know,
one transcends the modes. You know. You know. Now, we have to understand that
"avyabhicāreṇa" is not necessarily "ahay tuki". "ahay tuki" is unmotivated.
"avyabhicāreṇa" is unfailing. You know. You can. We can be unfailing in our
devotion. But that does not necessarily mean that we have, we will be
unmotivated. What is the difference between the two? The difference is, in terms
of, the intention. And the execution. Unmotivated is talking about intention.
"avyabhicāreṇa" is more talking about execution. Even a jnani, who wants to
transcend the modes of material nature, you know, you know, you know, you know,
that jnani recognises that I have to, you know, you know, you know, take shelter
of the Supreme Being who is beyond the modes. And only by shelter of that
tran..., you know, Supreme Being can I go beyond, you know, the modes. So, then,
the, the jnani starts practicing bhakti yoga. So, we have discussed earlier
about, you know, "pradhani-bhuta" bhakti. And "guni-bhuta" bhakti. So, you know,
you know, that means, when the other process is having a greater percentage. Or
the other process is having a lesser percentage. In the, you know, in the
functioning. You know. That means if the path, so kevala bhakti means hundred
percent bhakti. So, you know, "guni-bhuta" bhakti means the other processes are
more than fifty percent. "pradhani-bhuta" bhakti means the other processes are
more than fifty per..., you know, other, less than fifty percent. Bhakti is more
than fifty percent. So, even, when the jnanis are practicing bhakti. So,
we remember that this chapter is in the jnana section of the Gita. And if we
look at most of the verses, Krishna is not talking primarily about a bhakta,
practicing bhakti over here. Krishna is talking about a jnani practicing jna...,
a jnani practicing jnana yoga. That means, you know, you know, He is talking
about a jnani who is practicing seriously the process of jnana yoga. And when a
jnani practices the process of jnana yoga, you know, what is the jnani trying to
do by that? You know. By that, the jnani is trying to, you know, seriously, you
know practice, you know, you know, the process of, you know, you know, you know,
you know, you know, philosophical discrimination. And while praticing
philosophical discrimination, the jnani understands that, ok, ok, if I want to
go beyond the modes, bhakti is required. So, we have take shelter of Bhagavan,
also. So, this say, "mayi cānanya-yogena", you know, you know, no, what is it?

        nityaṁ ca sama-cittatvam
        iṣṭāniṣṭopapattiṣu

You know. You know. You know. "bhaktir". "mayi"

        mayi cānanya-yogena
        bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī

So, Krishna has talked about this in the, you know, items of knowledge in verses
13.8 to 12. Where He says that, you know, one becomes equipoised towards things.
And one practices devotional service without any, you know, distraction. Without
any, you know, without failing. You know. You know. There, also, the same word
is used. And the essential point of that is, you know, the jnani has to practice
devotional service seriously. And to the extent the jnani practices devotional
service seriously, to that extent the jnani makes spiritual adva..., you know,
makes spiritual advancement. So, why? In further, jnani, the goal is not
Krishna. The goal may be impersonal Brahman. So, we remember from the, the,
bhakt..., for the devotee, Krishna is not just the object of meditation. Krishna
is also the objective of meditation. Object means what we are meditating on.
Objective is, you know, what is the goal of that meditation? You know. You know.
You know. So, Krishna is the object as well as objective. But for the jnani,
Krishna is the object, you know, bhakti may be a tool. But bhakti may not be the
goal. But even for such a person, bhakti has to be practiced. And that person is
a serious practitioner, that person may also practice bhakti uninterrupted. You
know. So, while practicing bhakti uninterrupted:

        mayi cānanya-yogena
        bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī

You know. You know. "bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī". So, the point of this practice is
that, you know, that person seriously practices. Now, this may beg a question
that, you know, you know, you know, what causes interruption? In our bhakti, is
the modes. And, you know, you know, what is said that if you want to go beyond
the modes, we have to practice uninterrupted bhakti. So, isn't this a, you know,
self-defeating, you know, you know, you know, impossible thing? You know. That
means, say, if somebody says that, you know, you know, you know, ok, that, you
know, you are, you know, you are having this disease because you have, you know,
ha..., you are having these germs. Ok. And then, because you have these germs,
you have this disease. What is the solution? The solution is to take a medicine.
So, what is that medicine? Similarly, ok, why is one not able to practice
bhakti? Because one is affected by the modes. And how does one go beyond the
affect of the modes? By practicing bhakti. So, we may wonder how, where does
this begin? You know. So, the, it begins by practicing bhakti to whatever
capacity we can. By practicing bhakt..., ca..., bhakti at whatever capacity we
can. We move upward. Upward. Upwards. Until, eventually, we come to the level
where we practice bhakti purely. Where we practice bhakti seriously. You know.
And by that, you know, you know, we return back to Krishna. Gradually. Subtly.
But surely. We return back to Krishna. So, you know, you know, that means we may
not be able to transcend the mode all the times. Say, in the morning, we may
feel, when we wake up, we may feel very sleepy. We may not feel like waking up.
So, if we have got adequate rest. As per whatever, you know, our body needs.
Then, we push ourselves to get up. Now, we ca..., we cannot control whether we
will feel fresh or not when we wake up in the morning. But we can surely control
how we feel after we, you know, what we do. You know. When we wa..., when the
alarm rings, we may not feel fresh. But still, we can wake up. And we can
sprinkle some water. And afterwards, we start s..., feeling fresher. That means
47:16
