Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AGXvJI3mCPE
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=wa7gk1tcBnZpEQ9e6oXpqMRhl458MTU0ODQ4OTgwMUAxNTQ4NDAzNDAx&event=video_description&v=AGXvJI3mCPE&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_130_-_Bhagavad_Gita_15.15-15.20_-_How_the_tri-shloki_Gita_establishes_Krishna_as_the_Purushottama_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are in the 15th Chapter. Last part. We discussed, you know, the earlier sections
of the Bha..., you know, of the 15th Chapter. Let us have an overview of the
sections before we move to 15.15. So, you know, you know, the first section
talks about the upside-down banyan tree. And, you know, you know, conveys
through that metaphor how we can attain liberation through detachment. That is
verses 1 to 6. Then, 7 to 11 talks about how those who are not detached have to
undergo, you know, transmigration and stay in bondage. Then, the next, you know,
three ver..., next four verses, 12 to 15, you know, describe how Krishna assists
us in our material existence. And our spiritual endeavor. So, you know, you
know, we discussed how Krishna assists us in our material existence. Based on
how He helps us. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know.
Cosmologically. Terrestrially. Physiologically. Physiologically maintains the
body. So, now, let us move on and discuss about the spiritual aspect. So, how
Krishna helps all of us spiritually.

        sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo
        mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca
        vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
        vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham

So, "sarvasya cāhaṁ". You know. "sarvasya". For all, in all living beings. "ca",
"aham". You know. You know. You know. You know. In all living beings' hearts.
"hṛdi sanniviṣṭo". I am situated, you know, "sanniviṣṭo". "anniviṣṭo" is the,
come, is related with the word "nivas". To reside. So, I reside. You know. You
know. You know. "mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca". And, you know, from Me come
three things, things. "smṛtir". "jñānam". "apohanaṁ". Remembrance. Knowledge.
And forgetfulness. We will discuss about these a little bit later more. But
"vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo". You know. You know. You know. Just like 15.7
had two parts. You know. So, similarly, this verse also has two parts in the
sense that there are two distinct, you know, thoughts which are conveyed over
here. And then, they are linked, also. We will see how they are linked. So,
first is, Krishna's indwelling presence. And He, His actions through His
indwelling presence. You know. Second part is His connection with the Vedas.
That is "vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo". That by all the Vedas, I am to be
known. And then, "vedānta-kṛd". That I am the compiler of "Vedānta". And
therefore, "veda-vid eva cāham". I know it. You know. It is not that, sometimes,
we may write something. We may speak anything. And then, somebody else comes and
says, ah, you spoke that point. It was so wonderful. Now, we may have spoken
that point. Or maybe a year, year ago. Two years. We forget the point, also. So,
Krishna is not like that. He is a "vedānta-kṛd veda-vid". He does not forget. He
remembers always whatever He has, you know, spoken in His, He does not, He is
not under illusion. So, He does not, He does not go on to forgetfulness. So,
"vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham". You know. You know. So, let us look at these
two units, you know, within this verse separately. And understand their, you
know, their significance. And then, their interconnection. So, first is Krishna
is present in the heart. That has been talked about earlier, also. You know. You
know. You know. You know. In 13.23 most prominently. You know.

	upadraṣṭānumantā ca
	bhartā bhoktā maheśvaraḥ
	paramātmeti cāpy ukto
	dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ

So, "dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ". In the body, there is a transcendental per...,
person. "puruṣaḥ paraḥ". That is the Supreme Lord. You know. You know. So,
there, the focus was on "upadraṣṭānumantā ca". How this Lord is the overseer.
And the maintainer. But here, the focus is something different. Here, the focus
is on how He acts internally. So, if we, just three things. "mattaḥ". So, from
Me, come. The word "mattaḥ" is all living, li..., "mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate". In
10.8, Krishna has said that from Me. "mattaḥ" means from Me. From Me, the
universal order is, emanates. And is maintained. So, you know, you know, you
know, you know, "mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca". "smṛti...", you know, so,
remembrance. Knowledge. And forgetfulness. What does it mean? We see that,
actually, there are three aspects. There is knowledge. So, we will try to
understand this verse in different ways. First is that we get knowledge. Now,
Krishna acts internally as the "caitya-guru". In the, the indwelling Supersoul
is called as the "caitya-guru". You know. For the "cetanā", He is the guru from
inside. "caitya-guru". And we have, also have the, you know, you know, you know,
Siksha guru. Diksha guru. Externally. So, if the same Krishna, who is present
inside, guiding us as the indwelling Supersoul, is also present outside as the
Super..., as the guru. Sadhu. Shastra. So, from there, Krishna gives us
"jñānam". And when we get the "jñānam", after that, we have the choice. What do
we do with the "jñānam"? You know. You know. You know. If we decide to change
our desires according to the "jñānam" that we have got. So, for example, we get
the "jñānam". That I am not the body. I am the soul. And, you know, I am, you
know, meant to love and serve Krishna. And I will get grea..., far greater
happiness in that loving and serving Krishna. And not in..., independently
trying to enjoy. Separate rom Krishna. So, when I understand this. I got the
"jñānam". You know. Now, this "jñānam" is not just meant for pooling. Pooling
means, 'P', double 'O', L', 'I', 'N', 'G'. Pooling means just accumulating in
the head. Pool together. It is meant for pulling. It is meant to pull us towards
Krishna. This "jñānam" is meant to increase our attraction towards Krishna.
Increase our desire to surrender to Krishna. As it is mentioned in the
"Bhāgavatam", also.

        dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ
        viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ
        notpādayed yadi ratiṁ
        śrama eva hi kevalam

So, "dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ". That when one is situated in one's own, you
know, that whatever "dharmaḥ" one may do, the purpose is to increase our
attraction towards Krishna.

        viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ
        notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

If our attraction towards Krishna is not increasing, then "śrama eva hi
kevalam". It is actually a waste of time. So, now, after explaining this, the
next point that comes up is that, ok, so, now, I have the choice that I have
heard the knowledge. And based on the knowledge, I can change my desires. I can
try to, I am, try to, strive to turn towards Krishna. Now, if I de..., you know,
if I desire to turn towards Krishna. Then, one trajectory comes about. If I do
not desire to turn towards Krishna, then another comes about. So, when we say
Krishna gives kno..., re..., forgetfulness. So, what does it mean? You know.
Sometimes, we hear from scriptures, you know, sense gratification leads to
misery. But then, when the sense objects come in front of us, what happens?

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

What happens is we surrender to maya at that time. We just give up everything
else. And forget about everything. That is what actually, we say, happened to
"Ajamila". Isn't it? He just forgot all dharma. You know. Forgot his dharma as a
son. Forgot his dharma as a brahmin. Forgot as a dharma, as a member of
a respectable soc..., of a respected society. And just, as, you know, just
cap..., capitulated to the attraction to the, you know, prositute. So, now, when
this sci..., kind of thing happens, you know, "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". So,
Krishna is telling us, surrender to Me. But, you know, you know, we can have
other desires. So, what happens is, when maya tempts us, at that time, often, we
just tend to forget every...., you know, all the instructions that we have heard
from guru. Sadhu. Shastra. And we succumb to the temptation. So, now, can we say
that, oh, Krishna gives forgetfulness. Therefore, Krishna is responsible.
Krishna is responsible. Why? Because Krishna caused the forgetful..., Krishna
i..., Krishna gives forgetfulness. So, now, I forgot. So, what can I do? So, if
students go for an exam. And then, sometimes, student get a blackout. You know.
Just forget something. All they have memorised, just at the time of the exam,
they forget. So, then, can they say, oh, I studied. But Krishna is to take the
blame. Because Krishna gives forgetfulness. No. We have to understand that
Krishna is responsive. We are responsible. Krishna is responsive. He responds.
Responds to what? You know. Our desires. So, the, there is responsive. And
responsible. Responsible means it is related with the response. Able. You know.
We are able to choose our response. And we are meant to choose the right
response. Responsible. So, we are meant to be responsible. Krishna will be
responsive. That means, you know, you know, when temptations come. And we forget
all the instructions that we have heard from scripture. You know. So, actually,
why is that happening? If we go back to 2.62 and 63 in the Bhagavad Gita, then,
you know, we see that:

        dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ

Krishna describes that it all begins with contemplation. And then, He gives a
whole sequence in which, for, we let the consciousness degenerate. It, degrade
along that sequence. Contemplation. Then, attachment. Then, ob..., obsession.
Then, you know, you know, you know, that, the, so, the first, there is, you
know, "dhyāyato". Then, there is "saṅgāt". That is attachment. Then, there is
"kāmaḥ". That is infatuation. Then, there is, you know, you know, "krodhaḥ".
There is, you know, anger. Then, there is, you know, "sammohaḥ". Delusion. And
then, "sammohāt smṛti-vibhramaḥ". So, "smṛti-vibhramaḥ". That forgetfulness
comes after "sammohaḥ". That means we, when the temptations come, when the
material desires come, it is we who contemplate. You know. That is nice. You
know. I would like to have that. And we entertain the desires. And when Krishna
sees that we are entertaining the desires, we are telling Krishna, yeah, I have
heard all the things that You have taught me. But I do not care about it. I want
to enjoy. Then, Krishna says, ok. If that is what you want to do, if that is
what want, you want to, just enjoy separate from Me. You want to, you know, you
know, to continue to struggle to get that tiny little pleasure that is there in
the material world. That is what you want, I will all..., let you do that. So,
Krishna gives us forgetfulness because we want to act in forgetfulness of that
reality. So, we may say no, no, no. Actually, I want to remember. I want to act
according to Krishna's instructions. Yes. We want to. But then, you know, you
know, when the temptations come, what is our response? We often entertain the
desires. Entertain means, we allow them to entertain. Enter. And then, we do not
dismiss the desires. We actually retain the desires. So, they enter. And retain.
So, that is entertain. So, we entertain the desires. And when we entertain the
desires, what happens? They start taking more and more space. You know. First
they have a, we give them a foothold. And then, they will build a stronghold
over there. You know. They get a full hold our consciousness, ultimately. And
then, what happens is, you know, "apahṛta-cetasām". Our consciousness gets
abducted away. So, therefore, we cannot, you know, blame Krishna for
forgetfulness. Krishna is rec..., is reciprocal. He is responsive. You know. So,
you know, so what happens is, for us, when the tempta..., our temptations come,
it is important for us. So, Krishna has given us "jñānam" from guru. Sadhu.
Shastra. And then, depending on what is the desire that we choose to have. If we
choose to have the desire, you know, i..., if we hold on to the desire to love
and serve Him, you know, you know, then what will happen? Krishna will give us
further stronger remembrance of scripture. Of guru. Sadh..., the message of
guru. Sadhu. Shastra. And over a period of time, Krishna will give us
forgetfulness of material desires. And material enjoyment. And then, we will not
feel that, oh, I am missing something. I have to renounce something. No. We will
feel that, actually, those who are chasing after that, they are unfortunate.
That is what is the, you know, position of Prahlada Maharaja. Prahlada Maharaja
is, you know, you know, in his prayers, famous prayer, he says that:

        naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyās
        tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ
        śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-
        māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān

So, he says that my dear Lord, I have no anxiety about how I will cross beyond
material existence. Wh..., why? Because "tvad-vīrya-gāyana". In glorifying You,
"mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ". I have got immense nectar. And as I get this nectar,
"mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ". So, what happens? "śoce tato vimukha-cetasa". You know.
I lament for those. "śoce". For whom? "vimukha-cetasa". Those whose
consciousness has turned away. "vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-". For the sake of
sense gratification, those who have turned their consciousness away from
Krishna. You know. "tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-". And then, what happens?
"māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān". "māyā-sukhāya bharam". That, you know,
one, you know, you know, "māyā-sukhāya". That actually, you know, for the sake
of illusory happiness, "bharam udvahato". Big burden. The "vimūḍhān"s. The
foolish people are carrying. Actually, the word "vimūḍhān" means not just fool.
Special fool. What is the special fool? They are empowered fools. You know. We
talk about empowered devotees. But there can be empowered fools, also. What does
the empowered fool means? Means they have a lot of power for doing foolish
activities. So, their desi..., our desires will empower us. Now, if our desires
are positive. The empowerment will be positive. If the desires are distractive.
Then, the empowerment will be distractive. So, you know, you know, you know, as
just Prahlada Maharaja is praying that my dear Lord, I, I, I have, pity those
who are chasing after sense gratification. You know. A tiny pleasure. Which is a
big burden of anxiety. And, you know, lamentation. Hankering. And lamentation.
So, what does this mean? F..., you know, coming back to our Bhagavad Gita verse.
That means when m..., he, when he sees people enjoying sense gratification. You
know. He has heard from guru. Sadhu. Shastra. Narada Muni. And others. That
actually, this is, there is no real pleasure over here. It simply leads to
suffering. So, what is he saying now? He is saying that, he, he is not even
considering enjoying the sense objects. Enjoying sense gratification. So, what
happens? Because he has strongly chosen to desire to serve Krishna. So, then,
Krishna is giving him more and more remembrance. More and more remembrance of
what? His own beauty. His own sweetness. His own glory. His own means Krishna's.
And then, what happens by that? "mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ". Becomes completely
absorbed in remembrance of Krishna. So, when one is thus
"mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ", then what happens? Then, you know, when one forgets
material su..., the, forgets material enjoyment. That means the tiny little
enjoyment is there. One does not even crave for it. One thinks that, actually,
for that little enjoyment, so much hankering. So much lamentation. You know. We
discussed how sense enjoyment is like a sandwich. You know. It is a two thick
loaves of bitter bread of, you know, faun..., tasting. And f..., actually, and
then, in-between, there is a little thin, you know, delicious stuff. So, that,
the two thick loaves are hankering. First, hankering. When will I get it? When
will I get it? When will I get it? When will I get it? You know. You know. And
then, finally, I get it. And then, after that, oh, I lost it. I lost it. I lost
it. Lost it. Why did I, why did it get over so quickly? Why did it get over?
That is lamentation. So, like that, one feels that w.., so, one does not
remember the pleasure in sense gratification. One remembers all the associated
misery that comes with sense gratification. And one feels, I, I, it is nothing
in it. So, Krishna can invert the normal dynamics for a serious devotee. What do
we mean by normal dynamics? The normal dynamics for, you know, for the
struggling sadhaka is that when sense objects come in front. That the, you know,
the person forgets, you know, Krishna. And instructions from guru. Sadhu.
Shastra. And then, remembers maya. So, now, Krishna is giving the forgetfulness
and remembrance because that is what the soul is desiring. But if a soul
seriously desires to love and serve Krishna, then Krishna will invert this. And
then, Krishna will give forgetfulness of sense enjoyment. And Krishna will give
remembrance of His own sweetness. His own glory. His own beauty. And then, the
struggle will become, and struggle in trying to control the senses. In trying to
move away from sense gratification towards Krishna will become much, much lesser
for us. So, Krishna is responsive. We are responsible. That means when desires
come, we have to choose what will we do. We should not become a desirer of
desires. "kāma-kāmī". We need to become a desirer of Krishna. And then, when we
do that, you know, then gradually, this will change. You know. So, Krishna, you
know, acts for our welfare. Now, even when Krishna gives us forgetfulness. Why
does He do that? That is also to facilitate our eventual return to Him. How is
that? You know. When Krishna gives forgetfulness, also, He does not condemn, you
know, a person to perennial forgetfulness. No. It is forgetfulness. And then,
the, in the, in the intoxication that results after forgetfulness. The
intoxication, the infatuation with the hope for material enjoyment. Then, the
jna..., that, then it, were sof..., softer, phases out. Because when one enjoys,
one realises there is anticlimax. There is nothing in it. So, then, one
afterwards comes back to Krishna. And Krishna then gives guidance for the person
to come back to Him. So, you know, you know, you know, what we are, seekers
should do is we should try to move closer and closer towards Krishna. That means
when we have the opportunity to remember Krishna, at that time, you know,
ser..., we seriously remember Krishna. So, that means when we are in the
association of devotees. We are studying scriptures. We are, you know, chanting
the holy names. We are in a devotional environment. That time, it is relatively
easier to remember Krishna. So, so, when it is possible for us to remember
Krishna, if at that time, we show Krishna our earnestness. Yes. I want to
remember You, Krishna. Then, Krishna sees that. And then, afterwards, when the
temptations come, Krishna will give us the knowledge. No. Krishna will give us
the remembrance. No. Do not, no need to get involved. Do not get into this. You
know. You know. And if we respond to that, we will be protected. You know. You
know. So, we begin by doing what we can do. You know. To end our forgetfulness,
we need to first end our forgetfulness of our forgetfulness. What does that
mean? To end our forgetfulness, we need to first end our forgetfulness of our
forgetfulness. You know. Sometimes, we become forgetful. And we are, forg..., we
forget that we have forgotten, also. That means, we get so much into illusion
that we do not even realise that we are in illusion. But if we are in illusion.
Suppose we are chanting. And we get spaced out. You know. While chanting, we
start, you know, doing some sightseeing. You know. Looking at the sky. Looking
here. Looking there. And if we are all alone, then we will be forgetful. And we
will stay forgetful, all, for, forgetfulness, also. But if we are staying, in
the association of devotees. You know. Somebody will come, Prabhu, what are you
doing? Oh. You know. I am meant to chant. It is chanting time. Let me chant.
So, then, what will happen is, we have to resolve to end our forgetfulness of
our forgetfulness. That means as soon as we become aware, oh, I have forgotten,
then we bring ourselves back on track. You know. So, by that, also, we show
Krishna that we want to come towards Him. As we have discussed earlier, you
know, a plane is often off-track. When a plane is moving, say, Mum..., from
Mumbai to Kolkata. At that time, you know, it is not that a plane moves in a
straight line. Almost for 90% of the time, you know, because of the atmospheric
conditions. Because of the wind. And because of pressure, the plane keeps going
off-track. When the plane go..., keeps going off-track for 90% of the time, how
does it reach the destination? Because the pilot brings it back on track. It
goes off-track. Again on track. Off-track. On track. Off-track. On track. And
then, gradually, because the pilot is focused on the destination, so,
eventually, the plane be, is, stays, reaches the destination. Inspite of the
distractions.

So, like that, our, we will get distracted. We will not be able to avoid that.
So, we may become forgetful. But we should resolve to end our forgetfulness of
our forgetfulness. You know. As soon as we remember, oh, this is, I am going the
wrong track. Bring, bring back. Bring back. Bring back. And by this, we will
keep moving forwards. At, eventually, until we reach the final destination.
Until we develop love for Krishna. So, here, we know that Krishna is ready to
help us. And we will also observe in our spiritual life that certain forms of
enjoyment which we used to crave for earlier, they become utterly insignificant
over a period of time. That means that over a, over a period of, say, you know,
steady practice. We may, say, we may have been infatuated with a particular
thing in the past. We may have been infatuated parti..., particular sport. Or a
particular food item. Say, some, some of it might have been very ada...,
attached to meat-eating. You know. You know. But then, you know, after we get
the higher taste of prasad, then what happens? Then, you know, do we feel any
attraction for meat? No. Not at all. What has happened? You know. Krishna has
given us forgetfulness of that taste of the meat. So, what might have, you know,
immediately caused saliva, or secrete and, you know, act, agitate, craving to be
generated in our mind earlier. Now, nothing happens. So, Krishna can give us
forgetfulness of our, you know, of the, of, or even our cherished material
enjoyments. You know. So, just as, it has, it can, it has happened for a few of
our cherished material enjoyments, it will happen for the remaining, also. We
just have to keep persevering. In our practice of devotional practice. When we
keep persevering steadily in the practice of our devotional service, eventually,
we come to a level where we become, you know, liberated from, you know, even
our, the, even the strongest of material enjoyments. The strongest of material
enjoyments, we will become liberated from them. And then, we can purely relish
the nectar of Krishna Consciousness. Of remembrance of Krishna. Love of Krishna.
So, this is the first part of this verse. You know. Krishna gives us, you know,
re..., knowledge through guru. Sadhu. Shastra. And then, depending on whether
what, what our, does the desire that we cultivate, He will either give us
remembrance or He will give forgetfulness. Now, second part is, says that
"vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo". Now, we wonder, where the "sarv...", why
do the "Vedas" come in suddenly? Yes. Because the "jñānam". So, Krishna is
talking now about, first, He has talked about His internal role is, you know,
that "smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca". So, how does He give the "jñānam"? He gives
the "jñānam" externally through the "Vedas". So, then, He is telling what is the
connection with the "Vedas". He says, actually, by all the "Vedas", I am to be
known. You know. You know. Now, in the "Vedas", there are large variety of
subjects is talked about. Most of the "Vedas", if we use the word "Ved...", you
know, "Vedas" in a restrictive sense to refer to, you know, you know, the four
"Vedas", only. You know. Then, the world, you know, the "Vedas", actually,
primarily talk about karma-kanda. But the word "Veda" in generic sense means
knowledge. And the ultimate goal of knowledge is to know Krishna.

        bahūnāṁ janmanām ante
        jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

So, the ultimate goal of knowledge is to know Krishna. So, but, the, apart from
the, that generic understanding, also, actually, the, all the "Veda"s, you know,
if we con..., so, there is a, you know, you know, restrictive understanding of
the word "Vedas". There is a ve..., very i..., i..., liberal understanding. And
there is the moderate understanding. Moder...., sta..., moder..., what is the
moderate, moderate understanding? That is the "Vedas" refer to the body of
literature which, you know, derive, which are derived from the Vedas. So, it
includes the "Puranas". "Itihasa"s. We have discussed all this in the
introduction, you know, you know, to the "Īśopaniṣad". Right at the start of a
Bhakti Shastri course. So, in the general body of the Vedic literature, there is
a progression. From karma-kanda to jnana-kanda. Ultimately, to bhakti. So, you
know, you know, in that sense, because there is a progression which ultimately
leads to pure devotion to Krishna. So, by all the Vedas, it is Krishna who is to
be known. It is Krishna who is the object of all the, you know, different
subjects that are talked about in the Vedas. So, you know:

        jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ
        hṛdi sarvasya viṣṭhitam

We have discussed, also, in the 13th Chapter, "jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ".
"jñāna-gamyaṁ" is, is the object of knowledge. It is Krishna who is the ultimate
object of knowledge. "hṛdi sarvasya viṣṭhitam". He is situated in the hearts of
everyone. So, "jñāna-gamyaṁ". Similarly, "vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo". So,
you know, you know, you know, it is important, when we study a book, to know
what is the purpose of the book. I..., i..., if we start reading a book,
especially if a book is, you know, having a lot of informational content. Then,
we may just get lost in the, you know, details of the book. And we may lo...,
lose track. What is the, what is the purpose of the book? So, we need to know,
ok, this is the objective of the book. You know. The author wrote the book. This
was the objective. When we know that, then we can move forward through, you
know, all the different things that are told in the book. And come to the
under..., right understanding. By understanding what is the most important part
of the book. And what is the flow of the book. So, Krishna is telling like that
for all the "Vedas". It is I, by all the "Vedas", I am to be known. And then,
you know, you know, how does Krishna know this? That He is the goal of all
living entities. Krishna says, actually, I am the compiler of "Vedā...",
"vedānta-kṛt". How is Krishna the compiler? As Vyāsadeva. You know. Vyāsadeva is
the literary incarnation of the Supreme Lord. Because he is the literary
incarnation of the Supreme Lord, so, He Himself is also transcendental. And
Krishna says "vedānta-kṛt". "vedānta-kṛt". And then, after He says "veda-vid eva
cāham". "veda-vid". I know all the "Vedas". So, I am the compiler. I am the
knower. So, the, Krishna is, talk about "Vedas" in three ways over here. That I
am the, you know, goal. Compiler. And knower. You know. So, if we look at it
once again. What are the chara..., conne..., connection between the two? That,
you know, every body of knowledge is meant to, to go towards a particular
purpose. So, then, how can we know if there is a big book that is there? So, big
book that is there. You know. How do we know what is the purpose of the book?
Ask the author. So, "vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo". I am the goal of the
"Vedas". How does Krishna know it? Because "vedānta-kṛt". He is the author. And
then, you know, can be so..., some time, now, nowadays, there is the whole
idea of deconstructionism. Deconstructionism means that, you know, you know,
subsequent re..., reviewers of books. They try to deconstruct. When the author
said this. What was the intention in saying this? What was, why did the author
say like this? And some time, they come a bit, such interpretations, they, that
those interpretations are completely contradictory to what was intention, only.
So, that sort of deconstructionism is not of much use. You know. So,
"vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham". You know. We have, we, the author has spoken
something. When the author has spoken it, the author, you know, Krishna is, some
author may have forgotten. You know. You know. May forget what I wrote. And why
I wrote. But Krishna is not like that. Krishna remembers. "veda-vid eva cāham".
So, you know, that, now, with the connection between these two parts, these two
parts us what? Firstly, that Krishna gives the knowledge, you know, internally.
Krishna gives the knowledge. And remembrance. And forgetfulness. As the
Supersoul. And that same Krishna acts externally, you know, so, the first part
largely talks about how Krishna acts internally. And the second part talks about
how Krishna acts externally. And both together talk about how Krishna stri...,
you know, Krishna strives to elevate us. He strives actually. You know. Krishna
is working. You know.

        mādṛk prapanna-paśu-pāśa-vimokṣaṇāya
        muktāya bhūri-karuṇāya namo ’layāya

In the prayer of Gajendra, it is, says, you know, that, he says, "muktāya
bhūri-karuṇāya namo ’layāya". My dear Lord, You are liberated, You are supremely
merciful. And if, in, first, striving for my liberation, You are "alayāya". You
ne..., nor get tired. You never get, you know, you do not become lazy. You are
constantly active. Constantly striving. So, internally. And externally. Krishna
strives for liberating us. You know. That is Krishna's great mercy. So, when we
talk about, you know, Krishna's mercy. You know. Krishna's mercy. Certainly, he
has created the material world. And He has made arrangements for maintaining the
material world. But His ultimate, you know, mercy is not that He creates
arrangements, you know, that, you know, for maintaining the material world.
Because ultimately, this world is a place of old age. Disease. And death.
Krishna's ultimate mercy is that, He takes us beyond this world to the spiritual
world. And He provides arrangements for that. He provides abundant arrangements
for that. By which, He helps us to move from this world towards Krishna. Towards
the eternal world. So, the, this concludes the "jñāna-cakṣu" section. You know.
He started with, you know, 15.10 using the word "jñāna-cakṣu". "paśyanti
jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ". And then, that carries to the question if somebody is not so
perceptive to understand atma-tattva. Then, can that person make spiritual
advancement? Yes. That person in material consciousness, that person can see the
arrangement that Krishna is making at a material level. And then, gradually,
that person can understand how Krishna is making arrangements. Not just
materially. But also spiritually. So, here, Arjuna gets a question. Krishna, if
You, if You have compiled the "Vedas". And you know the "Vedas". Then, can You
tell me what is the essence of the "Vedas"? So, that leads to the Tri Shloki
Gita. Tri Shloki Gita is, the Gita is in three verses. So, the essence of
"Vedānta" is, start over here. In 16. 17. And 18. Before we go to that, let us
look at the, you know, purport. You know. You know. You know. You know. You
know. So, Prabhupada explains:

"the Lord is not only all-pervading; He is also localized in every individual
heart."

So, He is all-pervading as Brahman. But He is also localised as Paramatma. So,
when the Lord is thus present, so, Prabhupada writes about, you know:

"The Supreme Lord is so full"

So full with what?

Full with mercy. Full with love. That He deliver, you know, for:

"that for the deliverance of the conditioned soul He is the supplier and
digester of foodstuff, the witness of his activity, and the giver of knowledge
in the form of the Vedas and as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the teacher of the Bhagavad-gītā."

So, He is maintaining materially, "supplier and digester of foodstuff". Then He
is witnessing. And pick, en..., depending on witnessing, He is guiding, also.
So, therefore, because He is so merciful:

"He is worshipable by the conditioned soul. Thus God is all-good; God is
all-merciful."

Krishna goes to so many ext..., such extents for trying to help us. Then,
Prabhupada quotes over here:

        Antaḥ-praviṣṭaḥ śāstā janānām

"Antaḥ-praviṣṭaḥ". You know. You know. So, actually, the, you know, when the
soul enters into the body, the soul forgets. But, you know, the Lord remembers.
And the Lord guides the soul how to act. That means that when the soul, you
know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
comes in a particular body. Say, when the soul goes from a human body to a dog's
body. Then, you know, how does the soul know how to act in a dog's body? He does
not know. You know. Actually, it is the Supreme Lord who guides. It is the Lord
who guides. You know. You know. Even when a small ba..., even a baby is born,
and then the baby starts crying. And then, the mother picks up the baby. And
puts, you know, the baby's mouth near its, you know, breasts. So, now, how does
the baby know that I have to, I should suck those breasts? And by that, milk
will come. And that milk will nourish me. You know. Science may say that it is
instinct. But ultimately, where does instinct come from? You know. Ultimately,
it is a mystery, actually. So, and, you know, we will discuss in 18.61 about
birth migration. It is a profound mystery about how, you know, some of the
inti..., instincts are so complex. That they cannot be understood very easily.
You know. They cannot be explained reduc..., in reductionistic terms. So, you
know, it is Supreme Lord who gives guidance. You know. When the soul enters into
a body. How to live in that body. You know. And, you know, Prabhupada, you know,
quotes now, also, from the "Vedānta-sūtra".

"The ultimate goal is the Supreme Personality of Godhead."

"Vedānta-sūtra" quotes. You know. One, one point, you know, 1.1.4. He quotes
"tat tu samanvayāt". You know. You know. So, "tat tu samanvayāt". "samanvayāt"
means reconcilation. Harmonisation. So, actually, you know, "Jīva Gosvāmī" has
written an elaborate commentary on Chatur-Shlo..., you know, actually, you know,
on, just on the first four "sūtra"s of the "Vedānta-sūtra". So, you know, just
four, first "sūtra"s is "athāto brahma jijñāsā". Second is, you know, you know,
you know, you know, you know, "janmādy asya yataḥ". Third is, you know,
"śāstra-yonitvāt". Fourth is "tat tu samanvayāt". So, first is, inquire about
Brahman. Then, what is that Brahman? He is the source of everything. And then,
how can we know about that source? That is through "śāstra-yonitvāt". Through
"śāstra". Then, but "śāstra" says so many things. How do we know? What is, what
is the actual conclusion of "śāstra"? "tat tu samanvayāt". "samanvayāt". We have
to harmonise. We have to reconcile. By a particular, you know, hermeneutics.
That particular analytical methology, one should be able to harmonise. So, here,
what the point, we, "tat tu samanvayāt". That we, whatever different thing
taught in the scripture, we have to understand that they are in hierarchy. And
at the top of the hierarchy is knowledge of Krishna. It is He. It is kno...,
knowing about Krishna that is the most important for us. You know. You know. So,
you know, Prabhupada writes in the last sentence in the purport.

"In this verse the purpose of the Vedas, the understanding of the Vedas, and the
goal of the Vedas are clearly defined."

You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. How, that is all ultimately
meant, "vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo". It is Krishna who is known to be,
the, the, to be known through the Vedas. So, now, Krishna will talk about the
Chatur-Shloki Gita. Sorry. Cha..., not Chatur-Shloki. Tri Shloki. You know. The
essence of "Vedānta" in three verses. So:

        dvāv imau puruṣau loke
        kṣaraś cākṣara eva ca
        kṣaraḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni
        kūṭa-stho ’kṣara ucyate

You know. You know. So, "dvāv imau puruṣau loke". "puruṣau loke". In the, in
this mater..., in this mat..., you know, world. "loke". "puruṣau". There are two
kinds of "puruṣau"s. What are those "puruṣau"s? "kṣaraś cākṣara eva ca".
"kṣaraḥ". And "akṣaraḥ". The fallible. And infallible. The conditioned. And the
liberated. You know. "kṣaraḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni". That the fallible are situated,
they are everywhere. They exist in the material world. And "kūṭa-sthaḥ".
"kūṭa-stho ’kṣara ucyate". "kūṭa-sthaḥ" means that they are transcendentally
situated. Well-situated. High up. So, they are, they are not dragged down. They,
you know, by the material world. They are li..., they are situated in a
liberated position. "’kṣara ucyate". In oneness. Now, you know, "kūṭa-sthaḥ".
Prabhupada translates as oneness. But what exactly is this oneness? As we have
discussed in "ekatvam anupaśyataḥ". In the "Īśopaniṣad". Actually, this e...,
"kūṭa-sthaḥ", it refers to, you know, the, you know, "kūṭa-sthaḥ" refers to the
oneness in terms of quality. Not, in terms of entirely, identity. You know. You
know. So, that is "kūṭa-sthaḥ". "ucyate". The liberated souls are existing in
the spiritual world. Now, we may say no. No. This is not the interpretation of
"kūṭa-sthaḥ". "kūṭa-sthaḥ" actually means oneness. So, to understand what it is,
we have to look at the full flow. And then, look at the context. So, Prabhupada
explains in the purport that, you know, you know, you know:

"Oneness does not mean that they have no individuality, but that there is no
disunity."

Thus:

"They are all agreeable to the purpose of the creation."

"the purpose of the creation" is to love and serve Krishna. And, you know, you
know, so, it, it does not mean that does not mean the, oneness does not mean
dissolution of individuality. But it means resolution of disunity. When there is
resolution of disunity, then there is harmony. And that is what is the goal. So,
now, you know, you know, so, "kūṭa-stho ’kṣara ucyate". "kūṭa-sthaḥ" means,
Prabhupada says that, actually, there are these six changes in the, the
spiritual body is not, you know, in the spiritual world, the body is, body is
not made of matter. And therefore, there are no changes. In that sense, they are
"akṣaraḥ". They are infallible. They are "kūṭa-sthaḥ". These are liberated
souls. So, basically, here, Krishna identifies in the first verse, there are two
kinds of living beings. Now, Krishna goes on to further. Next verse.

        uttamaḥ puruṣas tv anyaḥ
        paramātmety udāhṛtaḥ
        yo loka-trayam āviśya
        bibharty avyaya īśvaraḥ

So, "uttamaḥ puruṣas tv anyaḥ". The "uttamaḥ puruṣas". The Supreme Person is
"anyaḥ", is somebody else. It is very significant that, you know, you know,
there is, you know, "akṣaraḥ". And "kṣaraḥ". There is liberat..., conditioned.
And there is liberated. But the Supreme Person, the "puruṣottamaḥ" is not a
liberated soul. You know. This is something higher. Beyond the liberated, also:

        uttamaḥ puruṣas tv anyaḥ
        paramātmety udāhṛtaḥ

"paramātmety udāhṛtaḥ". So, "parama-ātmā". You know. You know. Is kno..., you
know, is known as "parama-āt...", is, is the "para...", "parama-ātmā". He is
said to be "parama-ātmā". The Supreme Soul.

        yo loka-trayam āviśya

"yo loka". In these three worlds. "āviśya". Having entered. "bibharty avyaya
īśvaraḥ". Is maintaining. "avyaya īśvaraḥ". So, Krishna is actually building up,
you know, the message of the "Vedānta". So, if we look at the "Vedānta-sūtra"
itself, it talks primarily in term..., in, in terms of Brahman. So, Krishna will
tell in, you know, Krishna also uses in third person. Yes. There is that
"uttamaḥ puruṣas". And who is that "uttamaḥ puruṣas"? You know. You know. You
know. You know. That "uttamaḥ puruṣas" is known as "parama-ātmā". "parama-ātmā".
Now, Krishna has used the word "parama-ātmā" several times earlier.

        paramātmeti cāpy ukto
        dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ

He has used in 13.23. "paramātmā samāhitaḥ" is used in 6.7. You know. So, like
that, He has used it various places. But the important point here is that
Krishna is telling in terms of the k..., message of the "Vedānta" is there are
two "puruṣas". But, you know, among them, you know, there is one, beyon...,
beyond them, there is a "uttamaḥ puruṣas". And He is known as "parama-ātmā". And
He enters into all the worlds. And He maintains the worlds. Now, actually,
Krishna has just said, you know, two verses earlier in, you know, you know, the
13th verse. You know. Three verses earlier. This was this, this is the 17th
verse. So, four verses earlier. In 13th verse, what has He said? That:

        gām āviśya ca bhūtāni
        dhārayāmy aham ojasā

So, it is I who enter into the planets. And I maintain those planets. Maintain
those planets. Now, Krishna is saying the "parama-ātmā" maintain those planets.
Now, we, obviously, we can put two and two together. And then, we can say that,
it is Krishna who is entering into all the planets. And it is Krishna who has
talked about the Vedas. And that is what Krishna will tell in the next verse.
So, Krishna refers to Himself in the third person over here. And later on, He
will refer to Himself in the first person. Why? Because He is not talking from
the perspective of the "Vedānta". So, "Vedānta" talks about, you know, there is,
there is "kṣaraḥ". "akṣaraḥ". And then, there is "uttamaḥ puruṣas". And then,
Krishna says I am that "uttamaḥ puruṣas". In this way, He bui..., He, you know,
in the three verse summary, He leads to the conclusion that by all the Vedas, I
am to be known. So, He does not just, you know, give the conclusion right in the
beginning, only. These are Ve..., development of thought. And that is why, here,
there is second person reference. And then, there will be a thir..., first
person reference. You know. There is a third person reference over here. You
remember we discussed the third person reference means, I is first person. You
is second person. And he or she is a third person. So, you know, Krishna refers
to the "puruṣottamaḥ" in the third person here. And because He is talking from
the perspective of "Vedānta". And He i..., He is telling over here that, that,
that person is beyond the conditioned. And the liberated. So, in the three verse
summary of the "Vedānta", Krishna does three things. First is, He establishes
that, you know, the, you know, you know, you know, you know, the Supreme Person
is different from both the Supersoul. Both the liberated and the conditioned
living entity. Especially, the important point is the Supreme Being, the Supreme
Person is different from the, even the liberated souls. Then, it is not that
liberated souls who are all-pervading. It is the Supreme Soul who is
all-pervading. Supreme Soul is, enters into all, you know, into all creation.
And maintains the creation. So, because it is "any...", you know, once the world
"anyaḥ" is used, that means it is not even the liberated souls who does it. The
ideas of the mayavadis that when we become emergent into the impersonalism,
then, impersonal..., you know, when we merge into Brahman, then we become
everything. No. That is how their ide..., they have the own conception. Krishna
says no. That, you know, Supreme Person is somebody else. And that Supreme
Person is all-pervading. And the third thing that He will convey in the next
verse is that, that Supreme Person is Me. So, in this way, Krishna correlates
"vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo". You know. He comes to the same conclusion
through this Tri Shloki Gita. So, let us look at, you know, Prabhupada quotes it
from the "Upaniṣad"s. That "nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām". Is a favori...,
favor..., this is favorite verse of Srila Prabhupada. He often quotes it that
how, you know, you know, that, you know, there are many living beings. But among
them, one is special. One is Supreme. And Krishna, the Prabhu..., the same
point is told, told over here, you know, that the Supreme Being is beyond even
the liberated souls. You know. Then, then after that, now, Krishna will say
that, you know, that Supreme Being is Me itself. I am that Supreme Soul.

        yasmāt kṣaram atīto ’ham
        akṣarād api cottamaḥ
        ato ’smi loke vede ca
        prathitaḥ puruṣottamaḥ

You know. "yasmāt kṣaram atīto ’ham". Because, you know, I am beyond the
"kṣaram". "yasmāt kṣaram atīto ’ham". You know. Because I am beyond the
"kṣaram". "akṣarād api cottamaḥ". And because I am beyond the "akṣarāt", also.
You know. You know. So, now, Krishna has earlier said that the "uttamaḥ puruṣas"
is beyond the "kṣaraḥ". And "akṣaraḥ". Now, Krishna is using the word "aham" to
make things very clear. That "yasmāt kṣaram atīto ’ham". I am beyond the
"kṣaram". I am i..., also beyond the "akṣarāt". "ato ’smi loke vede ca".
Therefore, "loke vede ca". Therefore, in the "loke"s. And in the "vede"s. In the
world. And among, you know, in, that meaning the world. And among the Vedas.
"prathitaḥ puruṣottamaḥ". I am celebrated as "puruṣottamaḥ". So, this chapter is
called as "Purushottama Yoga". You know. You know. Now, "Purushottama Yoga".
"The Yoga of the Supreme Person" as Srila Prabhupada translates it. So, you
know, you know, Krishna is clearly established over here that I am that
"puruṣottamaḥ". So, you know, you know, that "puruṣottamaḥ", Krishna has
referred to in the upside-down banyan tree, also, when He is talking about it.
There, He says, the, you know, you know, actually, after one becomes liberated
from material world. And goes beyond. There, also, in that beyond, one has to
search for the Supreme Person. He has talked about in, in 12.4.

    tataḥ padaṁ tat parimārgitavyaṁ
    yasmin gatā na nivartanti bhūyaḥ
    tam eva cādyaṁ puruṣaṁ prapadye
    yataḥ pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī

So, "puruṣaṁ prapadye". There, one has to surrender to the Supreme Person. Who?
The transcendental person. Whom one have, can seek for, after one becomes
disentangled from material existence. That means this disentanglement from
material existence and attaining the spiritual platform is not enough. In the
spiritual platform, also, one has to connect with the Supreme Lord. So, beyond
Brahman, one has to raise to Bhagavan. So, that Bhagavad is that "puruṣaṁ" who
is beyond the liberation, also. That Bh..., that is "puruṣottamaḥ". And that is
Krishna. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, this ver..., these three
verses, you know, comprise the strongest and the most devastating, you know, you
know, you know, rebuttal. Refutation, you know, exposing of mayavada. Because,
you know, the, Krishna, then, very, very little scope for any kind of
interpretation. You know. You know. The imp..., you know, people may try to do
some kind of "prestidigitation". "prestidigitation" means, you know, jugglery of
words. You know. Ver..., verbal or intellectual trickery. But it is so obvious.
If we let the Bhagavad Gita speak for itself. You know. Now, Prabhupada would
often say that, you know, Krishna can speak for Himself. Let Krishna speak. You
shut up. So, Bha..., you know, "Bhagavad-gītā As It Is", Prabhupada called as
Gi..., you know, you know, his explanation of the Gita. Why? Because Krishna's
words are so clear. He is saying, first of all, there are two persons. And then,
you know, you know, one liberated. One condition..., one conditioned. One
liberated. Then, He says that there is the, there is a, you know, Supreme Person
who is beyond both of them. And who maintains all the worlds. And then, Krishna
says I am that Supreme Person. So, that means that I am beyond the liberated,
also. And therefore, actually, when we become liberated, we do not merge into
sup..., Krishna. We do not become a homogeneous non-differentiated oneness. No.
Krishna still remains the supreme reality. So, this is how, he strongly, you
know, de..., actually, refutes in almo..., devastates mayavada. You know. You
know. So, Prabhupada, you know, you know, explains various things in his
purport. You know. So, he quote from the "Chāndogya Upaniṣad" over here. You
know.

tāvad eṣa samprasādo ’smāc charīrāt samutthāya paraṁ jyoti-rūpaṁ sampadya svena rūpeṇābhiniṣpadyate sa uttamaḥ puruṣaḥ

"sa uttamaḥ puruṣaḥ". So, you know, the, what is Prabhupada doing? Prabhupada is
correlating, you know, what Krishna has talked about "puruṣottamaḥ" in this
verse. With other scriptural references. So, he says that, you know, you know,
you know, you know, "tāvad eṣa samprasādo ’smāc charīrāt samutthāya". "’smāc
charīrāt samutthāya". That, you know, the Supersou..., the com..., Supersoul
comes out of this body. And then, "paraṁ jyoti-rūpaṁ sampadya svena
rūpeṇābhiniṣpadyate". You know. That means ok, then the Supersoul goes and gets
situated in the "brahma-jyotir". And there, how He is situated? In one's own
form. And that means, called as the, you know, "puruṣottamaḥ". So, you know, in
this way, Krishna makes things very clear to us. So, let us look at the, you
know, next, you know, point over here. You know. Yeah. Let us look at the
summary over here now. 15.16, Krishna is saying that, you know, you know,
Krishna talks about, now, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura explains this in a
slightly different way. He says Kri..., 15.16 talks about Brahman. 15.17 talks
about Paramatma. And 15.18 talks about Bhagavan. You know. You know. You know.
You know. You know. So, let us see how this works out. You know. That there are
three aspects of the Absolute Truth. Brahman. Paramatma. And Bhagavan. You know.
Now, if we look at it, you know, let us go backwards. 15.18. What is it talking
about? It is talking about I am celebrated in all the three worlds as the
"puruṣottamaḥ". So, you know, and I am beyond, you know, the "kṣar...",
"kṣaraḥ". And "akṣaraḥ". Now, we know that in the Absolute Truth has the three
aspects. And the Bhagavan aspect is transcendental to everythi..., everything
and everyone. So, in that sense, it is a logical correlation that, you know,
this particular verse, you know, refers to the Bhagavan as..., you know, and
Krishna is clearly using "aham". "aham" is the Supreme Lord who is
transcendental. Who performs "līlā"s. Who is not just the endearing Supersoul.
But who has His own abode. And His own associates. And performs pastimes. So,
"aham". That makes it very clear this refers to the Bhagavan aspect. Then, if we
look back at 15.17. Then, it refer..., is referring to the Paramatma aspect. How
is that? It is clearly "bibharty":

        yo loka-trayam āviśya
        bibharty avyaya īśvaraḥ

One who enters into all the worlds. And there, residing there, maintains those
worlds. So, this is clearly referring to the Paramatma. The Paramatma enters
into three worlds. We know. "Mahavishnu". "Garbhodakaśāyī Vishnu".
"Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu". How the, you know, "Kṣīro...", "Garbhodakaśāyī Vishnu"
enters into each universe. The "Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu" enters into, you know, all,
hea..., hearts of all living beings. And even to the un..., you know, "paraman
uchayan tarastham". Into all of matter, also. Even the atoms. So, and then, so,
that is referring to the, you know, you know, Supersoul. Now, you know, what
about the, you know, you know, the 15.16? How does it refer to Brahman?
Actually, there, two things are talked about.

        dvāv imau puruṣau loke
        kṣaraś cākṣara eva ca

So, "kṣaraḥ". And "akṣaraḥ". So, you know, and the word "akṣaraḥ" has been used
to refer to Brahma. If we remember, 8.1, "akṣaraṁ", you know, not 8.1. 8.2. The
first verse is the question of Arjuna. And, you know:

        kiṁ tad brahma kim adhyātmaṁ
        kiṁ karma puruṣottama
        adhibhūtaṁ ca kiṁ proktam
        adhidaivaṁ kim ucyate

        adhiyajñaḥ kathaṁ ko ’tra
        dehe ’smin madhusūdana

So, you know:

        prayāṇa-kāle ca kathaṁ
        jñeyo ’si niyatātmabhiḥ

This was 8.1. And 8.2. And then, 8.3. The answer was:

        akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ
        svabhāvo ’dhyātmam ucyate

So, "akṣaraṁ" is "brahma". So, of course, Srila Prabhupada re..., uses the, you
know, word "brah...", "akṣaraṁ brahma" to re..., there to refer, to refer to the
living entity. But "Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura" is giving us a different
explanation. And there, also, he refers to "brahma" as Brahman. So, we are not
going to the full technical analysis. Because that will become too intricate.
But the point is this is also another way of looking at it. So, the word
"akṣaraḥ". That, what is infallible? It is Brahman. And then, Brahman is also
"kūṭa-sthaḥ". He is situa..., situated without any changes. Situated in
transcendence. So, you know, you know, the "brahma" is "kūṭa-sthaḥ". So, then,
"brahm...". So, then, that is Brahman. Paramatma. And Bhagavan. So, there is a
progression in these three verses. And through this progression, Krishna is
taking us towards the ultimate conclusion. What is the ultimate conclusion? That
ultimate conclusion is that we have to turn, you know, we have to, you know, you
know, you know, understand Him to be the Supreme Person. So, let us look at the,
you know, another way of s..., looking at the summary of these verses. Krishna
is not the same as the liberated soul. "puruṣaḥ". But is beyond even the
liberated. He is beyond even the liberated. That is one conclusion. Krishna is
the "puruṣottamaḥ". And the "parama-ātmā". That is another conclusion. And
therefore, Krishna is the highest manifestation of the Absolute Truth. There is
no manifestation higher than Krishna. And that will be made clear in the next
verse. You know. So, this is, you know, very unambiguous. And emphatic verse.
That means, Tri Shloki Bhagavad, Tri Shloki if one understands, then what
happens after that? One, this is the conclusion that one should come to:

        yo mām evam asammūḍho
        jānāti puruṣottamam
        sa sarva-vid bhajati māṁ
        sarva-bhāvena bhārata

So, "yo mām evam asammūḍho". "asammūḍho". "asammūḍho" means without any
delusion. One who understands. "mām evam asammūḍho". When one understands,
"jānāti puruṣottamam". You know. "puruṣottamam". So, when one und..., in this
way, without any delusion, when one understands Me to be the "puruṣottamam".
Such a person "sa sarva-vid". Such a person knows everything. He has got the
complete knowledge. Krishna is saying. That means to know Krishna as the
"puruṣottamam" is "sa sarva-vid". You know. Krishna has told earlier in 7.3
that, you know, you know, you know, not in 7.3. 7.2, He has said that, you know,
I will give you complete knowledge. And after getting this, there is nothing
more to be known.

        idaṁ vakṣyāmy aśeṣataḥ
        yaj jñātvā neha bhūyo ’nyaj
        jñātavyam avaśiṣyate

"aśeṣataḥ". Without keeping anything back, I am giving you everything. So, what
does that mean? It does not necessarily mean that, you know, all the
technical details of all branches of knowledge are given. No. The broad
principles, of that comprise the essence of knowledge, are given in their
completeness. The principles are properly explained. So, now, when Krishna is
talking in that way, Krishna is saying, what is the essential principle of
understanding of knowledge? It is to know Me, Me as "puruṣottamam". "sa
sarva-vid". And it is not just an intellectual knowledge. It is a
transformational knowledge. What is the transformation that happens? "sa
sarva-vid bhajati māṁ". When the person who becomes "sarva-vid" in this way,
what happ..., what does the person do? "bhajati māṁ". Worships Me. And how does
the person worship Me? "sarva-bhāvena bhārata". You know. "sarva-bhāvena". With
all the emotions of the heart. So, actually, you know, the result of knowledge
is devotion. Krishna has talked about this earlier, also. When one understands
Him to be the source of everything. In 10.8, He has said:

        ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo
        mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate
        iti matvā ...

When one knows Me, then what happens like this? When one knows Me like this,
what happens? "bhajante":

        iti matvā bhajante māṁ
        budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

Such a person becomes "budhā". Krishna has used the word "sa sarva", "sarva-vid"
over here. Same. And then, "bhāva-samanvitāḥ". "bhajante". He, and such a person
worships Me. Devotes oneself to Me. With the emo..., with all the emotions of
the heart. "bhāva-sam...", imbued with emotions. 55:39
