Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoYyr2Q1ftI
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the 18th Chapter. We will look at the happiness in the three modes. And
then, we will go on to talk about how the Vedic programme of karma-yoga. And
then, bhagavad arpit karma-yoga. And bhakti-yoga, you know, through jnana-yoga,
helps one to transcend from the arena of the modes to, you know, beyond the
modes. So, let us look at happiness in the three modes. You know. You know. So,
to go back, you know, the analysis, still now, you know, you know, we talked
about "jñānaṁ". "karma". And "kartā". In, in two classes earlier. And then,
"buddhiḥ". And "dhṛtiḥ", we talked about in our previous class. So, now, we come
to "sukhaṁ". You know. You know. So, the connection is that, you know,
ultimately, all action that we do, it is, we are aiming for the "phala". The
fruit of act..., the action is happiness. So, you know, happiness itself can be
in different modes. And let us look at the happiness in different modes. You
know. You know. "sukhaṁ". So, 36th verse.

        sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ
        śṛṇu me bharatarṣabha
        abhyāsād ramate yatra
        duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati

"sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ". So, "tri-vidhaṁ". Of three kinds. "sukhaṁ".
Happiness. "śṛṇu me bharatarṣabha". Oh, "bharatarṣabha". Oh, son of, son of
"Bhārata". There are these three kinds of happiness. "abhyāsād ramate yatra".
You know. That by practice, sometimes, one eng..., engages in this happiness.
And "duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati". You know. "duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati" means that,
sometimes, one, you know, comes out of misery. You know. "duḥkha". "antam". That
means the end of, you know, misery. The end of misery. So, you know, Krishna is
saying in the first part of the verse.

        sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ
        śṛṇu me bharatarṣabha

That three, hea..., hear, hear, oh, Arjuna, about three kinds of happiness. And
He gives a generic overview of the three kinds of happiness. By telling that,
you know, sometimes, you know, "abhyāsād ramate yatra". That by, that,
sometimes, the living entity engage..., eng..., enjoy this happiness. "ramate".
And sometimes, "duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati". You know. That, you know, the, you
know, c..., living entity comes out of all misery. Attains the end of all
sorrow. "duḥkha". "antam". You know. So, earlier, Krishna has talked about:

        antavanta ime dehā

That the body is temporary. And then, He has talked about how, you know, you
know:

        ādy-antavantaḥ kaunteya

So, you know, He has talked about, first "antavanta ime dehā", He talks about in
2.18. And then, 5.22, He talks about how material pleasure has a beginning. And
an end. And then, He has talked further about in the Seventh Chapter, the, how
the fruits of demigod worship are also temporary.

        antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ
        tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām

So, "antavat". Temporary. Or ending. That which has an end. That which is
temporary. So, the, Krishna has talked about various things that are
temporary. But here, He is talking about, you know, not just temporar...,
temporariness. He is talking about, you know, termination. Complete ending. The
termination of what? The termination of misery. So, how will this misery become
terminated? By the practice of, m..., m..., you know, "duḥkhāntaṁ ca
nigacchati". So, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura gives an alternative
explanation of this. He says that, so, basically, you know, you know, he
connects the second part of this verse, you know, the verse has four parts. A.
B. C. D. So, second part means C and D.

        abhyāsād ramate yatra
        duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati

So, he connects this with the next part. Next verse. Which is, 37th verse talks
about happiness in the mode of goodness. So, he says that, happiness in the mode
of goodness has to be cultivated. And "abhyāsād ramate yatra". That, actually,
this happiness does not come automatically. It has to be cultivated. One has to
practice it. "abhyāsād ramate yatra". That by "abhyāsāt", by practice, one will
start delighting in the happiness. And then, "duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati". So, it
is not that any and every happiness can bring the end of misery. There may be
some temporary relief. You know. You know. Sometimes, when people feel that, too
many problems. That they drink a bottle of liquor. Now, they think, you know,
they may not think literally. But their idea is that the solution to the problem
is from, that the bottom of a liquor bottle. No. At the bottom of a liquor
bottle, there is no solution to a problem. Actually, there is only worsening of
the problem. So, there may be a, there may be, seem to be like a "duḥkhāntaṁ".
Drown away all your misery, you know, in liquor. But no. Liquor makes things
worse. It makes a person suffer more than what the person was suffering earlier.
So, it is not a solution. It is an aggravation. So, therefore, "duḥkhāntaṁ ca
nigacchati". If one truly wants the "antam" of "duḥkha", the only way to do that
is by going beyond the material modes. Because as long as one is in the realm of
matter, you know, one will be encountering temporary things. And that is going
to cause suffering. "duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati". "duḥkha", "antam" will come when
one goes beyond the arena of matter. And to go beyond the arena of matter, one
has to practice. So, you know, you know, one cultivates happiness in goodness.
And after our goodness, one goes to transcendence. Now, in some ways, the
happiness in goodness and is transcendence is similar. And in some ways, it is
different. Let us understand this first by looking at happiness in goodness.
And we, there, we will look about, this con..., our concept, concept of
"abhyāsād ramate yatra" a little bit more. So, you know:

        yat tad agre viṣam iva
        pariṇāme ’mṛtopamam
        tat sukhaṁ sāttvikaṁ proktam
        ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam

"yat tad agre viṣam iva". That which in the beginning tastes like poison. But in
the end, "pariṇāme ’mṛtopamam". But which in the end taste like nectar. "tat
sukhaṁ sāttvikaṁ proktam". That happiness is in the mode of goodness. "sukhaṁ
sāttvikaṁ proktam". And its characteristic is "ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam".
"ātma-buddhi". "ātma-buddhi" means, you know, spiritual, you know, intelligence.
"ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam". So, "prasāda-jam" is born of. So, actually,
Prabhupada trans..., "prasāda", born of the satisfaction. And, actually, what
will, happens is, Prabhupada translate this as, you know, in the word to word,
he translates it as born of the satisfaction. In the sentence, he translated as,
as which awakens one to spiritual realisation. So, you know, you know, what
happens is that when one practices spiritual life. By the practice of spiritual
life, one moves forward from materialism to spirituality. And when one moves
forward from materialism to spirituality, one starts, you know, delighting at
the spiritual level. And to the extent, one starts delighting at the spiritual
level, to that extent, one becomes free, you know, sit..., more and more
situated on the spiritual, one's intelligence becomes spiritually inclined.
One's intelligence becomes spiritually situated. So, that is the meaning of
"ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam". "ātma-buddhi". Spiritual intelligence. And, you know,
actually, you know, for a child, for example, you know, you know, stu..., you
know, playing is natural. Whereas studying requires application. Requires
discipline. So, the child may not want to study at all. May feel bored. Oh. I
do not want to do this. It is so troublesome. But then, you know, a child has,
sometimes, the parents have to force the child to go to school. And then,
finally, the child goes to school. And when the child goes to school, then what
happens? You know. There, the child, the teacher asks. What is your name? And
child tells the name. And says, do you know how to spell your name? And then,
the, say, the child is small. He says no. You tell me. And the teacher tells how
to spell the name. Oh. This is so nice. Now, I can spell my name. And the child
starts getting the joy of learning. And as the joy of learning starts rubbing
off on the child. Then, the child, child becomes more and more eager. Let me
learn more. And more. And more. And in that way, the child starts relishing a
higher happiness. So, similarly, in spiritual, you know, in goodness, also, you
know, you know, initially, there may not be pleasure. But as one moves forward,
one starts experiencing higher pleasure. So, one starts experiencing the higher
pleasure. So, that higher pleasure is talked about as "pariṇāme ’mṛtopamam".
"pariṇāme ’mṛtopamam" means that which is the result. The result. "pariṇāme" is,
you know, you know, happiness. So, now, for example, another example could be
treatment. When we take any particular treatment, at that time, it is not
initially pleasurable. But if we take the treatment, then we become cured. And
then, we experience the higher happiness thereof. So, the word "pariṇāme" is
important. "pariṇāme", you know, ro..., can, it actually means result. So, the
result is, ultimately, you know, "sukhaṁ". Or "amṛta". So, it tastes like poison
in the beginning. Sometimes, if I have, somebody has a bitter medicine to take.
So, that bitter medicine is, you know, not palatable at all. In fact, the very
word bitter is the opposite of palatable. Antonym. But then, you know, you know,
you know, that, you know, what happens is, by that bitter medicine, our health
improves. Medicine is properly pre..., prescribed. And taken. And properly
adminstered. Then, what, you know, the bitter medicine may be better. But the
effect is, irre..., result is good. So, like that, you know, you know, "amṛ...",
"agre viṣam. "pariṇāme". "amṛta". You know. Now, actually, this appl..., now,
does this also apply to spiritual happiness? If we see, his, with respect to
spiritual happiness, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, in the "Śikṣāṣṭakam", mentions that
"pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". This is "prati-padaḿ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". So, He says that,
this happiness, in sankirtan, is "prati-padaḿ". Means that at every moment. At
every "padaḿ". That each step. How is it? "pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". "pūrṇāmṛtā". It
is complete nectar. You know. "prati-padaḿ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". So, He is,
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is not talking, here, about, say, in the beginning poison.
And late, nectar. He is saying, actually, it is complete nectar. That this is of
course, you know, you know, at a later stage. In the "Śikṣāṣṭakam", the, you
know, various effects of sankirtan that are described:

        ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaḿ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaḿ
        śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaḿ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

So, like that, as the various effects are described. "sarvātma-snapanaḿ".
"prati". "vijaya...", "paraḿ vijaya...", "prati-padaḿ", "prati-padaḿ
pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". So, like that, all this "paraḿ vijayate śrī-...",
"-sańkīrtanam". So, now, this is the, one of the last results. "prati-padaḿ
pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". So, actually, this is, at the spiritual level, you know,
the, spiritual, actually, the whole process is constantly ecstatic. The
reciprocation of love. The engagement in service. It is all profoundly ecstatic.
Until we come to the spiritual level, things may not be ecstatic. That, that
till then, it is a sadha..., it is a struggle. As sadhakas, we have to go
through that struggle. And when we go through that struggle, it is not easy. But
once we come to the sadh..., "siddha" level, then there is no "agre viṣam". And
"pariṇāme". "amṛta". It is completely "amṛta". But, you know, Rupa Goswami, in
the Upadesamrta, also gives the example of the medicine. He says:

        syāt kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi-sitāpy avidyā-
        pittopatapta-rasanasya na rocikā nu
        kintv ādarād anudinaṁ khalu saiva juṣṭā
        svādvī kramād bhavati tad-gada-mūla-hantrī

So, he says that, you know, you know, you know, "kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi-sitāpy
avidyā-". "avidyā". "avidyā" means ignorance. So, when we are covered over by
ignorance, it is like the tongue is affected by our disease. You know. And being
like jaundice. Because of which, one cannot taste the sweetness of sugarcane
jui..., juice. Our sweet things like sugarcane juice, say. So, similarly, we
cannot taste at our stage the sweetness of the holy name. And the sweetness of
Krishna. But as we become purified, we will be able to taste the sweetness of
Krishna. That is what is required. So, "ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam". So, Chaitanya
Maha..., so, Chaitanya, what Chai..., Rupa Goswami indicates, it is a more
specific example of the principle that is talked about over here. So, there are
now, for example, like the, it, the explanation of happiness in, through
learning. Through studying. You know. Now, in general, that is in goodness. That
is not necessarily transcendental. Or eternal. But that nature of poison in the
beginning, and nectar in the end, that applies to happiness in goodness. And
that also applies for happiness in transcendence. So, as sadhakas, you know, we
should not always be in the pleasure-searching mentality. You know. If at all,
we have to be in name, any searching mentalities, it is service-searching
mentality. Now, how can I serve Krishna? Whatever be the situation, Krishna, You
put me in, how can I serve You in that situation? And that service-searching
will enable us to move forward. And will enable us to stay or progressing in our
life. Because whatever the situation comes in, it is not that in all situations,
we can experience pleasure. But in all situations, we can certainly render
service. We may not be able to render service in a specific way. But we can
rend... service in some other way. In some way or the other, we can always
serve. At the very least, we can chant. Or we can remember Krishna internally.
So, service-searching mentality can help us to become elevated. So, "pariṇāme
’mṛtopamam". Now, you know, should we be looking forward to the "pariṇāme" of
"amṛta"? So, should we be looking forward for taste? For example, ruci. Ruci
refers to taste. So, when we talk about taste, what kind of taste are we
referring to? It is not just the taste that we get through bhakti. Ruci is one
of the nine stages in bhakt..., in the progression of bhakti from sraddha to
prema. As is talked about in "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". So, in this progression,
ruci is one of the advanced stages. So, it is not just that we are getting
pleasure at that level. Actually, we are giving pleasure to Krishna through our
service. And when we give pleasure to Krishna, naturally, we get pleasure by
that. You know. You know. You know. So, our i..., plea..., focus is always on
service. And the more we serve Krishna, the more we get pleasure in serving
Krishna. Because our service pleases Krishna. And then, Krishna in reciprocation
fills our heart with service. Fills our heart with pleasure. So, we focus
primarily on serving and pleasing Krishna. And naturally, we get a taste through
that as we become spiritually advanced. And we become pure-hearted. So,
initially, we practice bhakti as a discipline. Knowing that, ok, ultimately, you
know, it will take me to the spiritual level where I will please Krishna. And
then, that will bring me pleasure, also. So, it is a natural result of, you
know, purification. That we will get satisfaction, also. So, our goal is not our
satisfaction. Our goal is ultimately Krishna's satisfaction. But through
Krishna's satisfaction, we get satisfaction ourselves, too. Let us look at mode
in, you know, a happiness in the mode of passion, now. So, you know, you know,
you know, the nature of happiness in the mode of passion is, you know, you know,
the "viṣaya" and "amṛta" gets interchanged as compared to goodness.

        viṣayendriya-saṁyogād
        yat tad agre ’mṛtopamam
        pariṇāme viṣam iva
        tat sukhaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam

You know. So, "viṣayendriya-saṁyogād". So, when there is contact between the
senses and the sense objects. And by this "saṁyogāt", by this contact, what
happens? You know. "yat tad agre ’mṛtopamam". There is "amṛta" in the beginning.
There is nectar in the beginning. And what is the "pariṇāme"? "pariṇāme" is
"viṣam". Is poison. You know. "tat sukhaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam". This is happiness in
the mode of, you know, you know, you know, passion. You know. So, you know, you
know, you know, Krishna has already talked about in the 14th Chapter.

        rajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham

He says the result of "raja-gun...", practi..., li..., living in raja-guna is,
"phalaṁ duḥkham". The "phalaṁ" is "duḥkham". So, "yat tad", "agre", you know,
you know, "viṣa", "tad agre ’mṛtopamam". Now, Krishna makes, you know, that the
nature of s..., passionate pleasure is quite clear. When He says that they taste
like, they are, they result from the contact of the senses with the sense
objects. So, in this world, say, there are some good, you know, you know, foods
which look very good. And which taste very good. So, people eat it. So, then,
they eat. And eat. And eat. And then, it is "agre ’mṛtopamam". It is like nectar
in the beginning. But what happens eventually? You know. We cannot, our, our
digestive capacity is limited. So, we try to eat. And enjoy. But the capa...,
be cap..., digestive capacity being limited. Eventually, the result is that, we
get bloated. And that our stomach gets bloated. We get indigestion. We get, we
may get constipation. Or there are different kinds of problem we get. So, you
know, you know, actually speaking, the result is end, and the end result is that
there is misery. "pariṇāme viṣam iva". So, "viṣayendriya-saṁyogād". So, ok, the
tongue comes in contact with some delicious object. But the end result of that
is, you know, you know, "viṣaya", you know, you know, "pariṇāme viṣam iva". End
result is "viṣam". So, that is not at all, you know, a desirable kind of
happiness. Although, the whole world glamorises this kind of happiness. This
happiness is actually undesirable. You know. In the Ramayana, when Lord "Rāma" is
very grief-struck because of abduction of Sita. While consoling him, you know,
"Hanumān", "Sugrīva", and the "Vānara"s, they are talking. And they say that,
actually, at that time, "Sugrīva" says that, you know, "Rāvaṇa" can no more
enjoy Sita than can a person digest poison in food. Sometimes, there is the,
food is looking very delicious. It is opulent. It is very attractive to look
at. So, yeah. Oh. Wonderful food. And I can eat it. You know. When, as long as I
am eating it, it looks very nice. Oh. And some others meaning, also. This person
is eating so much. He is enjoying so much. But if that food is poisoned, you
know, I can eat it. But I cannot digest it. Once it goes inside, it start
burning me inside. And it can, it will kill me, actually. So, similarly, you
know, when people enjoy sense gratification, the, the, "agre" may be "amṛta".
You know. You know, When we say, oh, in the movies, they show, you know, some
good-looking man and woman embracing. And kissing. And doing all sorts of thing
which trigger erotic fantasies in the minds of people. And people start
thinking, oh, this is so enjoyable. And that is, you know, that is, that may be
there. Some initial enjoyment. But then, very few times do the movies talk about
"pariṇāme viṣam iva". "pariṇāme viṣam iva" can range over a wide spectrum.
"pariṇāme viṣam iva" can be, you know, you know, in terms of the consequences
of, you know, sense gratification. Like, you know, there can be ser..., the
terrible diseases that come up because of indiscriminate sex. There can be
terrible complications in terms of, you know, you know, if people have
extramarital affairs. Then, that can lead to abortion. That can lead to loss of
prestige. That can be, lead to, you know, you know, you know, b..., loud
triangles. Sort of conflicts. And this is with respect to, you know, so many
com..., "pariṇāme viṣam iva". And even if one does not talk about that. You
know. Even what is considered to be normal sex within marriage. If one gets too
attached to that. Then, that revets us to the bodily conception of life. And
once, one, a person is attached to the bodily conception of life, then one has
to suffer terribly as old age. Disease. And death come about. So, you know, we
cannot just switch on. And switch off our bodily conception. If we are in the
bodily conception, then we are deep in the bodily conception. You know. If we
are out, then we are out of the bodily conception.

So, actually, to the extent to be, enjoy sense gratification, to that extent,
we, you know, bind ourselves deeper and deeper into the bodily conception. And
when we bind ourselves deeper and deeper into bodily conception, it is very
difficult to come out of it. When we cannot come out of it, then, you know, we,
you know, suffer. When at the bodily level, suff..., you know, troubles come up.
So, old age, disease, death are the troubles, which all of us are going to face.
And along with that, there is also adhyatmika, dhibhautika, adhidaivika which
keep coming. So, "pariṇāme viṣam iva". So, all forms of sense gratification, you
know, they eventually lead to misery. The biggest misery being that they keep
us, you know, trapped in the cycl..., miserable cycle of birth and death. So,
that is why this sort of pleasure, you know, it has to be, if at all, that has
to be pursued, it has to be pursued within the limits of dharma. It is not that,
that the, that is itself good enough. But the point is, if s..., pursuit within
dharma, then what happens is, the practice of dharma gives us realisation. And
it enables us slowly to experience higher happiness. And then, the appeal of the
lower pleasure subsides and then one, eventually, one becomes free from the
allurement of those pleasures. Let us go now to the happiness in the mode of
ignorance. You know. You know.

        yad agre cānubandhe ca
        sukhaṁ mohanam ātmanaḥ
        nidrālasya-pramādotthaṁ
        tat tāmasam udāhṛtam

"yad agre cānubandhe ca". So, you know, from the beginning to the end. You know.
"anubandhe" refers to the end. So, from "agre". Beginning to the end. "sukhaṁ
mohanam ātmanaḥ". As we have mentioned earlier, the word "mohanam" is commonly
used with respect to the mode of ignorance by Krishna. You know. "sukhaṁ mohanam
ātmanaḥ". It completely puts the soul in illusion. And, you know, Krishna gives
three specific examples of, or three specific activities that comprise, you
know, the, you know, the pleasure in the mode of ignorance. "nidrā". "ālasya".
"pramādotthaṁ". So, "nidrā". "ālasya". "pramāda". You know. You know. Let us try
to understand these. "nidrā", as we know, is sleep. So, now, sleep is a
necessary bodily function. You know. So, Krishna has talked also earlier about:

        yuktāhāra-vihārasya
        yukta-ceṣṭasya karmasu

He has talked about in fif..., 6.16 and 17. Where He says:

        nāty-aśnatas tu yogo ’sti
        na caikāntam anaśnataḥ
        na cāti-svapna-śīlasya
        jāgrato naiva cārjuna

So, in those two verses, He has said that, if one sleeps too much. Or sleeps too
little. One cannot become a yogi. A yoga, a yogi should not do that. On the other
hand, if one has regulated one's sleeping. Of course, not just sleeping. But
other activities connected with the body, also. If one is regulated, then one
can, by the practice of yoga, become free from misery. So, Krishna essentially
is telling over that sleep is also basic bodily function. And it is essential
part of life. And it has to be regulated. But here, Krishna is not just talking
about "sukhaṁ". He is not talking about, you know, "nidrā". He is talking about
"sukhaṁ". So, you know, when one sleeps for the pleasure of sleeping, actually,
sleep is a bodily biological function. So, that is required as much. But one,
one makes sleep, not just for its function of biological restor..., you know,
restoration of, you know, energy. But also for, as an escape way from the
problems of life. What does that mean? That means, you know, I try to make one
thing work. It does not work. I try to make a second thing work, it does not
work. Third thing does not work. Then, I think, oh, God, life is so filled with
problems. So, what I do, I just eat. Eat. Eat. And then, I feel heavy. And then,
I go to sleep. Phew. I pull a blanket. And I forget all the problems. So, now,
sometimes, what happens is, you know, material nature humiliates us. You know.
Whatever we are trying to work, nothing works. And then, when we try to sleep,
we do not get sleep, also. That is frustrating. Nothing seems to work. So, we,
sometimes, Krishna, material nature pounds within us the realisation of utterly,
how helpless we are. We cannot even do, by our own efforts, such a basic
activity like sleeping. You know. Even from the, you know, both the experiential
and the analytical point of view, you know, every, we sleep, you know, every
day. Maybe several times every day. Especially, when classes are there, we may
sleep in the classes, also. But, you know, when we sleep, you know, you know,
how exactly we sleep, you know, it is a mystery. You know. You know. At one
moment, we are awake. And then, gradually, well, we are in..., welding into a
sense of sleepiness. And then, tuck. It is like a consc..., it is like a switch
that turns to another di..., place. So, we go from the "jagruti" stage to the
"svapna" stage. There are four different levels of consciousness. Tuck. From
"jagruti" to "svapna", we go. So, that is how we move, we get switched. Tuck.
Tuck. So, how it exactly happens, we do not know. But the point is that if one
seeks, you know, one's, one sleeps for the sake of pleasure as an escape way
from the torment of life. Then, that kind of escape way is undesirable. It is
counterproductive. And "nidrā". So, that i..., that is, you know, the, actually,
in that kind of pleasure, it is not a, you know, pleasure, actually. It is just
a, yout know, it is just, as I said, escape way. And we are just trying to run
away from problems over there. And we cannot run away for very long. You know.
The problems are still there. We are wishing the problems away. "nidrā".
"ālasya". "ālasya" refers to laziness. Sometimes, we have work to do. And we
just put off the work. So, some..., you know, sometimes, some people think that,
the more we are able to put off the work, the more clever we are. You know. I
gave, today, I gave this excuse. Tomorrow, I give that excu..., I will give that
excuse. And I have, tomorrow, I will give this excuse. And like that, somehow,
the work which we do not like to do, we just keep pushing it off. And we think,
oh, this is, the, I, the, I was able to get away from the work. But then, when we
think like that, the pro..., error with that is that, you know, how are we going
to grow in our life? You know. We grow by doing things. You know. There are
certain things we may not like to do. But sometimes, you know, you know, by
doing the things which we do not like to go, grow, you know, you know, you know,
do not like to do, we grow mentally. Because we develop our willpower. We
develop our determination. And we develop a culture of discipline. And all these
will stand us in good stead. Sometimes, we fee..., you know, goo..., in good
stead in the long run. You know. But, so, sometimes, we may feel, oh, this
activity is, you know, is not likable. And it is not very productive, also.
There is no use doing it. No. Even then, if we are oblig..., if we are expected
to do it. If our social obligations or spiritual obligations, whatever they
expect us to do it, we do that as a service. As a responsibility. And even if
nothing comes from it, that culture of self-discipline, that is going to help us
in the long run. You know. You know. So, "ālasya", actually, there is no misery.
There is no pleasure only in that. But one thinks that there is pleasure.
Because one assumes that, in that, I am enjoying. But I am not enjoying,
actually. I am suffering. So, "nidrā". "ālasya". "pramādotthaṁ".

"pramāda" means as intoxication. Illusion. Madness. So, "pramāda" can come in
various ways. One of the literal examples of "pramāda" is drinking. Now,
actually, when a person drinks, it is "agre cānubandhe ca". From the beginning
to end, it is actually misery. The person is miserable at the beginning, is,
then, I think, oh, I want to, I want some relief. And therefore, I will drink.
And once, a person starts drinking. Drinking. Drinking. Drinking. More and more
the person drinks, the more and more the person becomes bound by that
intoxication. And then, that person becomes like a mad man. There may be some
sense of control. And power. And pleasure. But actually, one is doing terrible
things. May, speaking terrible things. Doing terrible things. You know. One
becomes a, one becomes a, you know, ridiculously helpless afterwards. One may do
embarrassing things. Self-destructive things. One may do things that hurt
others. Sometimes, people, you know, another effect of alcohol, abuse others.
Assult others. It can, all sort of terrible things. So, there is no pleasure
over there. Then, afterward, one gets a hangover. One gets a regret. And then,
one has financial consequences. And other social consequences that come up
because of that. So, "agre cānubandhe ca". From beginning to end, there is
misery. You know. So, the "mohanam", or rather, "nidrālasya-pramādotthaṁ", the
"pramāda" can come in various ways. You know. The "pramāda" can also come
through, you know, television. You know. A television, you know, if we see, is
not run by, you know, you know, people who are interested in social welfare. You
know. It is run by people who are interested primarily in monetary gain. And
there may be some educational programmes. But a large variety of, a, the large
majority of things are primarily geared towards, you know, entertainment. And
not just, you know, simple innocent entertainment. But the kind of entertainment
that will trigger lust. Trigger anger. Trigger greed within us. You know. You
know. So, in general, the activities that are shown on television are rajasic
and tamasic. Most of the time. Rajasic. And tamasic. And these influence, the
influence of passion and ignorance is that, you know, you know, when we observe
such things, they have an affect on us. And they trouble us. They torment us.
You know. We get induced into doing similar activities. So, that is extremely
undesirable. When, for example, there are, you know, nowadays, in the, within
the entertainment, you know, lust and anger are glamorised. You know. For
example, sexually explicit scenes are quite common. And similarly, brutal
violence is also shown. And then, actually, many of these people, they say that
we have done surveys. And it does not have any affect. It is not that people go,
are going to act like that. You know. It, it is not that, you know, actually,
they say the media is, media is simply reflecting society. Media is not
affecting society, is reflecting society. That means their idea is that, you
know, that is what people are liking. And that is what, you know, people are,
that is why they are seeing it. Now, it is not that they will do it. They will
just see it. And they will stop at that. Actually, nobody stop..., peo..., it is
very difficult to stop just by seeing. Once the desires are induced, people will
want to do it. And if one does not, you know, si..., this is simple logical
point. But people do not agree to that. And sa..., instead, stakes are often
manipulated to try to have, keep the, say, like the pornographic industry going
on. And as contrasted with that, if we look at, say, advertisements. Now, you
know, the advertisements, they have no objective. It is not that, that, they
accept to, their only objective is to promote the product. And sometimes,
millions, billions of dollars are spen..., pen..., are, you know, are pumped
into advertising. Now, if by advertising a product, the, you know, you know,
people are not going to act according to their advertise..., advertisements.
That they show a popular icon, popular icon, maybe a sport star. Or movie star.
Or whatever. Such a person, you know, you know, you know, consuming a product.
Maybe eating. Or wearing. Or whatever. So, when people show something like this,
what is the result of that? Peop..., the people who are making the ads. And the
people who are paying to made the ads. The comp..., the producers of the product,
that is being glamorised, advertised, they know that that will imitate this. The
observ..., weavers, the audience, the spectators will imitate this. Ok. This
person is, you know, wearing this shampoo. Then, I will also wear this shampoo.
This  person is doing this. I will also do this. So, because they are sure of
that imitation, that is why, you know, they spend so much money. So, if a
five-second, ten-second, twenty-second, you know, you know, short advertisement
is like clay. Not just like clay, is surely going to affect people's behavior,
then what about programmes which are filled with lust? And, you know, you know,
you know, greed? How are they not going to affect people's minds? They are going
to affect people's minds. So, the pleasure that is there from beginning to the
end. What it is, it, it is actually tamasic. You know. So, you know, you know,
that which it dulls and lulls. That which it dulls and lulls. Lulls means that
it makes one physically complacent. You know. Phew. Just sit and watch. Sit and
watch. Sit and watch. It lulls people. And not only does it lull people. Lull
means, you know, to make physically inactive. And dull means to beak..., make
intellectually passive. People become dull. So, generally, because television is
so, such a passive medium. You know. People just have to watch. Consume digital
images. So, because of that, you know, their capacity for thought..., thinking,
goes down tremendously. Because their capacity for thinking goes down, you know,
so, therefore, they get caught in, they get caught in, you know, the seductively
appealing and e..., readily consumable images. And sometimes, people just keep
eating. Eating. You know. While watching. They are watching. And eating. They
keep eating potato chips. And they become like potatoes after that.

So, what is happening over there? The, actually, the pleasure is in illusion.
So, it can be in passion. It can also be in ignorance. Especially, when people
become addicted. Television addiction is there. Then, people spend hours and
hours watching television. Now, of course, whatever is available in television,
they can be available in a much more high-tech way through the internet. And,
you know, if television had a hundred, two hundred channels. Then, internet,
there are thousands of websites. And there are games. And there are so many
things over there. So, one has to be careful. Now, it is not that, one has to
necessarily give up these things. It is not necessary that television itself is
in ignorance. What we are talking about is the "sukhaṁ". What kind of "sukhaṁ"
one is pursuing. So, on the internet, also, we can have spiritual educa...,
spiritual educational programmes. You know. One has to de..., desi..., one has
to basically decide what kind of happiness I want to pursue in my life. You
know. You know. Actually, the, our standard of life will largely be determined
by our standard of happiness. Standard of happiness means, you know, you know,
what kind of happiness do I want to pursue in lives? What, what is the way that
I want to live in my life? The standard of happiness that I am going to pursue,
you know, that is what is going to enable me to, you know, either raise. Or go
down in my life. So, if we pursue, if we chase after happiness in ignorance.
There may be some happiness there. But overall, our consciousness, our life, and
our lo..., post life destination, you know, you know, you know, they are all
going to be downwards. So, if we choose upwards. If we choose happiness in
goodness. And practice "abhyāsād ramate yatra". If we practice to make spiritual
advancement, then gradually, we can get unending happiness. So, this is about,
you know, happiness in the mode of ignorance. Let us move forward now, you know,
you know, to the next topic. So, here, the analysis of the modes ends. And now,
from here onwards, Krishna starts talking about how one raises from karma-yoga
through, you know, through varnashram, through jnana-yoga to, ultimately, to
bhakti-yoga. So, what is the connection between this and previous sections? This
chapter, you know, actually, the chapter started with, you know, you know, a
discussion of, we, Arjuna's question. Ar..., what is better? Is action better?
You know. Or, Krishna is asking. Effectively, Arjuna's question is the same as
what was the right, at the beginning of the "Bhagavad-gītā". Is action better? Or
is renunciation better? But here here, he rephrases it as, you know, can You
explain it to me what is renun..., what is "tyāga"? And what is "sannyāsa"?
That was the starting eight, question in 18.1. And Arjuna's, Krishna's answer
was that, actually, you know, you know, rather than renouncing work, one should
work. But with a spirit of renunciation. Work with detachment. And how work
will, work with detachment will keep one free from bondage, to describe that,
the subsequent two sections came up. So, 1 to 12 was talking about how
karma-yoga, or is better, karma-yoga, you know, was, is the recommended course.
Then, you know, then, one talk..., talking about the jnana of the karma-yogi.
They are talking about the jnana of karma-yogi. They are five factors of action
we have, describes.

        adhiṣṭhānaṁ tathā kartā
        karaṇaṁ ca pṛthag-vidham

So, and after discussing that, you know, then the various, you know, components
of action. "jñānaṁ". "karma". "kartā". And "buddhiḥ". "dhṛtiḥ" They were
discussed. And then, "sukhaṁ". The objective of action. That was discussed. So,
after discussing this, now, you know, you know, how the karma-yogi with an
introspective attitude. With the jnan..., within, can gradu..., we can stay
free from bondage, that is discussed. Now, how this is integrated into social
structure of varnashram. And how through the social structure of varnashram,
people become elevated. You know. That will be discussed in the next section.
So, let us go to the, you know, you know, 18.40 here.

        na tad asti pṛthivyāṁ vā
        divi deveṣu vā punaḥ
        sattvaṁ prakṛti-jair muktaṁ
        yad ebhiḥ syāt tribhir guṇaiḥ

So, "na tad asti pṛthivyāṁ vā". That in the whole of "pṛthivyāṁ". In the whole
of earth, you know, "divi deveṣu vā punaḥ". So, what to speak of the earth? Even
in the heavenly planets, amonst the devatas, "pṛthi...", you know, "sattvaṁ
prakṛti-jair muktaṁ". So, in all of existence, "sattvaṁ" here does not refer to
goodness. "sattvaṁ" here refers to all of existence. So, both meanings are there
for "sattvaṁ". "prakṛti-jair muktaṁ". "prakṛti-jair" means that which is born of
"prakṛti". So, "yad ebhiḥ syāt tribhir guṇaiḥ". "tri...", "tribhir guṇaiḥ". So,
"tribhir guṇaiḥ". These three modes which are born of "prakṛti". Nobody is
"muktaṁ". Nobody is free from these modes. You know. You know. You know.
Everybody is under the influence of these modes. So, you know, you know, Krishna
has earlier also talked about this theme of how nobody can be inactive. But
here, Krishna is talking about the, uni..., all, the universality of the
influence of the three modes. You know. Everybody is influenced by the three
modes. Nobody is free. So, even the devatas, we see, some time, they act in
passion. Indra gets attracted to the, you know, to, say, Gautama rsi's wife. Or
things like that. So, these are, you know, these are indicative that the modes
are there everywhere. So, now, if a problem is there everywhere, then there has
to be program for solvin..., solving that problem. And that programme is the
system of varnashram. And that will be described in the next verse. You know.

	    brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśāṁ
    	śūdrāṇāṁ ca paran-tapa
    	karmāṇi pravibhaktāni
	    svabhāva-prabhavair guṇaiḥ

You know. So, "brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśāṁ". "brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśāṁ. 	So, these
are, "viśāṁ" is a short form for vaiśya. And "śūdrāṇāṁ ca paran-tapa". Oh,
"paran-tapa". You are a conqueror. You are a great conqueror. But that does not
mean that you alone can conquer everything. Actually, it means that, you know,
i..., you know, for even, if you want to conquer influence of the modes, you
will have take shelter of a particular, you know, you know, particular, you
know, system of sociocultural organisation. By which, you can conquer these
modes. Just like, if there is sickness, now, it is not just by willpower that
the sickness can be overcome. Willpower is important. But willpower has to be
coupled with a proper programme for treatment. So, similarly, you know, you
know, you know, actually, it is, varnashram is quite a remarkable system. And
we do not see sy..., anything, you know, as systematic as varnashram present in
any of the religious cultures of the world. You know. What does it mean? When I
am saying this. That, actually, every religion has at its core, certain
scriptures. Say, there is the Bible for the Christians. There is the Quran for
the Muslims. You know. And like that, the religions have their scripture. And
those, to, give some broad principles of how to live. And how to act. But when
it comes to, you know, you know, acting within day-to-day life, it is a very
complex thing to do. Now, the spiritual scriptur..., spiritual scriptural
principles are quite demanding. And to understand them. To internalise them.
You know. Life in the material world generally is materialistic. So, the
environment is materialistic. The matter, extent of materialism may be lesser.
Or more. At different times. But materialism is very much there. You know. You
know. So, when materialism is there, like that, how does one overcome the
influence of materialism? It is not easy. The way to influence this, overcome
this influence is by practicing spiritual life, you know, in a structured way.
So, without such a structured arrangement, we just endeavol..., individual
endeavor is quoti uphill. So, in the Vedic culture, through this:

        cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ

As Krishna says that, you know, actually, these four varanas, if we see them as
four human types. Not as castes. But as four human types. So, whether it is in
a, you know, if, even if the mainstream religion of a particular area is
Christian, or it is Muslim, or whichever way it is, may be, you know, if within
that area, if within that area, people are, you know, there will be, there will
be national, national divison. There will be people who are "brāhmaṇas". There
will be "kṣatriyas". There will be "vaiśyas". There will be "śūdras". There will
be people, people of these tendencies. There will be some people who will be
adminstrators. There will be some people who will be intellectuals. There will
be some people who will be, you know, you know, you know, you know, there will
be some people who will be, you know, business-inclined. And some people who
will be general assistants. Artisans. And things like that. So, these are all
definitely, you know, important things. In terms of, you know, you know, these
are naturally present in society. But that does not mean that the people, you
know, will automatically behave according to those qualities. We will see later
on, in this, you know, section, this division, when Krishna will describe. He
will talk about the qualities with which these particular varanas are meant to
live. So, there will always be intellectuals. But that does not mean that just
by being an intellectual, one will, can make spiritual advancement. You know.
One has to be an intellectual. But one has to also have a social structure.
Where one's intellectual role, you know, can be performed. In a way that leads
to gradual spiritual advancement. So, there are intellectuals. And they can
study different varieties of subjects. Different kinds of books. You know. And
through the study of different kinds of books, they can learn. And they can
grow. No doubt about that. But as they are learning and growing through that,
you know, if that learning is divorced from the ultimate purpose of life, then
that learning is not of much substantial use. So, for it, to be a substantial
use, it has to be connected with the ultimate goal of life. The ultimate goal
being self-realisation. Krishna-realisation. So, you know, you know, for the
intellectuals to perform their intellectual role in a way that is harmonious
with the ultimate purpose of life, a social structure is required. Otherwise,
intellectuals have to do whatever, you know, role is available for them. In
their particular sociocultural environment. So, now, in today's environment,
intellectuals may become scientists. Intellectualls may beco..., you know, you
know, you know, you know, may go into literature. And, you know, they may write
poetry. And, or they may write philosophical literature. Or social analysis,
Now, definitely, their intellectual skills are required. And they are used,
also. But that is not that, by this, they will develop intellectual qualities in
terms of what brahmanical qualities are expected. So, there is "guṇa". And
"karma".

        cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ
        guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ

So, that is what Krishna has talked about in the Fourth Chapter. And that, He
will be elaborating in this chapter about, how these modes ultimately take a
person to transcendence. How they help a person, you know, to ultimately come to
Krishna. You know. That is what will be talked about over here. But first, He
will talk about the, at the material level, what are the qualities expected of
each of the intellectuals. So, when I said, when we say that, "mayā sṛṣṭaṁ".
This is created by Krishna. That means "brāhmaṇas". "kṣatriyas". "vaiśya".
"śūdras". They are present in all societies. That simply means that, you know,
you know, people with those karmic tendencies are there. "guṇa". And "karma".
So, that "karma" which is there, that proficiency to do that activity. So, say,
proficiency is to earn money. Proficiency is to organise. And manage. And
delegate. And oversee. Say, which is a "kṣatriya"'s propensity. So, that is
there. You know. So, you know, you know, you know, that is good. You know. If
one has that capacity, one should use that capacity. So, a person who has a
"vaiśya" propensity should be engaging in "vaiśya" activities. That is how the
person will get even what, you know, what, in material circles, is called as job
satisafaction. One will be satisfied in doing activities according to one's
propensity. You know. If one can do that, discover one's propensity. And act
accordingly. That is good. But just acting according to one's propensity is not,
you know, does not relate, relate to naturally playing a role in varnashram.
Actually, acting according to one's propensity is just one part of it. The other
part of it is that one has to, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
you know, do that karma within dharmic framework. So, if one is an intellectual,
one should study about shastra. And teach about shastra. To study spiritual
knowledge. Teach spiritual knowledge. When there is a dharmic framework for
one's, you know, you know, performance of, you know, prescribed duties. Then
that will gradually lead to elevation. So, "svabh...":

        karmāṇi pravibhaktāni
        svabhāva-prabhavair guṇaiḥ

"svabhāva-prabhavair guṇaiḥ". So, one's "svabhāva" is, associates one's modes.
So, from that "svabhāva", emerge the certain propensities. And the system of
varnashram. "pravibhaktāni". It is divided in such a way that everybody,
accordin to their nature, can become elevated. So, let us look at the qualities
of the "brāhmaṇas". You know. Being:

        śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ
        kṣāntir ārjavam eva ca
        jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ
        brahma-karma svabhāva-jam

You know. So, "śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ". So, Krishna lists over here four plus
two plus three. Four in the first line. Two in the second line. And three in the
third line. Nine qualities of a "brāhmaṇa". You know. And He says "brahma-karma
svabhāva-jam". So, for a person who has to do "brahma-karma". For a person who
has brahmanically inclined. These qualities are important. So, what are these
qualities? You know. You know. It is interesting when Krishna talks about these
qualities, there is no mention of bhakti over here. You know. You know. Why is,
in the qualities of a "brāhmaṇa", bhakti not mentioned? You might, saying, a
"brāhmaṇa" does not have to have bhakta? Well, not necessarily. You know. The
quality, that is mentioned, relevant over here, is "āstikyam". "āstikyam" means
faith in scripture. Faith in the principles of Vedic culture. Now, that faith
does not necessarily have to be in the faith in the highest principles of Vedic
culture. The highest principle of Vedic culture is pure devotion. So, we see in
the "Bhāgavatam" that, you know, you know, in the nine, you know, there is the
Bali Maharaja pastime, in which, Shukracharya actually works against the
purposes of Vishnu. That Bali, Bali Maharaja wants to surrender, you know, as
per the promise that Va..., He has given to "Vāmana" Deva. And Shukracharya is
telling, you know, no, He is Vishnu. Do not submit. So, now, you know, although,
you know, Shukracharya does that, you know, at the end of the pastime, we do not
see Shukracharya being chastised by Lord Vishnu. You know. It is certainly clear
from that whole context that, you know, you know, Shukracharya is not a pure
devotee. You know. And the whole pastime, actually, is meant, you know, you
know, meant to demonstrate, you know, you know, you know, you know, the exalted
devotion of Bali Maharaja. But at the same time, there is no remonstration.
Remonstrate means, you know, chastisement of, you know, Ba..., you know,
Shukracharya that happens directly over there. So, it is not considered that you
are a hypocrite. You are, why are you against Vishnu? You are not a proper
"brāhmaṇa". No. "brāhmaṇas" can be of different levels. And there can be
"brāhmaṇas" who perform, you know, who perform also t..., rajasic, tamasic
activities. They may not necessarily be talking about principles of pure
devotion. You know. So, for example, there are tamasic rituals, also, which are
there. You know. In, we know there, the "Purāṇa"s talk about, you know, worship
in goodness. Worship in passion. Worship in ignorance. And the, if the worship
in ignorance is to be performed. Then, there have to cer..., certain priests
who will perform that worship in ignorance. So, within that framework, those
priests are considered "brāhmaṇas". So, those "brāhmaṇas" may not have princ...,
faith in the principles of pure devotion. But as long as they have generic faith
in scriptures. Generic faith in the existence of a higher power. With whom, we
need to high..., harmonise for gaining our needs fulfilled. For getting our
needs fulfilled. You know. That faith is defining to the, you know, life of a
"brāhmaṇa". You know. You know. So, "āstikyam". "āstikyam". So, you know, the
bhakti may not be always there in a "brāhmaṇa". And that is why, you know, there
are "śloka"s which talk about, like, you know, like, you know, you know,
Prahlada Maharaja says:

        viprād dvi-ṣaḍ-guṇa-yutād aravinda-nābha-
        pādāravinda-vimukhāt śvapacaṁ variṣṭham
        manye tad-arpita-mano-vacanehitārtha-
        prāṇaṁ punāti sa kulaṁ na tu bhūrimānaḥ

He says, if there is a "brāhmaṇa" with all the qualities of a "brāhmaṇa", you
know, but if that "brāhmaṇa" is turned away from Vishnu. And in contrast, there
is a bhak..., there is a "śvapacaṁ". Person very lowborn. But he is turned
toward Vishnu. That "śvapacaṁ" is much great. So, the point is that, "brāhmaṇa"
may not have bhakti all the time. So, there can be a "brāhmaṇa" who can be the
"mukha". Who can be turned away from Lord Vishnu. So, from the material point of
view, the "brāhmaṇa" is in a high varana. But from the devotional perspective,
that "brāhmaṇa" is, you know, not favorably situated. He is unfavorably situated
as compared to "śvapacaṁ". So, you know, you know, the point which we are making
is that, you know, varnashram is primarily a material sociocultural division. It
is not out favorable for furious..., spiritual life. But it does not have to be
intrinsically spiritual. It does not have to be intrinsically spiritual. And,
you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, it does not have to be, you
know, it, that, it is not that "brāhmaṇas" have to be intrinsically situated,
you know, in devotion to be called "brāhmaṇas". Yes, as devotees, you know, when
we develop, take "brāhmaṇa" diksha, it is assumed that we are practicing
vaishnavism. And then, when the, when we take "brāhmaṇa" diksha, it is more like
we come to goodness. By which, we can practice devotion more steadily. But the,
intrinsically, the "brāhmaṇas" do not have to be devotees. Although, from the
perspective of the conclusion of Vedic culture, devotees are highest than,
higher than "brāhmaṇas". So, the devotees, when they mature, when the
"brāhmaṇas", then they mature, that time, they will become devotees. But here,
what are the qualities that are mentioned? "śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ". So,
Prabhupada exp..., "śamaḥ". And "damaḥ" are refer..., "śamaḥ" refers to sense
control. "damaḥ" refers to mind control. Sense control means, that is, you know,
"śam...", sorry, "śamaḥ" refers to sense, you know, mind, you know, mind
control. And "damaḥ" refers to sense control. So, actually, it is best if we do
not let the mind, only, get agitated. By temptation. But if the mind gets
agitated, then at least, we do not act according to temptation. You know. You
know. So, if I know, there is a thief outside, the best is I do not open the
door, only. But if I open the door and the thief starts charging in, then I have
to fight against. Bang myself against the door. And the close the door. And push
the thief out. So, like that, I know, outside the door of my consciousness, maya
is there. Temptations are there. So, best is, lock the door. That means, best is
just keep the mind busy in Krishna's service. And do not le..., open the door
for, do not leave time and scope for maya to come inside. But if somehow, we
leave the door open. Maya. Tuck. Forces the way inside. Then, what do we do? We
push back. We chant Hare Krishna. Take shelter of Krishna. Fill our mind with
Krishna. And close the door again. Busy ourselves in Krishna. So, "śamaḥ". And
"damaḥ". So, it is best if we can do "śamaḥ". Keep the mind, only, peaceful. If
we cannot do "śamaḥ", then at least "damaḥ". Do not let the indulgence happen at
the physical level even if the mind's agitation is there. And living in this
way, "śamaḥ" and "damaḥ", that is "tapaḥ". You know. So, "tapaḥ" involves, also,
"brāhmaṇas" are expected to live qui..., quite austerely. There are fast...,
there is the various ways they have to fast. Various kinds of cleanliness that
they have to follow. That is mentioned. "śaucaṁ". You know. "kṣāntir ārjavam eva
ca". "kṣāntiḥ", as Prabhupada mentions over here, is tolerance. So, "brāhmaṇas"
generally do not raise weapons. You know. When "Vishvamitra" who, pure, was
previously a king, "Kaushika". When he came to steal the cow of "Vaśiṣṭha" Muni.
"Vaśiṣṭha" Muni did not take up any weapons to fight. So, why? Because
"brāhmaṇas" are expected to be forgiving. You know. You know. "brāhmaṇas" do not
refer, whenever, the, even if they are attacked, they just tolerate it.
"kṣāntir". "ārjavam". "ārjavam" means honesty. You know. The "brāhmaṇas" should
not speak falsity. False. So, the, because if they false, false, fix, falsehood,
then they are, you know, they are meant to fa..., speak the ultimate truth. And
take people towards the ultimate truth. So, when they start, you know, speaking
falsehood, then that is a contamination in the brahminical culture. And then,
"jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ". Brahmanas cultivate spiritual knowledge. And then,
they live in such a way, in a pure, dedicated way, by which, they realise that
spiritual knowledge. So, "jñānaṁ" is theoretical knowledge. "vijñānam" is, you
know, internalised, realised knowledge. And for this "jñānaṁ" and "vijñānam" to
have a spiritual orientation, they have to have a faith in spirit, it is,
spiritual reality. They have to have faith in scripture that guides one to
spiritual reality. And they have to have faith in the overall brahminical
culture. You know. You know. So, these are the qualities of a "brāhmaṇa". And as
devotees, we also try, try to develop as many of these qualities as possible.
And by that, we also creat a platform by which we can make steady spiritual
advancement. So, the, what is the role of varnashram? In bhakti yoga? That we
will discuss further in our next class.

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
