Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pgc2M8xtgqU
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are now in
the 17th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. You know. We are discussing about
"yajña-dāna-tapaḥ" in the three modes. So, we discussed about "yajña". You know.
You know. Now, as a part of, you know, "tapaḥ". We will be discussing about
austerity of body. Austerity of mind. And austerity of speech. So, let us start
that discussion now. You know. 17.14 in the Bhagavad Gita. We discussed the, you
know, 13th verse.

        deva-dvija-guru-prājña-
        pūjanaṁ śaucam ārjavam
        brahmacaryam ahiṁsā ca
        śārīraṁ tapa ucyate

So, "deva-dvija-guru-prājña-". So, the, here, it is describing that we should
respect "pūjanaṁ". "pūjanaṁ" means, it does not necessarily have to mean
"pū...", doing "pūja" literally. That can also be one aspect of it. You know.
You know. So, it is necessarily even doing worship. But it basically means
respecting. So, doing "pūja" is one way of expressing respect. So, who are all
the people to be respect? "deva". "deva" can refer to the Supreme Lord. "deva"
can refer to the devatas, also. So, Prabhupada explains that they wor...,
worship the Supreme Lord. Because ultimately, the Supreme Lord is the greatest
of all the devas. So, "deva", "deva". He is also referred to. You know. In, when
we want to contrast. And establish His supreme position. But "deva" is also a,
you know, one way to refer to the Supreme Lord. So, "deva-dvija-guru-prājña-".
"dvija". Other brahmanas. "guru" is, you know, all brahmanas in general are
spiritual teachers. But there is one particular brahmana who becomes our
specific spiritual master. "deva-dvija-guru-prājña-". And in general, anybody
who is advanced in knowledge. So, Chanakya Pandit says that, you know, you know,
you know, a, a powerful person may be respected in his own area. But a
knowledgeable person is able to un..., on, respect everywhere. Because of
the wisdom that that person has. So, "prājña". One who is wise is respected. So,
these are all people, we should respect.

        deva-dvija-guru-prājña-
        pūjanaṁ śaucam ārjavam

"śaucam". Cleanliness. Cleanliness means, well, per..., we have talked about
this repeatedly. Several times that has come in the Bhagavad Gita. Internal and
external cleanliness. "ārjavam". "ārjavam" is, as Prabhupada translates over
here, simplicity. Or straightforwardness. This is also quality been mentioned
earlier. You know. And:

        brahmacaryam ahiṁsā ca
        śārīraṁ tapa ucyate

So, all these are "śārīraṁ tapa". They are, the, austerities of the body.
"śā...", "ār...", What is it? So, "brahmacaryam ahiṁsā ca". So, "brahmacaryam"
and "ahiṁsā", it is interesting that Krishna has coupled them together over
here. Earlier, we have, saw how Krishna was coupling in "kāma" and "krodha"
together. So:

        kāma-krodha-vimuktānāṁ

You know. You know.

        kāma-krodhodbhavaṁ vegaṁ

So, He has been coupling "kāma" and "krodha" together several times in the
Bhagavad Gita. So, "kāma". The, the way to control "kāma" is to practice
"brahmacaryam". You know. The way to kept, you know, control, you know,
"krodha", is to practice "ahiṁsā". So:

        brahmacaryam ahiṁsā ca
        śārīraṁ tapa ucyate

"śārīraṁ tapa". These are austerities of the body. So, in general, all our
activities can be classified into these three categories. Those which are, with,
do the body. With the speech. And with the mind. So, you know, you know, we also
discov..., you know, discussed about, you know, these three, these different
"vegaṁ". Which Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura also classifies into bodily,
mental and verbal. So, the sannyasis also have the "ta...", three "daṇḍa". Which
also indicates that they will, which has three parts in it. And which indicates
thus, they will serve the Lord. With their body. With their mind. And with their
speech. You know. You know. So, "deva-dvija". So, what is Prabhupada telling
over here in this purport? Let us have a look briefly. You know. You know. You
know. You know. So, Prabhupada says:

"One should offer, or learn to offer,"

You know. And Prabhupada also includes the God. Or the demigods. That means
what? "offer, or learn to offer". That means austerity is also something which
we may not feel like doing. But we do it. Now, when the devotees asked Srila
Prabhu..., you know, you know, Prabhupada has told the etiquette of offering
obeisances to the spiritual master. And the devotees asked Prabhupada, we do not
feel like doing it. You know. You know. One devotee asked Srila
Prabhupada. So, Prabhupada, you know, I do not fee..., he was, devotees were
not offering obeisances. So, Prabhupada asked him, why are you not offering
obeisances? You know. Prabhupada had to educate devotees. He himself had to ask.
You know. So, at that time, the devotees said that Prabhupada, I did not, you
know, you know, I did not feel like offering obeisances. So, Prabhupada said
you do offer obeisances. Then, gradually, the feeling will come. You know. So,
it is said that when the deities come in front of us. When the darshan opens.
You know. That once devotees, you know, they feel so ecstatic. They feel so
overwhelmed with joy. That often they feel it in ecstasy. This is, "Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu", sometimes, when he would get darshan of Krishna, you know, just run
in that direction. And then, suddenly, faint completely. So, that is, you know,
the idea that, you know, when a pure devotee is, an exal..., advanced devotee,
they get darshan of Krishna, they faint. And if he cannot faint, then at least,
we fall down. So, when there is pure love, there will be ecstatic fainting. But
at least, if not, then there is falling. You know. Falling in obeisances. This
is austerity. Even we do not feel like doing, do it. What will happen? By this,
itself a proper set of culture, you know, cultural impressions are created
within our minds. So, we learn to offer respect. You know. You know. So, the,
all these are bodily austerities. So, "ahiṁsā" means, somebody gets, you know,
somebody provokes us, at that time, it is, you know, it is, you know, it
requires willpower. And discipline. You know. You know. To, you know, you know,
not lash out. And hit out at somebody, who has provoked us. You know. You know.
So, how do we avoid that provocation? That is an austerity. You know. How, how
do we avoid getting provoked when somebody, means when the provocation comes.
That is an austerity. Now, you know, in general, you know, you know, in material
life, people messages that count until ten. So that you do not ae..., come to
anger. That may help. A devotee may count Hare, chant Hare Krishna maha mantra
ten times. A devotee may remember some verses. You know. Which con..., you know,
talk about the danger of anger, you know, danger of anger. But in general, you
know, all, every devotee has to develop one's own pause button. You know. You
know. Pause button means, just like when a, you know, movie is playing. And
then, you know, we do not want it to move onwards. So, pause. So, like that,
when we are moving forward, at that time, we realise that, oh, I am not going in
the right dire..., I am going in the wrong direction. I am doing something
which, you know, if I move in this direction. I will end up doing something
dangerous. So, then, tuck. We have to have our own pause button. Which checks
us. So, what does the pause button mean? Pause button does not necessarily mean
that we have to become motionless completely. Pause button means we have to stop
our mind from following its default tra..., trajectory towards, you know,
temptation. And then fall, fall down. You know. So, the, that pause button may
be for some devotees by chanting. For some devotees, by hearing kirtans. By
s..., by, by maybe reading one's own, some inspirational passages which we have
taken from scripture. You know. Which we have, some, you know, some mo...,
motivational points we have heard in classes. All of us have to, you know, this
is where the individual aspect of Krishna Consciousness comes up. You know. I
have my mind. You have your mind. And the way you will fight with your mind will
be different from the way I will fight with my mind. So, we all have to find out
our ways. And fight according to our ways. Whatever those ways may be. You know.
You know. So, it is how we fight against the mind. And we make spiritual
advancement.
 
So, we will have to individualise. Although the principles are universal. But
the specific ways in which we apply them may be, you know, spe..., may be
different for different individuals. But this is the austerity of the body. You
know. You know. You know. So, it is interesting now that what is put it
simplicity. Now, "ārjavam" can be con..., translated as straightforwardness.
Which will be more an inner attribute. "ārjavam" can be translated as
simplicity, also. So, now, ar..., you know, the word "Arjuna" is related with
the word "ārjavam". "ārjavam". Arjuna. So, they have a similar, you know, and
cognate sense. The idea is that, you know, "ārjavam" means simplicity. So, you
know, the more simpler we live, the more we have time for, you know, higher
thought. You know. Simple living. And higher thinking. Simple living and high
thinking. Why is it mentioned? You know. Prabhupada also talks about the plain
living. And high thinking. Why? Because the simpler our living, the more we have
time for high thinking. The more complex our living, then the more, our, you
know, co..., thoughts get caught up in the living, only. So, this does not mean
that a devotee cannot use technology. A devotee cannot have opulence. No. What
is required. What is required. Now, the media pressure, the cultural pressure is
such that today that people acquire gadgets. And conveniences. And trinkets.
Just for the sake of glamor. Just for the sake of prestige. You know. We have
discussed earlier about shopaholism. So, for a devotee, what will simplicity be?
That will vary according to time, place, circumstance. You know. Every devotee
has to decide. You know. What level of engagement with material things is
necessary for my, my service? My social position? You know. And what necessary
level of engagement is sucking me in? So, that is something which every devotee
has to decide. And accordingly, live. We may not be able to disconnect ourselves
entirely from material, ma..., from technology and such things. But that does
not necessarily mean that we have to entangle ourselve..., let ourselves
completely entangled in them. So, instead of simple living and high thinking,
many people end up simply living and hardly thinking. Simply living. Hardly
thinking. What does that mean? That mean..., now, so, sure, it is not that
people are hardly thinking. So, then, they are not thinking. See, everybody
thinks. You know. We are all the time thinking. Even when a, you know, you know,
he-dog is attracted to a she-dog. You know. The he-dog is thinking. So, when
male is attracted to female. Or a female is attracted to male. They are
thinking. But that thinking is not really considered thinking. Because it is
simply at the bodily level. It is at the animal level. And there is nothing, you
know, very exalted about that. So, therefore, real thinking is thinking at the
spiritual level. And simple living facilitates high thinking. You know. You
know. And the living is complex, then, oh, I have to do this, also. I have to
manage that, also. I have to take care of this, also. I have to take, so, you
know, todos at the material level itself become so many. And so complex. That
they suck our mental energy. So, Prabhupada is talking here about "ārjavam" as
simplicity. You know. You know. You know. Generally, the more wealth we earn,
the more we rise in social status. But then, the more we have to struggle to
maintain that social status, also. And that also brings its own entanglements.
That also brings its own irritations. That also brings its own, you know,
complications. And agitations. That is why a devotee tries to live as simply as
is possible. The, given the, you know, you know, given the limitations of time,
place, and circumstance. You know. You know. Now, after describing this, now, of
course, we will not go too much into "brahmacaryam". Because that has been topic
which we have discussed repeatedly over here.

        brahma carati iti brahmacarya

One who li..., tries to live on the spiritual platform. That is a brahmacarya.
Then:

        anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ
        satyaṁ priya-hitaṁ ca yat
        svādhyāyābhyasanaṁ caiva
        vāṅ-mayaṁ tapa ucyate

You know. You know. "anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ". You know. You know. You know. You
know. "anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ". You know. You know. You know. "anudvega" means to
decrease the agitation. "anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ". That which does not cause
agitation. "vāky...". The words which do not agitate others. Then, "satyaṁ
priya-hitaṁ ca yat". "satyaṁ". Those which are truthful. You know. "priya".
Those which are pleasing. You know. And then, those which are beneficial.
"svādhyāyābhyasanaṁ caiva". That means words which involve, "svādhy...", you
know, "svādhyāya". Study. And then, "abhyasanam". Practice. So, Prabhupada
translate this as recitation of scripture. Regularly recitation scripture.
"svādhyāyābhyasanaṁ caiva". We study. And then, we recite scripture. All this is
"vāṅ-mayaṁ tapa ucyate". You know. "vāṅ-mayaṁ tapa". Austerity of the speech.
So, Prabhu..., we have discussed earlier in "vāco vegaṁ" how, you know, the
materialistic tendency is to talk about hundreds and hund..., millions of
things. And the spiritual tendency is to, and the spiritual inclination is to
fu..., keep the speech chased and focused on Krishna. And things related with
Krishna. So, here, Krishna is not necessarily talking about bhakta. He is
talking in general about austerity. And He is talking about how even from a
material point of view, one should be able to discipline and regulate oneself.
So, "anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ". How should one speak? Generally speaking, you know,
sarcasm, and, you know, you know, you know, sarcasm is often considered to be a
sign of intelligence. Where people want to hur..., hurt others. And they speak
in such a way that the more they can hurt others, the thing, more that they are
thinking that they are clever. But actually, you know, you know, to be sarcastic
may require cleverness. But that is not the, that is not really the desirable
use of cleverness. The desirable use of cleverness is to bring others closer to
us. And closer to, you know, Krishna through us. Or even closer to the right
track in general. Even at the material level. So, by agitating people, whether
that is going to happen, you know, it is unlikely. You know. Very often, you
know, you know, we may end up not, not educating, but alienating people. If we
speak strongly. Sometimes, we talk about how the spiritual master or the sadhu
cuts. So, the sadhu cuts. And what does the sadhu cut? The material attachments
of the conditioned souls. And the sadhu cuts the material attachments of the
conditioned souls. And helps them to come to, closer to Krishna. So, that is
used, you know, that example of that, in the First Canto of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam".
When Vidura speaks strongly to "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". And gets him out of, you know, his
attachments. So, you know, that is good. You know. To get somebody out of
material entanglement. But, you know, we see that Vidura, before that, had a
long history of a very deep and intimate relationship, you know, with, you know,
"Dhṛtarāṣṭra". And when he spoke those words, those words penetrated. Otherwise,
the words do not penetrate. We may end up, you know, sometimes, when we chastise
people, instead of cutting their anarthas, the "bīja" of their anarthas, we may
end up cutting their "bhakti-latā-bīja", only. That mean..., the
"bhakti-latā-bīja" is that which is to be nourished. You know. And that which
should grow. Grow. Grow. But when people are corr..., reckless. Then, you know,
while cutting, our intention may be to cut the anarthas. But our speech may
discourage people so much in the same of chastising. And disciplining. And
correcting. That we end up cutting the "bhakti-latā-bīja", only. And we cut the
"bhakti-latā-bīja". And then, most people can get lost. We may think that I have
spoken Krishna's message for that other person's good. But good intentions are
not good enough. You know. You know. People should feel, you know, people should
feel the trust in us. People should feel that we are their well-wishers. Then,
they will be able to see our good intention. Otherwise, they will see us
suspicious, through their, you know, default, you know, filters of suspicion. And
scepticism. And then, when we speak strongly. And, you know, or we, we speak
har..., what they feel as harshly. Insensitively. You know. Then, they may just
close down. And then, they will go away from Krishna by that. So, and this is
not just with respect to Krishna Consciousness. Even in normal human
relationships. You know, There are, most of the relationship conflicts within a
family, within a, you know, within any social circle, most of the relationship
conflicts come up because of carelessness, you know, in, you know, speech.
Because of insensitivity in dealing with people. You know. So, "anudvega-karaṁ
vākyaṁ". Whenever we have to speak. You know. It is, "viśva...", it is not that
we have to speak, you know, false just to make sure that people's mind do not
get agitated. But Krishna is putting "satyaṁ" as second. The first, He is
putting as "anudvega-karaṁ". Speak in a non-agitating way. That does not mean
speak false. Speak the truth. As is the Subhashita. It says:

        satyaṃ brūyāt priyaṃ brūyānna brūyāt

Now, "brūyāt". "satyaṃ, you know, "satyamapriyam". "nāditaṃ...", "satyaṃ".

        nānṛtaṃ brūyādeṣa dharmaḥ sanātanaḥ

What is this? "satyaṃ brūyāt priyaṃ brūyānna brūyāt". You know. Speak the truth.
But speak it palatably. Speak palatable truth. "na brūyāt satyamapriyam". If
some truth is unpalatable, then better not speak it. "nānṛtaṃ", "priyaṃ
brūyānna". That do not speak false just because there is falsehood. Just because
it is palatable. "eṣa dharmaḥ sanātanaḥ". This is an eternal principle. As
"Chanakya Pandit" says that, you know, the most important tr..., if somebody
wants to rule the whole world, the most important power for that person is the
power of proper speech. You know. In the person, if that person who has the
power to speak properly, that person can strike alliances. Make friendships.
Forge treaties. Build bridges. And mobilise, you know, people and resources to
be able to eventually rule the whole world. You know. You know. It is not just
by re..., sheer power. Or just try, you know, by bruteforce that one can conquer
others. You know. You know. So, you know, now, we may say, as devotees,
Prabhupada would also say, a devotee should call a spade as spade. That is true.
But we also have to see that there are many times when Prabhupada was sensitive
in his preaching. You know. Prabhupada could differentiate between philosophical
differences and, you know, cultural etiquettes. Even when Srila Prabhupada was
with Dr. Misra in New York. When Prabhupada came initially to New York. At that
time, he was staying with Dr. Misra. At that time, you know, you know, and this
Dr. Misra was a mayavadi. You know. And Prabhupada would have philosophical, you
know, they would have finance..., strong philosophical differences. And, but
then, in spite of that, when they were living together, Prabhupada was cooking
for him. Prabhupada was serving him food. And he said that, my time, my timing
is so, so ear..., unregulated that I would have fallen sick. And I would have,
may have not allude..., also. But as Prabhupada, who practically, by his
regulated eating habits, and he would force me to eat. And that is how I
survived. So, you know, Prabhupada did not think, oh, this person is a mayavadi.
Let him starve to death. No. Prabhupada did not, you know, Prabhupada was, as a
person, as a human being, was co..., very cordial. And congenial. You know. As,
as by the philosophy, there might be differences. But that does not mean that we
have to forget basic human etiquette in relationship with others. So, you know,
Prabhupada had a heart of compassion. And people could feel that compassion when
they interacted with him. Because of his purity. And potency. Now, we, if we
think that, you know, you know, preaching gives us a license to speak harshly,
then we are completely mistaking what preaching means. Preaching means the,
speaking in a way that helps people come, to come closer to Krishna. Certainly,
this, the, this requires at times for us to speak, you know, not so pure...,
sweet, you know, spea..., it does require sometimes for us to speak, you know,
you know, you know, things that are going to be unpalatable to people. But that
does not mean that we have to make a mission of speaking those things. You know.
Ju..., in, sometimes, when we have to give feedback to people. So, I might
deter. For "Back to Godhead". So, when people submit articles, the, you know,
the articles come to us. Then, we take a feedback. So, general, we try to follow
a formula of plus, minus, plus. Plus means tell some positives. Actually,
encourage people. Then, tell some rooms for improvement. And then, te..., ends
with some positives again. So, often, it works that, at least, you know, there
should be room for improvement, some positive, some appreciation should be
given. And along with that, some room for improvement may also be given. So,
generally, if we just keep agitating people, when, the, you know, then we will
not be able to elevate them. We may end up alienating them more and more. So,
even if our in..., intention is to do good. Still, "anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ". By
spea..., non-agitating speech, we help people to calm down. We help people to
open their minds. And open their hearts. And then, "satyaṁ priya-hitaṁ ca yat".
Speak the truth. Speak in a, you know, speak pleasing truth. And "hitaṁ ca yat".
In a way that is beneficial. Just like a doctor. You know. A doctor, it is said,
the doctors', you know, behavior itself should be such that the patient feels
reassured. And comforted by that. You know. If a patient has got a diagnosis of
cancer. And the doctor, doctor himself becomes agitated. And scared. Then, the
patient will just lose heart completely at that time. You know. Of course, if
the doctor is just stone-hearted and does not show any compassion, any emotion,
that is also not proper. But the doctor has to have, you know, you know,
maintain some level of objective. The, even if the doctor has to give bad news,
still, it can be done in a non-agitating way. As much as possible. So:

        anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ
        satyaṁ priya-hitaṁ ca yat

And "svādhyāyābhyasanaṁ caiva". "svādhyāya" is study. "abhyasanam" is
repetition. Or practice. So, you know, how do we study? And, you know, practice?
In this case, Prabhupada translates it as by memorising and reciting scripture.
So, Srila Prabhupada himself in the early days of the movement, you know,
recited, you know, you know, when he, initially, when he started, he would just
give the classes. And he would quote the shlokas. But once he started the
"Bhāgavatam" class, then Srila Prabhupada took some extreme s..., intere..., you
know, some, you know, step, which is quite dramatic. As well as a bit alarming
for devotees. You know. He would have the "Bhāgav...", he started having the
"Bhāgavatam" shloka written down. And he would ask all devotees to recite the
shloka. So, he would recite it. And not only would he recite it, afterwards, he
would all, ask all devotees to recite it. And in, this was in, you know, Los
Angeles. And the devotees in Los Angeles were quite wild. As compared to, you
know, you know, you know, the Lower East Side in New York. The Haight-Ashbury
area in Los Angeles was much more wild. You know. The hippies in that
generation, you know, you know, were completely into all kind of things. You
know. Even a person would go high on drugs. That person would be considered LSD
saint. LSD saint means, you know, just like there can be a bhakti saint. Or a
jnana saint. You know. That means somebody, who by some method, has gone high,
has got some very great realisation. So, after taking LSD, whatever the person
speaks, this is actually the person's wisdom speaking from within. You know. So,
people who treat people, you know, the, some, these people who had gone high
on LSD, like saints. So, in such a culture to infuse appropriate moment of
gravit..., appropriate amonut of gravity, it, the study of scripture was
difficult. Srila Prabhupada would give classes. But there was some devo..., some
people who were just becoming devotees. They might be coming down from drugs. Or
some other people who were just walking in. And just seeing what is going on.
So, the mode was very for, you know, there was no, the gra..., adequate gra...,
adequate gravity was not there. So, what did Srila Prabhupada do? He made
everyone recites. You know. And not only would everyone have to recite. If
somebody would recite a verse wrong, Prabhupada would correct their
pronunciation. Not like this. Speak like this. And then, all the devotees were
forced to become serious. So, generally, hearing is a passive activity. Just
sit. And hear. And unless there is some exam or something like that, you know,
nobody can find out, also, how much we heard. It is just that, ok, I have to sit
and hear. And but when there is some, when we have, we, after hearing, we have
to speak something. You know. Then, we have to, the whole thing becomes much
more serious. And we have to, you know, take things, you know, much more
attentively. Much more gravely. So, Prabhupada introduced this recitation of
scriptures. And he wanted devotees, also, as much as possible, to recite
scripture. To memorise scripture. Sometimes, we feel, oh, memorising is such a
big strain for my head. You know. I cannot memorise. It is very difficult to
memorise verses. Well, it is maybe true that some, it is difficult to memorise
verses. But actually, the fact is, nothing worthwhile is easy in this world. We
have to put in efforts if we want something worthwhile in life. The fact is
that, you know, memorisation of verses will not burden the head. It will
unburden the heart. You know. It will not burden the head. It will unburden the
heart. How will it unburden the heart? Because, you know, you know, when we
memorise scripture, at that time, we will find that this memorised scripture
will become a shelter for us in times of stress and distress. You know. You
know. When we feel too much burdened by too many things. Or when we feel, you
know, that everything has gone wrong. And we are feeling disheartened. When
there is stress. Or there is distress. At that time, you know, you know, you
know, you know, you know, we, if we recite script..., if we recite appropriate
verses from scriptures, you know, when we are feeling too much troubled with
things:

	yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete
	puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha
	sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ
	so ’mṛtatvāya kalpate

One who does not get agitated. Amidst plea..., you know, misery. And pleasure.
Such a person will attain eternity. Just reciting this verse will calm us down.
Or we can recite how Krishna says:

        kaunteya pratijānīhi
        na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

Just memorising verses like that can have a tremendously calming and, you know,
a comforting, you know, you know, you know, effect on us. So, you know, you
know, but, you know, you know, even meditating on the translation is like that.
Or recitating the translations may also help. At the same time, the original
sanskrit itself has its potency. Either way, the point is that, you know,
knowledge in books is like knowledge in the bank account. Knowledge in the
memory is like knowle..., money in the pocket. So, money in the bank account,
may, it is there. But I have to, you know, have to do some processes by which I
will get the money out of the bank account. But money in the pocket means, it is
much more reasily accessi..., readily accessible. So, like that, you know, if we
have memorised verses, you know, you know, you know, that that is like money,
that is readily accessible spiritual resource for us. We can, you know, when an
enemy attacks. You know. Supposed to, soldiers have to war, war, you know, two
groups of armies are fighting on the battlefield. And then, soldier says, hey,
wait, wait, I forgot to get my weapon. Let me go get my weapon. Then, we will
fight. Ah, you go. And I will go before you go to the, go to your, you know,
encampment. You will go to the next world. You know. Soldier will shoot you.
Shoot the enemy like that. So, we need, you know, you know, to be ready. So,
memorised verses can act as weapons for us. Which enable us to take shelter of
Krishna, you know, when whatever situations we may be in. You know. You know.
You know. So, Prabhupada also explain this means that one should quote
scripture. One should quote scripture. You know. One, you know:

"The process of speaking in spiritual circles is to say something upheld by the
scriptures. One should at once quote from scriptural authority to back up what
he is saying."

So, that is "svādhyāyābhyasanaṁ caiva". Then, you know, you know, let us look at
austerities of the mind:

        manaḥ-prasādaḥ saumyatvaṁ
        maunam ātma-vinigrahaḥ
        bhāva-saṁśuddhir ity etat
        tapo mānasam ucyate

So, "manaḥ-prasādaḥ saumyatvaṁ". "manaḥ-prasādaḥ". "manaḥ-prasādaḥ" means
satisfaction. "saumyatvaṁ". "saumyatvaṁ" is, without, Prabhupada translate,
without being simply, du..., duplicities towards other. Now, Prabhupada translate
this also as, you know, simplicity. But this is a different kind of simplicity.
We will come back to it. "maunam" is, you know, silence. Or Prabhupada
translates it as gravity. "ātma-vinigrahaḥ". Self-control. And then,
"bhāva-saṁśuddhir ity etat". "bhāva", "saṁśuddhiḥ" is, you know, purification of
existence. That is "tapo mānasam ucyate". You know. This is a tra..., austerity
of the mind. You know. Let us look at these one by one. Satisfaction.
"manaḥ-prasādaḥ". You know. Many times, we feel, I am not satisfied in life. I
am not satisfied. Yes. Beyond me, even as devotees, also, sometimes, we may not
feel satisfied. So, we have to recognise that satisfaction is not just an
emotion. Satisfaction is also a decision. What does that mean? Satisfaction is
not just an emotion. It is not that sometime, I have, it is a feeling that will
come on its own. Satisfaction is also a choice. It is a decision. For example,
if I have, if I have a house of a particular size. And say, my relative has got
a bigger house. Now, if I constantly keep thinking, oh, my relative has got a
bigger house. My relative has got a bigger house. And what will happen? I cannot
be satisfied. But if I take a decision, ok, you know, my, my goal in life is not
to get the biggest house in the world. You know. The, how big is my, how big my
house is, is not going to matter, ultimately, you know, in the regards to how,
you know, how happy I am going to be in life. So, you know, what will matter is,
actually, not, you know, we are determined not by our possessions. But our
decisions. You know. Our decisions. Our values. Our commitments. They determine
who we are. So, if we keep them straight and focused. Then, we can achieve a
lot, no matter what be the situation in our life otherwise. So, therefore, you
know, "manaḥ-prasādaḥ". Prabhupada writes in this purport that, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know:

"The more we think of sense enjoyment, the more the mind becomes dissatisfied."

"The more we think of sense enjoyment,". If we kee..., you know, if we meditate
on the objects and senses, we will become agitated. But:

"Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained only by taking the mind away from
thoughts of sense enjoyment."

"only by taking the mind away from thoughts of sense enjoyment.". You know. You
know. So, you know, in general, our mind has a default to see what we do not
have. You know. And to crave for that. So, ok, these objects are sense
enjoyment. I do not have. This I do not have. That I do not have. That I do not
have. But if I think of what all I have. That is how satisfaction will come. So,
you know, in general, if we, now, the whole advertising industry is a
dissatisfaction-producing industry. In fact, dissatisfact..., sa..., customer
dissatisfaction is the fuel that runs, you know, today's consumer economy. But
actually, consumer economy is not the most essential economy. The most essential
aspects of the economy is necessities economy. You know. Necessities is food.
Clothing. Shelter. And what we need biologically for, biologically and
physically for living. You know. You know. They are the necessities. Most of the
consumer products are not really necessities. They are luxuries. Which, because
of today's, you know, social, social conditions may seem like necessities. But,
you know, you know, ok, I need a hea..., cellphone. You know. But it is not
that, you know, you know, I need the, you know, you know, late..., I need to
keep getting the latest cellphone every single time some new, some new fea...,
some new development happens. And some new feature is added to a cellphone.
No. I can freeze. Ok. This is what, this is what I want. This is what my
functions are required. I will use them. That is. So, good enough for me. So,
"manaḥ-prasādaḥ". You know. In this way, we can have "manaḥ-prasādaḥ". The
"saumyatvaṁ". So, Prabhupada says how can we develop this "manaḥ-prasādaḥ"? It
is not just do not think of things. Do not think of things. Oh, do not think of
those things. But we have to think of something. So, Prabhupada says, think
about Krishna's pastimes. You know. Krishna is all-attractive. And the more we
think of His pastimes, the more our mind becomes, when heart becomes satisfied.
So, in general, the important point is to recognise, you know, you know, that
all of us will have to battle with the satisfaction. But, you know, you know,
that battle with the satisfaction will be much lesser. Or much less, mu...,
much, you know, you know, which will be now so difficult to win. If we have a
satisfying alternative object of thought. So, Krishna, and Krishna's pastimes
are that satisfying object of thought. And the more we absorb ourselves in
Krishna's pastimes, the less we will be caught in, you know, less we will feel
agitated by material thoughts. "manaḥ-prasādaḥ saumyatvaṁ". "saumyatvaṁ" is
softness. Gentleness. Simpleness. As Prabhupada translates over here as, Krishna
has earlier talked about "saumya rūpaṁ". Oh, Arjuna, please show me your
gentle form, you know, Krishna has been told by Arjuna. Arjuna says to Krishna,
please, ge..., you know, You have shown me Your "ugra-rūpaḥ". The "kālaḥ",
"rūpaḥ", which You have shown in the 12th, 11th Chapter. Very frightening. Now,
show me Your "saumya", "rūpaḥ". Show, please show Your gentle form. So, like
that, "saumyatvaṁ". You know. You know. "saumyatvaṁ". "saumyatvaṁ" will help us.
And then, now, you know, so, gentleness. And then, simplicity. Now, simplicity
is also a state of the mind. You know. In general, if we think harsh thoughts
about others. We get complex. You know. Do not get into complexities.
Ultimately, one of the complexities, we get into, is trying to get into
philosophical integrities of everything. You know. We are not God. And we cannot
understand everything about everything. We have to fo..., you know, focus on
what are the important things for me in my spiritual life. And focus on them.
And utilise them. You know. You know. You know. And then, "manaḥ". "saumyatvaṁ".

"am...", "maunam ātma-vinigrahaḥ". Now, it is interesting, "maunam" literally
means, "maunam". Like we say "maunam vratta", that means silence. Now, if we
want to talk about "maunam". "maunam" would normally be an austerity of the
speech. "vāṅ-mayaṁ tapa ucyate". But Krishna has put it here as austerity of the
mind. And Prabhupada aptly see..., you know, seeing Krishna's, you know, you
know, context. He is translating that as gravity. So, "maunam" is not just a
state of speech. It is a state of mind. Sometimes, some people may take a
"maunam vratta". But then, they may use a slate for writing and communicating.
And with the slate, they write so much. That they end up speaking more than what
they would have spoken. They take more trouble, also, for speaking. And others,
also, have more trouble. Because for somebody writes. And then, you will read.
And then, again, you know, it, it just makes things complicated. So, is it
really serving a purpose? That is a question. You know. So, "maunam" is not just
physically shutting the mouth. Actually, sometimes, it is said that people speak
because they find sound more tolerable than silence. People speak because what
is happening ins..., inside, their mind is wild. Their mind is agitated. What
about this? That? So much anxiety. So much passion. So much irritations. Their
mind is crying. And squealing. And screaming. And screeching. And crea..., you
know, shouting. You know. And then, they just cannot tolerate that. Just get
away from the mind. Speak something. You speak something. I will speak
something. And I will get away from the mind. Or if there is no one to speak.
Then, turn on a television. And let it speak. And then, what happens? Somehow,
get away from the mind. Get away from the mind. So, regal "maunam" is not just
a state of the, you know, speech. It is a state of mind. State of the mind. So,
when the mind is peaceful. That is why Prabhupada talks about gravity. You know.
The opposite of gravity is flivor..., fli..., you know, frivolity. Or levity. Or
fri..., frivolity means when the occasion is serious. You know. For example,
say, some, we, there is a funeral. And somebody has died. And then, suddenly,
somebody starts telling a joke. And laughing over there. Everbody is, everybody,
people are laughing. You know. That is, it is so sensitive over there to do
something like that. Now, if, if that jo..., if that joke is about that departed
person. And we are somehow appreciating that person, that is a different issue.
But if it is something and not related with that at all, it is, so, it is very
inappropriate. It is very insensitive. So, in general, we are all on the verge
of death. You know. We do not know who of us is going to die when. And it, it
can happen anytime. So, when we understand the impermanence. And the, you know,
fragility of material existence, then that makes us grave. Gravity. So,
Prabhupada writes another way of becoming grave is by thinking about the welfare
of others. And generally, you know, if we are just thinking about ourselves,
then oh, my problem. My problem. My, the problem with the problems is that the
more we think about the problem, the bigger the problems become. Generally, if
we are not having a clear plan. And, you know, you know, you know, you know,
steady commitment to deal with the problem, then just thinking about the problem
makes the problem bigger. And bigger. And bigger. And bigger. And we do not
solve the problem at all in this way. You know. So, anu..., so, it is better
that we do not think about the problem. Instead, we think about Krishna. And we
think about Krishna. We think, now, it is difficult for us to think about
Krishna. What do I think? You know. The, ok, Krishna's flute is, you know, flute
is long. Or Krishna's flute is short. Krishna's complexion is blue. You know.
That is one way we can think about Krishna. Which is good if we can. But that is
not, it may not be possible to meditate on Krishna unless we have love for
Krishna. To meditate for a long time is difficult. So, then, we can think about
how we can connect others with Krishna. How we can benefit others. Just say, you
know, a doctor thinks about how I, I can cure my patients. How I can help me
patients. Similarly, a person can think about how I can help others. And that,
you know, is very auspicious. For us. As well as for others. You know.

So, in this way, we can move forward in our spiritual life. "maunam
ātma-vinigrahaḥ". "ātma-vinigrahaḥ" is self-control. Again, Krishna is putting
that in the charac..., category of the mind. Why? Because every, all false
begin with the mind. You know. There is contemplation on the sense objects. Now,
thoughts, the sense objects may have sources from outside. Or sources from
inside. So, the sources may be something which I see. Or sources may be
something which is a flashback from, in the memory from the past. But whatever
way the source i..., whatever the source is. But after that, there is
contemplation. And it is that contemplation that leads to, eventually, if that
contemplation is unchecked, it will lead to degradation. So, "ātma-vinigrahaḥ".
Self-control, and, means that, you know, you know, you know, we do not
frivolously think about sense objects. We focus on thinking about Krishna. And
how to connect others with Krishna. And then, "bhāva-saṁśuddhir ity etat". You
know. You know. "bhāva-saṁśuddhir". Purification. Again. Purification. Krishna
is saying, it is primarily in austerity of the mind. Why? Because impure and
pure actions begin with impure and pu..., or pure thoughts. So, if we think
purely, it may not always be easy. But as soon as we realise, ok, the mind has
gone off-track. Then, bringing it back on track. Do not let the mind go on
the impure thoughts for too long. Bring it back on track. So, then, that is
"tapo mānasam ucyate". All this is austerity of the mind. So, in this way,
Krishna, you know, you know, gives a clear understanding of how one can practice
Kri..., you know, Krishna Consciousness. So, for a devotee, "maunam" is in terms
of not just silence. But gravity. And gravity comes by meditating on Krishna.
Thinking about Krishna. And talking about Krishna, also. So, "maunam" can also
be talking about Krishna. Now, Prabhupada, now, Krishna describes, ok, these are
in general faculties of, how, you know, f..., attributes of body. Mind. And
speech. So, how do the austerities be performed? So, Krishna says that these
can be performed in the three modes. So, when one performs it in goodness. Then,
that is, you know, that wi..., we, you know, that will be austerity in the mode
of goodness.

        śraddhayā parayā taptaṁ
        tapas tat tri-vidhaṁ naraiḥ
        aphalākāṅkṣibhir yuktaiḥ
        sāttvikaṁ paricakṣate

So, "śraddhayā parayā taptaṁ". "śraddhayā parayā". That means with very, great
faith. With strong faith. Prabhupada tran..., "parayā", he translates it a
transcendental. So, you know, you know, you know, "śraddhayā parayā taptaṁ".
That which is executed austerity. "tapas tat tri-vidhaṁ naraiḥ". "tri-vidhaṁ"
means the three kinds of austerities that have been talked about earlier.
"naraiḥ". Those human beings. When they perform this, "aphalākāṅkṣibhir
yuktaiḥ". Without the "ākāṅkṣa" of "phala". That is "sāttvikaṁ paricakṣate". So,
again, and again, Krishna talks about how, you know, austerity should be dev...,
a formed in goodne..., goodness. Characteristic is non-attachment to the
results. The attachment is primarily to Krishna. Not to the results.
Non-attachment to results. That is auspicious. And then, "śraddhayā parayā
taptaṁ". Now, we may wonder that if the austerity is in goodness, how can the
faith be transcendental. You know. If the faith is transcendental, won't the
austerity be transcendental? Yes. It will be, gradually become transcendental.
When, so, person goes to transcendental consciousness. Sometimes, we may, by the
association of devotees have faith in transcendence. Even when we ourselves are
not at the transcendental level. So, that is how we may have faith in
transcendence. You know. We may, so, we may practice the principles of pure
devotional service. Although, we are not yet pure. Because we are inspired by a
pure devotee. "śraddhayā parayā taptaṁ". So, that is how transcendental, then
Krishna will describe in the mode of passion.

        satkāra-māna-pūjārthaṁ
        tapo dambhena caiva yat
        kriyate tad iha proktaṁ
        rājasaṁ calam adhruvam

So, "satkāra-māna-pūjārthaṁ". "satkāra". You know. "satkāra" is, you know, you
know, you know, respect. You know. "satkāra" especially means, you know, when
a public forum. A person is felicitated. Honored. Respected.
"satkāra-māna-pūjārthaṁ". So, "māna" is honor. And "pūjā" is worship. You know.
"tapo dambhena caiva yat". When performed. Once au..., aus..., austerity for
that. "tapo dambhena caiva yat". So, one is actually motivated by "dambhena". By
the desire to show off with pride. "kriyate tad iha proktaṁ". When one does
this, all this, "rājasaṁ calam adhruvam". This is "rājasaṁ calam". This is
"rājasaṁ" in the mode of, it is flickering. And it is "adhruvam". It is not
factual. It will not last for long. Why? Because, you know, you know, you know,
sometimes, we take a resolution. You know. Say, I will never eat sweets again in
my lifetime. You know. You know. We take that austerity. You know. We decide,
you know, what, why like that? Because, you know, we want to tell other, show
others how austere I am. You know. I do not take any sweets. And then, one day,
two day, one week, two week, one month that goes on. And then, after that, what
happens is, maybe, in private, you know, we take it all, with the install, with
extra installments, also. As if it all compensated. So, idea is that, it is not
that devotee is against weights. You know. You know. And of course, if a devotee
wants to avoid sweets for some reason, that is also okay. The point which I am
making is, sometimes, we take, you know, we do austerity for the sake of getting
honor. Sometimes, I may fast on ekadashi. And then, if I am going on fasting on
ekadashi. And I am seeing, you know, who all are eating how much. You know. Ok.
No sense control. You know. That is so much eating this person is doing. So, if
that is my attitude, then what am I doing? My body may be fasting. But my ego is
feasting. My ego is feasting. And actually, that fasting, rather than helping me
to make spiritual advancement will become a big hurdle in my spiritual
advancement. That fasting will boost my ego. And, you know, so, fasting is
generally good. But any kind of austerity, if it is done with, you know,
passionate intentions. Then, if it leads to increase of passion, that may not,
that will be cou..., unproductive. Even counterproductive. So, you know, what we
do is important. But why we do what we do is even more important. So, we cannot
den..., you know, we cannot just reject if somebody is doing fasting. We should
not think, hey, this fasting, that is for show that person is doing. You know.
That person want..., that person just wants a reputation that I am such a
self-controlled person. That is not how we should be think about others. I
think. You know. That person is maybe advanced devotee. That person has a
serious commitment. You know. And because of which, he wants to advance. You
know. You know. And that is how he is doing this. But for ourselves, we should
be more introspective. You know. You know. Then, you know, you know, so, you
know, you know, you know, you know, so, previously, I, they:

"arrange to be worshiped by subordinates and let them wash their feet and offer
riches."

Now, sometimes, there are pictures of some sadhus. You know. The pictures
themselves, even they are both raising their legs. You know. As if showing, you
know, oh, my asurvad is there. You, they, all of you take my charan, doli and
get asurvad. You know. This is not at all, actually, a saintly, saintly
attitude. You know. A, you know, true saint does not actually, even when the,
only disciples there, may be allowed to, the true saint will allow to touch the
feet. You know. Raising one's leg, this is generally not a very devotional
attitude. So, you know, you know, you know, in some cases, some devotees may
photograph the lotus feet of the spiritual master. And that is ok. But, say, you
know, but, a posing like that is very, it can very often be just a s..., "tapo
dambhena caiva". It can be, now, it, out of "dambhena". That is unfortunate.
Then, Krishna talks about austerity in the mode of ignorance.

        mūḍha-grāheṇātmano yat
        pīḍayā kriyate tapaḥ
        parasyotsādanārthaṁ vā
        tat tāmasam udāhṛtam

So, "mūḍha-grāheṇā". "mūḍha-grāheṇā" means, you know, you know, "mūḍha" is
foolishness. So, foo..., that is studied, which is performed with foolishness.
Which is performed with "grāheṇa". You know. It is, there is a lot of endeavor
in, on it. "ātmano yat". "pīḍayā", "te". "pīḍayā". "pīḍayā kriyate". By with
that, which knowledge leads to tormenting of oneself. You know. You know. Not
only does it torment oneself. "parasya". "utsādana-artham", "vā". So, one also
wants to, you know, cause destruction. Prabhupada tranl..., "parasya". "utsā".
"utsādana-artham". Prabhupada translates it as annihilation. "ā...", "tat
tāmasam udāhṛtam". You know. So, austerity, you know, which a perfon performs
because of, for destroying others. That is austerity in the mode of ignorance.
So, Prabhupada gives the example of Hiranyakashipu in the purport. And also,
there is the example of, you know, you know, you know, how, you know,
"Vṛkāsura". You know. He did austerity to please Lord Shiva. And what was the,
first of all, what was the kind of austerity? Both are there. "pīḍayā". "pīḍayā
kriyate", "arjunah". You know. So, what was the "pīḍayā"? Actually, he was just
cutting off his own flesh. He was cutting off his own flesh. And offering into
the fi..., you know, fire. And then, finally, he was about to cut off his own
head. And Lord Shiva appeared. Not because he was pleased. But he felt pity for
him. You know. Why should this person kill oneself for, like this? So, Lord
Shiva appeared. And then one, you know, when Lord Shiva said, what benediction
do you want? What did he say? He said whoever I touch, let that person die. So,
this is cru..., example of "parasya", "utsādana-artham". "vā". When one does
austerity for the causing of, you know, distress. And, you know, devastation to
others. So, we know how jealousy works. Envy works. There is that, you know,
anecdotal story of, you know, it may be apocr..., apocryphal. But illustrates
the principle that there was one person who meditated and did austerity. And
pleased God. And then, God appeared in front of him, and said that what do you
want?  He says, you know, I will give you whatever you want. But on one
condition. Whatever you get, your neighbor will get the double of that. So, the
idea is that the God wanted to, you know, inculcate him in a feeling of, you
know, a bonding between the two. And once he tested him. So, what does this
person think? He said, oh, God, please, break, break one of my eyes. And make,
make that eye blind. What was the idea? If I lose one eye, my neighbor will lose
both eyes. And become permanently blind. Now, what is this standard?
"parasyotsādanārthaṁ vā". So, one thinks that others' misery is one's own
pleasure. You know. You know. You know. So, this is, you know, "tāmasam uc...",
"tāmasam", "ucyate". This is in the mode of ignorance. Now, after talking about
"tapaḥ", now, Krishna will talk about, you know, you know, so, first, He has talked
about "yajñaḥ". Then, He has caused "tava, "tava", "tapaḥ". Now, He will talk
about "dānaṁ". You know. You know. You know. You know. So, you know, let us look
at the "dānaṁ" quickly. You know.

        dātavyam iti yad dānaṁ
        dīyate ’nupakāriṇe
        deśe kāle ca pātre ca
        tad dānaṁ sāttvikaṁ smṛtam

"dātavyam iti yad dānaṁ". "dātavyam". That means this worth giving. This
appropriate to give. "dīyate ’nupakāriṇe". When we give with "’nupakāriṇe". We
do not expect others to give us something back. You know. "’nupakāriṇe". You
know. You know. You know. "deśe kāle ca pātre ca". According to time, place and
circumstance. "deśe kāle ca pātre ca". "tad dānaṁ". That "dānaṁ" is "sāttvikaṁ
smṛtam". That "dānaṁ" is in goodness. So, again, the commonality we see is what?
That it is accor..., it is, you know, first of all, there, the commonality
which we see, all with, all goodness earlier is that, you know, there is no
attachment. One is not expecting a material result from it. And one gives "deśe
kāle ca pātre ca". So, actually, austerity, it is said that sacrifice and, you
know, it is, charity should be given to the right person. At the right time.
So, for example, it is told that on ekadashi, one can give a charit..., charity
to brahmana. And things like that. So, the idea is, you know, when we do these
things. These are, these are activities which can benefit others. And we do it,
them at the right time, then we get more benefit. Because according to certain
time, place, circumstance, certain activities are considered more auspicious.
And less auspicious at certain times. You know. So, you know, you know, you
know, so, now, you know, Prabhupada will talk about there is no recommendation
for giving charity indiscriminately. Now, we may wonder, you know, are, should,
if the poor are starving, shouldn't they be given charity? You know. The point
is not that they should not be given charity. The point is that it should be
given in a way that helps others. So, in general, in Vedic culture, poor people
were given food. You know. Generally, you know, people who are of a shudra
mentality. If they get money, they will misuse it. And there are so many
families. Even in today's society, where the husband is alcoholic. Where the
moth..., and then, the husband is alcoholic. What does the husband do? The
husband, you know, you know, again, get..., or gets money. Uses that money to
maybe abuse the wife. Abuse the children. And then, just spends all the money on
alcohol. Such a people, giving thus them money can be a curse for them. Better
that instead of giving them money, give them, you know, you know, you know, give
them resources that cannot be misused. So, if food is given, then that cannot be
misused. So, you know, you now, you know, when it is talked about goodness.
Passion. Ignorance. The point is not that we have to be hard-hearted and
insensitive to others' suffering. But we have to, sen..., have to be
intelligent. So that what we are offering to help others, actually, helps
others. You know. You know. Then, Krishna talks about:

        yat tu pratyupakārārthaṁ
        phalam uddiśya vā punaḥ
        dīyate ca parikliṣṭaṁ
        tad dānaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam

"yat tu pratyupakārārthaṁ". So, when one gives charity with the expect of
"pratyupakārārthaṁ". Yes. I am giving something. Will you gi..., you will give
me something back? "prati-upakāra". Earlier, it was "’nupakāriṇe". So, opposite
of that is "pratyupakārārthaṁ". So, one expects something in return for that.
"phalam uddiśya vā punaḥ". You know. One expects that something, we will, I will
get in return for, and then, "dīyate ca parikliṣṭaṁ". On the other hand,
"parikliṣṭaṁ". "parikliṣṭaṁ" means grudgingly, Prabhupada translates.
Resentfully. "tad dānaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam". You know. You know. So, "parikliṣṭaṁ"
means I do not want to give charity. But because of social pressure. Because of
some other factors, I have to give some charity. So, internally, I am resenting
it. Forget to give it So, as we discussed earlier, our actions are important.
But our motivations are even more important. So, when the motivation is not
proper, then passion, what happens is? The focus is what will I get in
return. So, if my, if I am trying to get, you know, material honor. And material
returns. Then, I am always calculating. Ok. If I give this much, in the future,
I will get that much. Just like a person thinks that I am doing a savings bank.
So, if I put this much money, then this, it will increase. Increase. And then, I
can get this much back. On the other hand, if I put, you know, you know, so, the
idea is, if I give charity to some religious, you know, religious thing. Then,
the idea is, maybe God will increase it ten times. And give it to me in the
future again. So, that was, that was the idea which people have. If that is the
motive with which people are giving, then that is not really a noble motive. And
then, what happens if one does not have that faith that I will get something in
return? Or one does not feel that, ok, there is maybe, this is not the kind of
investment that I want to make. Then, "parikliṣṭaṁ". Then, one, I am forced to
give. Grudgingly, one gives. And then, grudging attitude creates a, creates an
impression which does not allow to, you know, you know, which does not allow us
to, you know, move forward in spiritual life. You know. It does not allow us to
mi..., mis..., crise about the mode of passion. Then, Krishna talks about, you
know, charity in the mode of ignorance. 

        adeśa-kāle yad dānam
        apātrebhyaś ca dīyate
        asat-kṛtam avajñātaṁ
        tat tāmasam udāhṛtam

So, "adeśa-kāle yad dānam". "adeśa-kāle". Without considering the right place.
The right time. "yad dānam". When one gives charity.

        adeśa-kāle yad dānam
        apātrebhyaś ca dīyate

"apātrebhyaś". One gives to an unworthy person. "asat-kṛtam avajñātaṁ".
"asat-kṛtam". Without respect. Without proper attention. You know. What does
respect and attention means? For example, you know, you know, if a drunkard is
going to a bar. And then, along the way, after, drunkard comes out with four,
five bottles of liquor with, you know, right time to go back to home. And then,
drink more. And then, sees a beggar along the street. And he says, you know,
half-open bottle is there. He says ta..., take this. "tubika adrakega". You
know. Take. And drink. And enjoy. So, what kind of charity is that? That person
is giving something which is going to harm others. So, that kind of charity is
in the mode of ignorance. So, "apātrebhyaś ca". So, if someone, one does not
give it proper attention. Proper respects. Sometimes, when charity is given,
those who are getting, getting the charity, they are made to grovel. Fall at the
feet. Beg. You know. That is boot-licking. Somehow, you know, person has to come
ten times. Twenty times. Hundred times. And then, after that, give something to
that person. So, even when there is no respect the person properly, you know,
then that is also not considered proper charity. You know. Because the whole
idea of charity is not that we are just giving to that person. We understand
what we have got from Krishna, I have to offer back to Krishna. So, when I
lea..., learn to respect other people, also, you know, you know, , firstly, as
human beings, and then as parts of Krishna. Then, I gi..., even if I am wealthy,
and even if I am doing others a favor. That does not mean that I have to, you
know, put, push my foot into their throat. And assert my authority. No. I have
to actually be, you know, properly respectful. So, "adeśa-kāle yad dānam".
"adeśa-kāle". So, earlier, it was, you know, it was "deśa-kāle". One sees. One
does not see the "deśa". One does not see the "kāle". And one gives charity.
"apātrebhyaś". So, "deśa", "kāle", "pātra" is important here. In charity, in
ignorance, there is no "deśa", "kāle", "pātra" consideration. And that is very,
you know, misleading. That is very unfortunate. "asat-kṛtam". You know. So, such
charity is in the mode of ignorance. Now, after describing this charity, you
know, Krishna will now move forward. And describe about how whatever activities
are done, we can make them transcendental. By reciting "oṁ tat sad". That we
will discuss in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
