nVideo: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2TuJUkGojc
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=I2TuJUkGojc&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_131_-_Bhagavad_Gita_16.01-16.06_-_The_godly_qualities_that_lead_to_liberation_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=c-o8MY9ygDmd6TTDYD4g88MBwxd8MTU0ODQ4OTgyN0AxNTQ4NDAzNDI3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now going to start with the 16th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. You know. This is
"Daiva Asura Sampada Vibhaga Yoga". "The Divine and Demoniac Natures". So,
Prabhupada gives a simpler translation. "The Divine and Demoniac Natures".
"Daiva Asura Sampada Vibhaga Yoga". That is the sanskrit name. You know. The,
san..., you know, you know, sa..., sa..., "Sampada Vibhaga". "Sampada" means,
you know, which is "Sampada" is related with the word "Sampatti". You know. You
know. Health. You know. Wealth. So, "Sampada" means actually, you know, you
know, you know, this is what they consider to be the wealth. You know. The
demoniac consider the demoniac qualities their wealth. We will see the list of
demoniac and godly qualities. The, ungodly, the demoniac, they think that,
actually, you know, the, you know, arrogance. Harshness. These are their
strength they think. They think this is the treasure. The, this is the last,
they think, ok, this is good. You know. This is, I want to ge..., have this more
and more so that I can enjoy. So, that is demoniac. And that is what is, you
know, their wea..., f..., considered to be wealth. So, this is "Vibhaga". You
know. The divine considers certain things to be the wealth. The demoniac
considers certain qualiti..., things to be the wealth. And these qualities, they
become so ingrained in them that they become a part of their nature. That is why
"Sampada Vibhaga". So, what we consider our, as our wealth, we will hold it
close to us. And eventually, that will become a part of us. And that will become
us. That will become our nature eventually. That is how the divine and demoniac
natures. That is the title. Now, again, this is, this chapter is like the 15th
Chapter. And the 14th Chapter, also. Where Krishna speaks without any prompting
from Arjuna. So, Krishna has, you know, taken the thread of thought of
explaining how, how "jñāna" leads to bhakti. Based on the question that Arjuna
asked in 13.1. And Krishna pursues that theme. Now, in the 14th Chapter, Kri...,
Arjuna has asked one question about how one can, you know, three questions.
Basically, in one verse, he asked. In, you know, you know, 14.21. He asked about,
you know, what are the characteristics of a person who has transcended the
modes? You know. What is the behavior of such a person? And what are the, what
is the process to transcend? After that, he has not asked any question. So, the
link between 15th and 16th Chapter is based on e..., the understanding of the
upside-down tree. So, you know, we discussed in 13.22 that the "bīja" is what?
"puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi". That the living entity is situated in material
nature. And what is the, the covers that that makes the living entity situated?
"bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān". The desire to enjoy material world. "bhuṅkte
prakṛti-jān guṇān". You know. And then, you know, you know, in this tree, we
discussed that what waters the tree is the modes. So, the tree is, so the, the
tree was speci..., explicitly mentioned in the 15th chapter. But the mentality
which causes that, you know, tree to sprout is the "bhuṅkte". The desire to
enjoy. And it is nourished by the three modes of material nature. Which were
described in 14th Chapter. The 15th Chapter describes the upside-down tree. And
how one can become disentangled from it by taking shelter of "puruṣottamaḥ".
Worshipping "puruṣottamaḥ".

Now, 16th Chapter describes the upper and the lower aspects of, lower extremes
of the tree. Now, the tree is upside-down. So, "ūrdhva-mūlam adhaḥ-śākham". So,
the upper part of the tree is nearer to the root. That is the "Brahmāloka",
Pra..., is, now, the word "Brahmāloka" can sometimes mean "Brahmāloka". The
spiritual world. "Brahmā" can mean spirit. And "loka" is the world. So, then,
"Brahmāloka" refers to the spiritual world. But "Brahmāloka" can also refer to
abode of Brahmaji. You know. You know. Which is also called as "Satyaloka". So,
you know, you know, now, here, we are referring to the "Sat...", you know,
"Brahmāloka" as "Satyaloka". The, the abode of "Brahmā". That is in the material
world. So, that is the upper extreme. And then, there are the lower, lower,
lower, then, in ma..., then, it, as we told, downwards, downwards, there is
Svarga. And there is the human, you know, level. And below that, there is the
hellish lev..., hellish planetary systems. So, when we describe it thus, this,
you know, descending level. So, in this descending level of hierarchy, the
primary and important thing is to recognise that, you know, there are, that the
divine are situated in upper part of the tree. And the demoniac are in the lower
part of the tree. So, this sort of differentiation helps us understand that, you
know, we have to move upward. Upward. And ultimately, come out of this tree. And
then, go back to the, you know, re..., from the reflection to the reality. So,
in this particular verse, the, in the beginning, so, Krishna describes the, you
know, demo..., divine nature. So, actually, the divine, He describes only in
three verses. And the rest of the chapter, He is describing the demoniac nature.
So, let us look, we clear, the chapter overview. You know. You know. You know.
You know. And then, we will move forward. So, Chapter 16th. So, Krishna
describes, you know, divine qualities in verses 1 to 3. Then, after that, He
describes the demoniac qualities. You know. Then, divine and demoniac qualities
are basically described in 1 to 9. You know. Then, 10 to 18 describes the
activities of the demoniac. You know. Whatever qualities we have. Those
qualities get reflected in the activities that we do. So, the activities of
demoniac are talked about. And then, after that, you know, 19 to 22 talks about
the consequences and causes of demoniac activities. You know. You know. That
what will be the result. And what makes people do these demoniac activities. And
then, you know, you know, chapter concludes with, you know, you know, you know,
outlining of the choices. Choice that we have. Do we want to act in the divine
way? Or the demoniac way? It gives us a, you know, that, it gives us the choice.
By telling us how to, if we want to act in a divine way, how can we act in the
divine way. So, let us look at the first section. The first section talks about,
you know, the divine qualities. Now, here, also, Srila Prabhupada brings three
verses together. Because the focus is on divine qualities as a group. And
Krishna gives them, the verses, also, as a group. And at the end of the third
world, He says a summary. Which applies to, the similar language applies to all
the previous three verses. So, it is logical to group these verses together. Let
us look at these three verses.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir
        jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ
        dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś ca
        svādhyāyas tapa ārjavam

        ahiṁsā satyam akrodhas
        tyāgaḥ śāntir apaiśunam
        dayā bhūteṣv aloluptvaṁ
        mārdavaṁ hrīr acāpalam

        tejaḥ kṣamā dhṛtiḥ śaucam
        adroho nāti-mānitā
        bhavanti sampadaṁ daivīm
        abhijātasya bhārata

You know. You know. You know. You know. So, "bhavanti". You know. All this is
"sampadaṁ daivīm". All this is the, you know, "sampadaṁ". The, you know, the
cha..., nature. The characteristic. The wealth. Of the "daivīm". And
"abhijātasya bhārata". So, those who are, you know, the, of the godly
disposition. Of the divine nature. They have these qualities from birth itself.
So, now, of course, you know, nature is also, nature is ju..., not just a matter
of something internal. Nature is also, you know, shaped by nurture and culture.
So, actually, you know, our behavior is shaped by these three things. Nature.
Nurture. And culture. Nature means how we are born with. All of us have certain,
certain tendencies. Certain psychophysical characteristics. Likes. And dislikes.
That are innate to us. That is. Innate means, innate not as the level of the
soul. But innate at the level of the body and the mind that we have. Based on
our previous karma. You know. So, that is nature. And then, there is, our
behavior is also shaped by nurture. Nurture means how we are taken care of in
the values with which our parents, you know, raise us. The, you know, you know,
you know, kind of environment, you know, in which we live in while we grow up.
And that, especially, in the initial ages, it is just the parents. The parents
create the environment. But as we move out, and even when we are in the parents.
Nowadays, there is TV. Which also affects a lot. But then, there is a larger
culture in which we live. Culture also refers to association. Including
association. So, that also shapes our behavior in a significant way. So, there
is nature. Nurture. And culture. Of course, beyond that, there is a free will.
So, all these shape our behavior. But they do not, they do not cu..., absolutely
determine our behavior. We can still use our free will. And choose to act
differently. So, this system is not fatalistic. This analysis. So, actually, it,
it is not completely deterministic. There are different, there are choices. You
know. Two twins may have the, genetically, the identi..., you know, identical
genetic pole. Especially, if they are monozygotic. That means they are born from
the same zygote which has split later. So, they have identical genetics makeup.
But still, they have different behaviors. They have different mood. Different
dispositions. And even if they are, they, even if their parents take care of
them in similar ways, still, over a period of time, they grow up differently.
So, why is that? Because beyond nature, beyond nurture, and beyond culture, we
are all individuals. And as individuals, we have free will. And we are souls who
ha..., originally have the spiritual individuality. And now, when we come to the
material world, our original individuality is covered over. But still, we remain
individuals. So, that is why, actually speaking, our free will never goes away.
Our individuality never goes away. Nature, nurture, culture shape our behavior.
They do not determine our behavior. But here, when Krishna talks about these two
diffe..., these two, you know, the divine and demoniac nature, the focus of
talking these is, you know, to help us understand that this is the way, the
godly, the divine nature is the way to liberation. And the demoniac nature is
the way to bondage. And therefore, we should choose to act according to the
divine nature. Now, you know, you know, you know, you know, let us mo..., look
at these qualities. "abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir". So, you know, Srila Prabhupada
in his purport, actually, gives, you know, concise and exp..., you know, concise
and profound explanations of each of these qualities. You know. You know.
Prabhupada further describes the qualities. You know. You know. You know. You
know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You
know. So, Prabhupada says about how, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
know:

"To beget a child in a godly atmosphere is known in the Vedic scriptures as
Garbhādhāna-saṁskāra."

So, that is the way one can get a godly child. You know. You know.
"abhijātasya". So, you know, ultimately, you know, you know, every soul has free
will. But the parents can do the best, you know, to protect the child. Now,
protection is not just physical. Protection is also emotional. And spiritual.
And protection is emotional and spiritual means that, actually, at an emotional
level, the child should feel cared. And loved. And the spiritual level, the
child should be facilitated so that the child can make right choices. Throughout
the life. Choices that will take one closer towards Krishna. That will help one
to return to Krishna. So, that is what is desired. And one such a choice that
the parents can make for the protection of the child, even before the bi...,
birth of the child is with the "Garbhādhāna-saṁskāra". Where, where purifying
their consciousness, the parents can help to attract a pure-hearted soul towards
their, into their womb. And thereby, help them to go towards Krish..., help in
the, g..., help create the life journey. You know. Auspicious way. Right from
the beginning. Now, you know, "abhayaṁ". What is "abhayaṁ"? "abhayaṁ" is
fearlessness. So, fearlessness is, fearlessness is, as we have discussed earlier
that fearlessness does not comes by the absence of fear. It comes by the
presence of a cause that dwarves fear. You know. When we understand that there
is a reality. That there is a, there is a purpose. That, you know, that is so
fulfilling. That is so consuming. That is so dee..., you know, deep. That fear
becomes insignificant in front of it. So, that is how fear, fearlessness comes.
And Prabhupada explains what is that? By the awareness, you know, by the
awaren..., by, by the absorption in a cause. Now, how do we absorb ourselves in
a cause? We could, peop..., different people can have different causes. You
know. A patriot, you know, may, because of love for the nation. And the desire
for the, the, that, then the, and because of attach...., attraction to cause of
protection of the nation, may overcome the natural normal fear of bodily injury.
And be, and willingly go to fight a war. That is possible in some cases. Bu...,
you know, but, you know, that is not the highest cause. The highest cause, high,
the, you know, the highest cause is cause that pure devotion to Krishna. Because
that alone leads to eternal benefits for ourselves. For, and for others. And,
you know, f..., in that, we are, that fearlessness that a devotee has, comes
from the awareness of a presence that dwares the fear. That awareness of a
presence that dwarves fear is the awareness of Krishna. The more we become aware
of the presence of Krishna as the Supersoul in the heart, the more we will be
able to be fearless. Know, knowing that Krishna is always there with me. And
Krishna will protect me. When Krishna is there. And I am serving Krishna.
Whatever happens will be for my good. And Krishna will offer me all protection.
So, you know, you know, you know, that, so, you know, now, Prabhupada explain
that these godly qualities, you know, among them, "abhayaṁ" comes by awareness
of Krishna. As indwelling presence. And because Krishna is greater than the
greatest. So, no problem can be bigger than Krishna. And that is why while
remember, while remembering Krishna, we can become fearless. As it is sai...,
you know, as it is said. You know. You know. Do not tell Krishna how big your
problems are. Tell your problems how big Krishna is.

So, our problems. Our fears. When we remember how big Krishna is. Then the
problems become dwarfed. So, you know, you know, you know, we have to remember
Krishna that way. And "abhayaṁ". Now, Prabhupada explain that these various
qualities are there. They are as per the different varanas. So, "abhayaṁ". Of
course, now, all godly people have to have these qualities, you know, in
general. You know. But certain qualities are important for certain varanas. And
Prabhupada explains that systematically into the purport. So, "abhayaṁ"
especially is a quality of, you know, the quality that is to be cultivated by
sannyasis. Sannyasis, generally, you know, in this world, we get security by,
you know, through, having people around us. You know. If something happens to
me, others are there. They will take care of me. But sannyasi has to leave
everyone. And travel alone. So, that was the tradition. That sannyasi would
travel alone through the jungles. So, for that, "abhayaṁ". Sannyasi requires to
be fearless. And that fearlessness comes by taking shelter of Krishna. By
remembering, you know, Krishna's presence int..., internally. And taking shelter
of Krishna. So, the, that is a quality, specially important for bra..., you
know, you know, for sannyasis. And:

        abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir
        jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ

So, "sattva-saṁśuddhir". "sattva-saṁśuddhir" is, "saṁśuddhir" is purification.
"sattva" is existence. So, purification of one's existence. You know.
Purification. Purification means what? Now, there are many impurities that are
there. So, Srila Prabhupada focuses on the impurity of lust. So, how do we, you
know, you know, so, how do we free ourselves from by lust? You know. By, you
know, you know, by avoiding external and internal triggers. External triggers
are, you know, the association of the opposite sex. And internal triggers are,
you know, recollections of past indulgences. Or recollections, recollections of
memories of, you know, of sensual pleasures. So, that is why, you know, the
sannyasis are not meant to associate with women. You know. Closely. And Srila
Prabhupada gives the example how Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was so strict that that
even his female disciples would have, would offer obeisances to him from a
distance. So, the idea is that one has to focus on purification. You know. So,
purification of existence. "sattva-saṁśuddhir". And when we focus on
purification, by following certain rules and regulations. You know. The point
here is not to, you know, not to, you know, not to misogyny. It is not to hatred
of woman. Or something like that. The focus is on one's purification. So, you
know, you know, you know, in the, you know, you know, in the Vedic culture. The
brahmacaris are told, you know, not to, you know, have eye contact with women.
Now, of course, you know, there are, you know, so, now, what, the reason for
this is, sometimes, the women may fee..., find this very, very disturbing. Very
irritating. You know. You know. Talking with somebody. And you do not even look
at that person. That might fee..., appear very, you know, you know, it is, it
might appear offending, also. It might appear dehumanising. But that was the
sta..., that was the standard. And the purpose of the standard was not to
dehumanise at all. It was to respiritualise. You know. The idea is that, you
know, you know, you know, you know, you know, the idea i..., you know, the
id..., the idea, the reason for this particular injunction is that actually
there has to be, you know, there, you know, the, you know, you know, the, th...,
those who are in the renounced order, they are not meant to derive, you know,
pleasure, you know, through sensuality. And, you know, when a person, when a
soul is in the male body, the male bod..., the male body. And the male eyes get
pleasure in looking at the female forms. And especially looking at the female
face. And the female eyes. And, you know, you know, this is a, so, by, or
minimising eye contact, the idea is not to disrespect women. But it is to, the
idea is to help one, one to have a spiritual vision. You know. Not by looking.
But by, you know, even if there is some necessary service required by looking,
by having focus on, you know, the, you know, service. Without necessarily the
eye contact. Now, of course, as Kri..., you know, because we have, you know, we
have the modern society. And, you know, we have women who also, you know, you
know, you know, have been brought up in a different set of values. So, some,
now, so, in some cases, sometimes, you know, to avoid offending women,
some time, some people, you know, some renunciates, brahmacaris or sannyasis may
also have eye contact. And that is a matter of, you know, that is a matter of
courtesy. Which they may do it. So, either way, this may, some sannyasi, some
renunciates may avoid eye contact. Some renunciates may avoid, may, you know,
may have eye contact. But the important point is that we recognise that it is
not that when eye contact is avoided, it is not a matte..., meant to disrespect.
It is simply matter of pure, maintaining the purity. You know. And purification
of existence. It is, it is actually admi..., admission of humility. And
weakness. That, you know, I am not pure-hearted. And, you know, and there may be
contamination that may be resulting. And that is why to avoid the contamination,
you know, I am avoiding eye contact. But then, whatever service is to be done,
that, you know, you know, say, answering questions. Or whatever has to be done.
That, the sannyasis are ready to do that. So, either way, the point is, you
know, f..., beyond the specifics, there is general point that, sannyasis are
meant to focus on purification of existence. And that should not be, that focus
of purification of existence should not be misinterpreted on, misrepresented as,
as antipathy towards any particular gender. Or anything like that. You know. You
know. So, when Srila, look at, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport. So,
Prabhupada talks about "abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir". And then, he talks from
"Chaitanya Mahaprabhu". And then, "jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ".
"jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ". Cultivation of knowledge. And, you know, in the
cultivation of knowledge, you know, you know, so, Prabhupada writes:

"Sannyāsī life is meant for distributing knowledge to the householders and
others who have forgotten their real life of spiritual advancement."

"their real life of spiritual advancement.". You know. So, what happens in
material life is that, material life is endlessly entangling. It is not just
entangling. But endlessly entangling. You know. One thing. Second thing. Third
thing. Fourth thing. Keeps come..., you know, keeps coming. And then, there are
loose ends. Loose ends means, ok, this has to be fixed up. This has to be fixed
up. This has to be fixed up. But what happens is the loose ends never end. You
know. I fix up one thing. And then, ten other things become unfixed. And I fix
those things. And then, ten other things become unfixed. And it just goes on.
And on. And on. Now, we are not meant to neglect material life. But nor are we
meant to neglect spiritual life. So, you know, you know, regular contact with
renunciates, those renunciates, especially, those renunciates who have
completely devoted themselves to, you know, you know, the, to pursuit of
transcendence. To the, to Krishna's service, that reminds those who are in the
householder life. Ok. This is an important part of life. And I have to focus on
this, also. So, if, you know, you know, you know, sannyasis are focusing e...,
exclusively on, primarily on this. Entirely on this. Then, at least, I have to
devote some time for this. So, that is how there is a, you know, reciprocation.
And sannyasis are also traditionally meant to beg. So, the begging is not
because they, they are beggars primarily. The begging is a means by which they
express their humility. You know. And the begging is also a means by which they
can, you know, get an opportunity to interact with the householders. And give
them some transcendental knowledge. So, "jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ". And then,
Prabhupada writes that, in case one i..., is taken to renunciation. But does not
have knowledge. Then, one should cultivate knowledge. And then, one can share
that knowledge with others. But either way, it is important to share knowledge.
Then, you know, you know, you know, you know:

        dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś ca
        svādhyāyas tapa ārjavam

So, "dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś ca". "dānaṁ" is charity. Charity is a very important
part of, you know, spiritual life, especially as, you know, the householders.
And in, the important point about charity is to recognise that charity is not
just an activity. Charity should not just be an activity. Charity should be a
mentality. And mentality is developed through the cultivation of a habit. So,
you know, that means, you know, you know, that, you know, the idea behind
charity is not to, you know, just give some charity. Yes. That is important to
give some charity. But the idea is that to develop the mentality of giving.
That, to develop the mentality of a giving, giving. And that is why we should
give regularly. Some people feel, ok, now, I am in a financial crunch. So, now,
I will not give anything. In the future, when I earn money, then I will give a
huge sum. Yes. If we have money. And we can give a large sum, that is good. But
the important point is not the quantity of the sum. But the regularity. Why?
Because that creates the mentality of giving. Yes. I have to give regularly.
Regularly. Regularly. And a small amount. Or big amount. Of course. You know. We
should try to give as much as possible to Krishna. But the important point is
give regularly. Because that is a habit to be cultivated. That is why Krishna
clarifies charity. Now, we pu..., we put, put charity as an activity. And we
would consider charitable disposition as a quality. But Krishna is calling
char..., co..., charity itself as a, as a part of the, you know, godly nature.
You know. You know. The, the that the demoni..., divine nature. The grihast...,
the householders who have divine nature. They are charitably disposed. But
charity is their quality. So, you know, charity, as a quality, helps us to
develop the giving mentality. And then, when we have, you know, if we do not
develop that habit of giving, you know, then i..., i..., we may eventually have
a lot, also. But then, because the habit of giving is not there. So, when we
have a lot, then the mind comes up with a lot of, you know, a lot of demands,
also. Oh, we have to get this, also. We have to get this, also. We have to get
this, also. And then, people who postpone giving charity so that they can give a
lump sum in the future often do not give anything at all. Because the idea is
that, their habit has not been developed. The habit of holding on to the money
has been developed. And that habit perceives, you know, continues even when a
person does not have, you know, you know, you know, person can spare money to
give charity. That is why, you know, char..., charity should be focused on, is
a, you know, charity should be done as a habit. And then, "dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś
ca". "damaś" is sense control. You know. You know. Now, "damaś ca yajñaś ca".
You know. So, you know, you know, sense control refers to the capacity. You
know. Sense control is required for everyone. And it is also required for
householders. The idea is that, you know, even in household life, the purpose of
marriage is not just an arrangement for sense gratification. It is for helping
you know, both of them, to together move on towards Krishna. So, you know, you
know, you know, now, sexuality is a part of life. Sexuality is a part of our
humanity itself. You know. You know. As human beings, as embodied creatures,
sexuality is a part. But sexuality is one thing. And sexualisation is another
thing. Sexualisation means that we reduce everything to, you know, to sexual
terms, only. So, you know, you know, the marriage realisation, relationship
should not be, you know, reduced to sexualisation. It is not just an arrangement
for, you know, sexual gratification. It is actually an, you know, arrangement
for spiritual elevation. And gra..., over a period of time, you know, the
husband and wife, they come to a level. If they exp..., practic..., practicing
spiritual life seriously. You know. They start seeing each other. You know. Not
so much as males and females. Who will provide each other mutual gratification.
But they start seeing each other spiritually. As, as a partners in a spiritual
journey. As a fellow souls. Fellow devotees. Who are moving forward in the
spiritual journey. So, that is, so that requir..., you know, that sort of, you
know, to develop that sort of req..., vision, it requires self-control. "dānaṁ
damaś ca yajñaś ca". "yajñaḥ" is sacrifice. So, there are, you know, you know,
this, also, now:

        abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir
        jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ

was for the sanny..., you know, sannyasis. Then, "dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś ca".
These are for the grihastas. You know. You know. So, "damaś ca yajñaś ca".
"yajñaḥ" is sacrifice. Of course, Srila Prabhupada mentions that there are
various kinds of sacrifices. There are "yajñaḥ"s. You know. You know. You know.
Various "yajñaḥ"s which the, you know, grihastas would do in Vedic culture. But
now, the primary "yajñaḥ" is the "yajñaḥ" of, you know, you know, you know,
chanting the holy names. That is meant for everyone. Even the grihastas, you
know, do it. And then, that is how they fulfill the obligations that are
expected, you know, in householder life. And "svādhyāyas tapa ārjavam". So,
"svādhyāyas". "svādhyāyaḥ" is self-study. So, Prabhupada explains that
"svādhyāyaḥ" is especially meant for brahmacarya. You know. brahmacarya is
student life. So, and students, the very word student is associated with the
stu..., word study. So, "svādhyāyaḥ". So, they are meant to study. So, by
studying the Vedic literature in student life, then the person develops a deep
understanding of scripture. And by developing the deep understanding of
scripture, eventually, even when the brahmacari becomes a grihasta, the person
will not get entangled in material life. That person recognises that, actually,
you know, you know, the purpose of life is not just material enjoyment. It is
spiritual fulfillment. And even grihasta ashram will be a way towards that. So,
the purpose of scriptural study is to, you know, help one understand this. So,
"svādhyāyaḥ". Of course, co..., now, I mentioned earlier that this has to be
done for everyone. You know. You know. Always, demon..., you know, godly
qualities, you know, the divine qualities are meant to be developed by everyone.
But, you know, while developing all these qualities, the, in certain ashrams,
certain varana, certan ashram, certain qualities are specifically emphasised.
They are especially required. And that is what is talked about over here. So,
you know, everybody has to do "svādhyāyaḥ". But brahmacarya life is focused on
"svādhyāyaḥ". "svādhyāyas tapa ārjavam". So, "tapaḥ", austerity is also required
for everyone. But Prabhupada explains that this is especially for the retired.
Vanaprastha. You know. You know. When a person is living as a grihasta. There
are relative comforts of householder life. Then, when a person takes
Vanaprastha, at that time, things may not bec..., things are really difficult.
But, you know, the focus is on, you know, the accepting the austerity so that
one can effectively, you know, f..., practice spiritual life. Now, how
varanashram is going to implemented in today's age is difficult to see. So, the
important point is that we understand the principles. And we adop..., develop
the qualities. So that we can practice spiritual life. You know. In today's
society, often brahamcaris, you know, they also act as, you know, preachers. So,
actually, primarily, brahamcarya is meant, are, you know, the tradition of Vedic
culture, brahamcaris are students. Brahmacaris are servants. And then, they
assist the sannyasis. Of course, those brahmacaris, they start their brahmacarya
at the age of 5. And they may continue to, at the age of 25. Today, the whole
varanashram is such that people at the age of 25 become brahmacaris. You know.
After doing their education in material life. And then, then they become
brahmacaris.

So, we cannot have, replicate the ideal way, Vedic sys..., the Vedic system,
right in today's culture. So, we, the important point is that we understand the
broad social roles. And see how we can, you know, you know, incorporate and
integrate those into our lives. According to our time, place, circumstance. Now,
going forward, you know, with respect to, you know, you know, vanaprastha.
You know. Vanaprastha is almost like a, you know, extinct specy today. There are
sannyasis within ISKCON. And there are, of course, many devot..., there is good
number of devotees who, after doing their family obligations, after, you know,
you know, you know, crea...., creating some financial security, would like to
fo..., would like to focus, fo..., you know, more on, you know, the, more on
serving Krishna whole-heartedly. So, then, you know, the, they may or may not
go, Prabhupada did not recommend devotees going to jungle. That is not practical
in Kali Yuga. In Kali, vanaprastha means one who goes to jungle. But, but the
idea o..., is not just to go to a jungle. The idea is to go to a jungle to meet
saintly people. So, in Kali Yuga, there are very few jungles only left. And even
if you go to jungles, there are not many saintly people left over there in the
jungles. And even if there are saintly people, there are very few people who are
ready to go to the jungle to the meet the saintly people. That is why saintly
people also live in the temples. And even if it is not possible for a person to
entirely live house..., you know, you know, you know, you know, householder
life. But, you know, person can minimise the worldly engagements. And focu...,
one increase spiritual engagements. That is "tapaḥ". "tapaḥ" is austerity. So,
accepting voluntary discomfort for a higher cause. That is austerity. And, you
know, you know, you know, we may have to, you know, see when and how we can, you
know, increase our focus on spiritual life. And that will vary according to
time, place, circumstance. No doubt. But the idea should be, a devotee wants to,
over a period time, increase. Increase one's spiritual commitments. One's, you
know, spiritual envolvement. And thereby, prepare for the final exam of death.
And prepare for the ultimate success for life of returning back to Krishna. You
know. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada emphasises that. You know:

"The entire varṇāśrama-dharma society is meant for tapasya. Without tapasya, or
austerity, no human being can get liberation."

So, you know, you know, why? Because, actually, when we are sick. We have to
take a treatment. And the treatment involves, you know, following certain, you
know, processes. You know. Not all of which are likeable to us. So, we should
be rea..., we have to be ready to do what is not likeable to us, also. So that
we can make steady spiritual advancement. You know. You know. You know. Then,
Prabhupada goes on and talks about the, you know, you know, the qualities in
terms of the varana. So, fi..., first was, brahmacari, griha..., you know,
brahmacari, you know, so, you know, grihasta, van..., van..., sannyasi,
brahmacari, grihasta, and vanaprastha. Now, it is brahman. Ksatriya. Vaisya.
Shudra. So, you know, "ārjavam". So, you know, you know, you know, the list of
the qualities is going on now. You know. You know. Let us look back at the list
once again. You know. You know. So, we have discussed until now, "svādhyāyas
tapa". So, now, we are coming to "ārjavam". "ārjavam" is truthfulness. So, of
course, everybody is recommended to be truthful. But the brahmana is meant to be
truthful. And as brahmana, is especially meant to speak the Absolute Truth. You
know. You know. You know. Now, you know, many of these qualities that are
described over here, they primarily apply to brahmanas. So, like that, there are
qualities for everyone. So, "ahiṁsā". Now, "ahiṁsā" is not a primary quality for
a ksat..., you know, for a ksatriya. It is quality for a brahmana. A brahmana is
meant to be forgiving. You know. It is described in the, you know, you know,
Ramayana that when, you know, you know, you know, "Vishvamitra", when he was
earlier a king. Kaushika. He tried to, s..., taking away the "Surabhī" cow of
Valmiki. So, Valmiki did not put as. Because the Brahmana is meant to be
non-violent. A brahmana, you know, depends on a ksatriya for protection. A
brahmana does not take arms oneself. Of course, in extreme situations, not for
the sake of self-defense. But for the sake of general welfare of others, a
brahmana may resort to strong means. Just like, you know, when, you know, King
Vena was, you know, committing attrocities. And disrupting, not just the social
order. But also the spiritual order. Was preventing people from practicing
spiritual life. So, at that time, you know, what did he do? You know. You know.
The body, you know, the brahmanas, when given good instruction. When he divi...,
was defiant. And he condemned the brahmana's, brahmanas' absence. Then, the
brahmanas took strong action. At the time, the brahmanas, you know, you know,
just, you know, by speaking. You know. You know. Hmm. So, just by hunkar, they
reduced him to ashes. So, that is extreme. But generally, the brahmanas are
meant to cultivate "ahiṁsā". So, "ahiṁsā satyam akrodhas". So, like that, all
these qualities are described. So, so, "ārjavam" is straightforward. Now,
"satyam" is truthfulness. The two are related. But there is slight difference
between them in terms of emphasis. So, you know, you know, you know, "akrodhas"
is not getting angry. You know. You know. You know. "ahiṁsā satyam akrodhas".
So, we discussed about "ahiṁsā". Prabhupada, again and again, Prabhupada has
talked about "ahiṁsā" earlier, also, in terms of, you know, you know, you know,
you know, in terms of, you know, while talking about, you know, 13th Chapter,
also. He says, "ahiṁsā" means not to kill animals. And not to:

"Real ahiṁsā means not checking anyone’s progressive life."

So, we discussed this how, you know, you know, one should, you know, help
everyone to advance. So, the animals are also, in their own way, moving forward.
And one should not cause violence to them. "satyam". So, Prabhupada translates
the "ārjavam" as straightforwardness. "satyam":

"means that one should not distort the truth for some personal interest."

And Prabhupada talks about misinterpretation of scriptures. Then, "akrodhaḥ".
You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. "akrodhaḥ" means:

"Even if there is provocation one should be tolerant, for once one becomes angry
his whole body becomes polluted."

Now, it is interesting, Prabhupada using the word "body becomes polluted.". Now,
normally, we would think of the anarthas as polluting the mind. How do they
pollute the body? Actually, the anarthas, certainly, they pollute the mind. Lust
is full, as pollutes the mind. Greed pollutes the mind. Anger pollutes the mind.
But then, whatever happens in the mind also affects the body. You know. When we
become angry, we become also physically disturbed by it. You know. Maybe, we
start breathing fast. We start sweating. You know. We start clenching our fist.
Grinding our teeth. And all these are rajasic. And tamasics, you know, cha...,
you know, behavior characteristics. And they are undesirable. Even at the
physical level. So, you know, so, they count, they contaminate the body. And how
does one tolerate anger? By, you know, you know, by, you know, remembering, you
know, that, there is a higher purpose to life. Now, small, small things, their
provocation will always keep coming. So, as Prabhupada tells in the "Kṛṣṇa"
books, one's greatness has to be estimated by, you know, one's ability to
tolerate provoking situations. So, when there is reason to become angry. But we
stay calm. Then, that is, you know, tolerance. And that is, you know, also,
"akrodhaḥ". So, you know, you know, not becoming angry. You know. You know. And
then, "apaiśunam". It is very important. "apaiśunam" is, you know, Prabhupada
translates it, very beausi..., beautifully as "aversion to fault-finding". You
know. "aversion to fault-finding". Generally, you know, what is gossip all
about? Gossip basically means, you know, you know, we talk about the faults of
others. The devotees glori..., you know, devotees delight in the glories of
Krishna. And the glories of devotees. But gossipers delight in the faults of
others. Gossipers delight in the faults of others. They delight in how, you
know, the, every..., you know, I, this person has this fault. This person has
this fault. And this spread the faults. So, this is very distasteful for a
cultured person. And for a person who is godly-minded, aversion to
fault-finding. So, even if we have to speak about faults of others, actually,
the only time when we can speak about the faults of others is when we get no joy
in doing so. When we get no joy in doing so. So, as a matter of necessity, for
benefitting others. Or for protecting others. We may sometimes have to speak the
faults of others. But we do not get any joy in it. Our joy comes, and we are
meant to laugh with others. Not laugh at others. As devotees, we are meant to
laugh with others. Laugh with others means not that, you know, if people are
engaging in ignorant enjoyment, we go and descend to their level. And ga..., we
enjoy at that level. No. We are meant to, you know, we, we enjo..., we are
relishing life at the spiritual level. And we want to elevate others, also, to
the spiritual level. And, you know, you know, there, you know, we all delight.
We all relish. So, we are meant to love with others. Our goal ultimately is to
elevate others. Sometimes, as devotees, you know, we may, we get a joy in
condemning the s..., karmis. You know. Those karmis. They are so foolish. They
do like this. They do like that. They do like that. They do like that. Now, even
if we want to talk about the folly and the fallacy of material, you know,
fallacies of materialism, we can do that. But that should not lead to hatred or
derision towards the, you know, towards the materialistic people. No. Actually,
if we are, we want, if at all, we should have compassion. We should have
affection. Affection in terms of seeing them as parts of Krishna. And we try to
help them in whatever way we can. So, whether it is, cer..., certainly, finding
fault with devotees can be offensive. And finding faults even at material, you
know, materialistic people, also. 

You know. Bhaktivinoda Thakur talks about one of the offenses being, you know,
criticism of general living entities. We do not want to criticise general living
entities, also. And necessarily. So, "apaiśunam". "apaiśunam" is, you know,
aversion to fault-finding. And then, you know, you know, in this way, when one
develops "apaiśunam". Then, you know, then one can actually develop very deep
relationships.

        annya indadi suda rupsha
        sannya inda indadi sunyartam ipsita sanga labdhyam

The characteristic of advanced devotee, Bhakti..., described in the Rupa, by
Rupa Goswami, is also that:

        indadi sunya hrdim

That does not have the inclination to criticise anyone. Because the devotee is,
you know, sees everyone's spiritual potential. And wants every..., to, the, help
develop, help everyone's spiritual potential be developed. You know. We see this
in "Ramanujacharya". When he saw, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
know, you know, this young man. Who was completely infatuated with the woman.
What did he do? You know. He did not, everybody was mocking. Just, you know,
there is the Lord's procession going on. And you are just foolishly, you know,
captivated with a woman. But what did, you know, "Ramanujacharya"? He did not
laugh at him. He had compassion for, rather than finding fault with him, he
asked him. You know. Why is it that? You know. What do you find so attractive?
He says, this woman's eyes are so attractive. I have never seen such attractive
eyes. "Ramanujacharya" saw the spiritual potential over there. He says, oh, you
are attracted with beauty. What if I show you a beau..., eyes which are more
beautiful than this? He says, then I will devote myself to those eyes. Then, he
took him to the temple of Lord "Jagannātha". And showed him this, revealed to
him the supreme beauty of the Lord. And then, revealed to him the supreme
beauty. What happened? The Lord had become, He became captivated by that. And
even turned to become a great devotee thereafter. So, you know, you know, you
know, you know, what? Aversion to fault-finding. The idea is see the spiritual
potental in others. And help to develop the spiritual potential. Sometimes, we
may say, Prabhupada used fools and rascals. Fool and rascal so strongly. So,
Prabhupada was condemning. Yes. Prabhupada wa..., you know, you know, the, for
our, it is the sake of education, he would point out misconception that people
would have. But if Prabhupada had been a fault-finder, then could he have
possibly gone to the hippies? Stayed among people. Who, whose, as we discussed,
only regulative principle was to break all the regulative principles. And who
were doing all court of sinful activities. And Prabhupada not only lived among
them. Not only taught them. But he fed them. He wa..., he washed the pla...,
their plates. And he served them. How could he have done that if he had just
been a fault-finder? No. Prabhupada saw the spiritual potential in others. And
found that potential. And, you know, neglected, whatever conditionings they
might have had. That is actually compassion. That is godly quality. "apaiśunam".
And then, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada does not,
you know, you know, Prabhupada, he says "hrīr". "hrīr" means modesty. So,
modesty, now the word modesty is often, is used in terms of dressing. It is used
in terms of, you know, you know, you know, how we live together. So, you know,
one, one, one should not act in a way that is immodest. That is, you know, that
is inappropriate. That is undesirable. "acāpalam". "cāp...", cāpalam" means,
"cā...", a, "cāpalam" means restless. Going here. Going there. "acāpalam"
means one does not, you know, one does not become restless. One stays focused.
One stays determined. And "tejaḥ". So, now, Prabhupada, you know, are, these are
all qualities which, until now, are described. So, we will not go into all the
qualities. We will just focus on whatever Prabhupada has described. And the
focus is on, now, "tejaḥ". "tejaḥ kṣa...", "tejaḥ" is strength. Or effulgence.
So, you know, "tej...", the ksatriyas are meant to be assertive. Whatever is
required for the service of the Lord, they should do that. You know. You know.
You know. There is "śaucam", Prabhupada discuss, "śaucam" means cleanliness.
"nāti-mānitā". "adroho nāti-mānitā". "adroho nāti-mānitā". So, "adroho" is
non-enviousness. So, if others have more t..., wealth than, you know, me. Others
have more power. More prestige than me. Then, if am, I am in a particular varana
within the varnashram system, others may have more, you know, than me. Then, I
should not become envious of them. Because I understand that this is the best
way I can become purified. You know. Ultimately, this world is like a hospital.
And in this hospital, you know, the goal is to get cured. You know. If we see
that, you know, that the doctor is giving me one medicine. And doctor is giving
somebody else another medicine. He says, why? You know. You are giving me such a
bitter medicine. And giving that person such a sweet medicine. You know. The
point is not bitterness. Or sweetness. The, you know, the point is
appropriateness. What is required for me. So, for a person with the
psychophysical nature of a, say, a vaisya or a shudra. That that that person, by
doing the work, vaisya, shudra activities, that person will get purified. And by
getting purified, that person will become eventually liberated. So, that is like
getting discharged from the hospital. So, we should not focus so much on the
spe..., you know, specifics. You know. This person has got more. I have got
less. This person is doing this. I am doing that. No. We focus on what is
appropriate for us according to psychophysical nature. And by doing, we get
elevated. So, now, "adroho". Do not be envious. And "nāti-mānitā". "āti-mānitā".
One does not demand respect. You know. As we said that, you know, we, in
spiritual life, we can accept respect. But we do not expect respect. Accept
means, if somebody offers respect, we accept it. You know. Because we see that
respect as a means for, you know, the reciprocation of, you know, you know,
love. And the following of eti..., it is, Krishna, affection. Affection. The
following for etiquette. So, we fold hands. We offer obeisances. All this is a
part of Vaishnava etiquette. And we do that. But the important in doing all this
is, you know, to recognise, you know, you know, that this respect is not just
being offered to me. I am representing Krishna. And respect is being offered
ultimately to Krishna. So, I should also offer respect to Krishna. Who is
present in the heart of this person.

So, generally, when we get praise, you know, praise, you know, should, you know,
deflate the mind. It should not inflate the ego. What does that mean? Generally,
praise can inflate the ego. You know. Somebody praises me, oh, I am so great. I
have so much talent. I have this. I have that. I have that. So, when the other
devotees praise us, we may think, I am, I am such a great person. I am such a
great devotee. It can inflate our ego. But rather, you know, serious devotee can
use praise to deflate the mind. Deflate the mind. Suppose, we give a good class.
And then, others come and appreciate. Oh. You gave such a nice class. You told
such a wonderful philosophy. You have helped me co..., you know, brought me out
of ignorance. You have inspired me in devotional service. So, we may feel, you
know, we may, we, you know, we can become proud of this. Or, we, we can let it
inflate our ego. Or otherwise, we can think, it is actually, I am so unworthy.
You know. I know how much impurities I have in my heart. And still, Krishna is
using me, also. Krishna is using me to serve Krish..., you know, serve Him. To,
to serve His mission. By, you know, letting my message be broadcast. You know.
Getting His message be broadcast even through me. So, Krishna is so great that
He can use any minim..., unworthy instrument like me. So, if Krishna is using me
as an instrument, then to do good to others. Then, why should I be an obstacle,
obstruction? Why should I be an obstacle? Let me try to, you know, you know, you
know, be as resist..., less resistant to possible, as possible to Krishna's
mercy going through me. And the frivolousness of our mind is what? Frivolous of
the mind. You know. There is, ok, I will enjoy this. I will do this. I will do
that. You know. We, in every moment, we can be doing so much good to others. We
can be doing so much good to others. By sharing Krishna's message. By connecting
others to Krishna. Every moment, we can do so much for Krishna. And, you know,
help others come close to Krishna. So, the mind has its frivolous engagements.
You know. I just waste time here. Gossip over there. Chit-chat over there. All
those things. But if we remember the gravity and the glory of, of the mission
that we have, then, you know, you know, we will not let, you know, ourselves
become fri..., you know, affected by frivolousness. What we will do is, we will
recognise the seriousness of what we are doing. And we will be inspired to
devote ourselves to ser..., you know, to doing things seriously. You know. Each
of us, we are not just a practitioner of devotional service. But we are also a,
you know, repre..., become a representative of devotional service. We become a
representative of Krishna. And Krishna is the supreme doctor. And we become
assistant doctors. Even if we are doing overly little, still, we can give
the medicine to others. So, now, imagine that, if a, you know, you know, a
doctor is on a hospital aboard. And the doctor is, you know, doctor is meant to,
you know, attend to the patients. And treat the patients who are in pain. Now,
if instead, while in, being on the hospital aboard, the doctor starts flirting
with a nurse, You know. And the patient is crying. And dying in pain. That is so
terrible. So, like that, you know, we have a serious mission. And when we are
the, if others appreciate us. Others praise us. They tell us, you know, you
are helping me so much in my spiritual life. This and that. Then, that should
remind us that I have such a serious mission over here. And when I have a
serious mission, I should not let my mind be caught in frivolousness. So, the
frivolousness of the mind is very inappropriate when we come, you know,
understand the gravity of the miss..., mission that we have been entrusted. So,
you know, youk know, when others praise us, we can let that praise remind us of
the gravity of the mission. And thereby, deflate the mind. Deflate the mind from
its frivolousness. So, in this way, you know, you know, whenever "mānitā" comes,
you know, "mān...", "mānā" comes, we can accept it. But not get intoxicated by
it. And then, Prabhupada explains that, according to varnashram, quality,
quality wait them. These qualities. Now, you know, let us move forward to the
next verse. You know. So:

        dambho darpo ’bhimānaś ca
        krodhaḥ pāruṣyam eva ca
        ajñānaṁ cābhijātasya
        pārtha sampadam āsurīm

So, "sampadam āsurīm". This is the demon..., this is demon..., demoniac nature.
The demoniac qualities. So, the qualities that comprise the demoniac nature. So,
what are these qualities? You know. "dambho darpo ’bhimānaś ca". You know.
Pride. Arrogance. Conceit. You know. Now, they see, seem, they seem similar. You
know. And they are in many ways similar. But there is a slight differences of
degrees. In, you know, you know, just like there is egoist. And there is
egotist. Egoist is a person who thinks, who has, thinks that, I am a great
person. I am a great person. I am a great person. Who think..., has a big ego.
But egotist is a person who talks about himself constan..., oneself constantly.
Just, you know, we, when we are, we start talking something. Anything. You know.
You know. Yesterday, I had gone to this place. And I saw this. Oh, you know.
Three years ago, I had gone to similar place. And, you know, what happened at
that time? And that person, so, everything that person hears, the person
becomes, is autobiographical hearer. That means whatever that person hears, that
becomes a stimulus for rewinding the autobiography of that person. And that is
ve..., that can be very irritating. So, that is egotist. So, that, that, the ego
is the center. But, you know, in one case, one is just thinking about oneself.
The other case, one is talking about oneself. So, "dambhaḥ". "darpaḥ". And
"abhimānaḥ". So, you know, you know, you know, "dambhaḥ" is where one, you know,
wants to, you know, one, actually, we discussed, you know, "am...", "amānitvam
adambhitvam". "dambhaḥ" means where one does not have good qualities. Still, one
wants to parade that I have good qualities. And one wants credit for that.
"darpaḥ" refers to where one may have good qualities. One wants to parade one's
qualities. And "abh...", "abhimānaḥ" refers to where one wants "mā...", "mānaḥ".
Is, it, as we discussed earlier, one is, we discussed earlier difference between
"stuti". And "mānaḥ". "stuti" means that others praise. And "mānaḥ" means we
feel honor. So, there correlation. But the focus is different. So, "dambho darpo
’bhimānaś ca". So, "abhimānaḥ" is where one is hungry for "mānaḥ". So, one, one,
it delights. And resides. And lives in "mānaḥ", only. Without "mānaḥ", that
person cannot live. You know. That is why in the past, you know, you know, the,
the kings would have bards. You know. Bards are those who are actually, like
their only job is to glorify the king. So, you know, of course, if the king is a
devotee, then the glory of the king is also connected with the glory of Krishna.
That is different. But, you know, there are people like that. Then, just
glorify, glorify the person. Bards. So. "’bhimānaś ca". Then:

        krodhaḥ pāruṣyam eva ca

So, "krodhaḥ". And "pāruṣyam" may seem similar. But "krodhaḥ" is anger. And
"pāruṣyam" is anger as expressed through the speech. That is harshness. So,
insensitive. Hurting. Sarcastic speech. That is "pāruṣyam". "pāruṣyam". You
know. You know. So, how does the "pāruṣyam"? So, you know, you know, we, we will
"mārdavaṁ hrīr acāpalam". "mārdavaṁ" was gentleness. So, the characteristic of
a, you know, you know, godly person is sensitive. Gentle speech. So, "mārdavaṁ".
So, we see that. You know. People often, you know, you know, taunt, especially
materialistic people. They taunt others. And they use ugly words. Using swear
word. Using foul words is so common among materialistic people. Among, among
godless people. And sometimes, people, the more nasty the swear words, they use,
they think it as, po..., you know, they think that is good. That is cool.
Actually, that is not cool. That is a sign of a fool. So, you know. The way we
speak, that, you know, that is the way we think. And that is the way, you know,
our whole culture gets shaped. And affected. So, "pāruṣyam". Harshness. So,
harsh speech is a characteristic of, you know, the, you know, "ajñānaṁ
cābhijātasya". So, we discussed, you know, "jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ". And
"svādhyāyaḥ". In the, you know, qualities of the devata, of the demon..., of
the godly. Divine. So, you know, they either have knowledge. Or they are
cultivating knowledge. Through study. But "ajñānaṁ". The, ungodly, the demoniac,
they focus only on, if at all, they have any "jñānaṁ", that is just material
knowledge. And they, actually, the, you know, foc..., completely neglect
spiritual life. And spiritual knowledge. And in that way, they stay in, you
know, darkness about spiritual life. That is their misfortune. So, we will
discuss about you know, the demoniac more. Later. So, Prabhupada writes, in this
verse:

"the royal road to hell is described."

You know. "described", graphic language. "the royal road to hell". Why "the
royal road to hell"? You know. So, you know, generally, the royal road is
something which is celebrated. And glorified. So, you know, you know, the
demoniac go proudly on this road. That means the demoniac are proud of being
harsh. They are proud of being arrogant. They are being proud, proud of all
these things. So, that is very unfortunate. "the royal road to hell is
described.". So, now, you know, you know:

        daivī sampad vimokṣāya
        nibandhāyāsurī matā
        mā śucaḥ sampadaṁ daivīm
        abhijāto ’si pāṇḍava

So, now, at this point, when Arjuna hears, now, Arjuna is hearing everything
quite seriously. He is just thinking, how it, how does it apply to me? You know.
When we go to a doctor. And the doctor describes certain things about a disease.
And we are naturally hearing with concern. Who does the, are these
characteristic? Are these symptoms? Are these relevant to me? How does it apply
to me? So, Arjuna starts thinking that I am a ksatriya. That I do violence. And
in, the ksatriyas, before they fight, they go reach other. You know. And they
go reach other to fight. And that is the end, that, that is, that is, actually,
one of the joys of the marshall spirit. You want to bring out the, you know,
bring out the, you know, be..., best from the other. Best in terms of the
fighting expertise. And skill. So, you know, you know, the person should have
that fighting spirit. And to go, that person is, often go there. So, sometimes,
the ksatriyas also speak harshly to each other. So, he is thinking that I am
going to fight a war. And I will speak harshly. So, I am chasing, I, I am
looking for a kingdom. So, am I a demo..., am I, am I demoniac qualities? So,
Krishna says no. No. No. First, He describes, mentions that "daivī sampad
vimokṣāya". So, if one lives according to divine nature, that will lead to
liberation. If one leaves according to demoniac nature. That will lead to
bondage. "nibandhāyāsurī matā". Then, Arjuna thinks am I going to stay in
bondage? But I have, I have, I want to live, to become liberated. You know. He
just says, do not worry. Krishna says, do not worry. Because:

        mā śucaḥ sampadaṁ daivīm
        abhijāto ’si pāṇḍava

Oh, "pāṇḍava". Oh, Arjuna, your "sampadaṁ" is "daivīm". How is your "sampadaṁ"
"daivīm"? Because, you know, for a ksatriya to fight in "dharma-yuddha", is not
demoniac. Actually, it is divine. It is essential. Otherwise, how will order be
maintained? Krishna says that He Himself comes. And to reestablish dharma, He
has to do violence. "vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām". So, violence in and of itself is not
bad. Violence, when it is unwarranted, that is bad. But when, for a
"dharma-yuddha", violence is required. And that is, that is not bad. So, "mā
śucaḥ sampadaṁ daivīm". Arjuna, do not fear. The "mā śucaḥ" phrase will come
later in the 18th Chapter, also. You know. "mā śucaḥ". Do not fear. Do not
lament. You are probab..., you are, your characteristic is divine. So, do not
lament. Then, Krishna describes further:

        dvau bhūta-sargau loke ’smin
        daiva āsura eva ca
        daivo vistaraśaḥ prokta
        āsuraṁ pārtha me śṛṇu

You know. So, "dvau bhūta-sargau loke ’smin". So, He says, in this world, there
are two kinds of people. There are the "daivaḥ". And the "āsura". And now:

        daivo vistaraśaḥ prokta
        āsuraṁ pārtha me śṛṇu

So, I have described in detail, you know, the divine nature to you. And "āsuraṁ
pārtha". So, now, I will describe to you the demoniac nature. Now, we may
wonder, where ha..., where has Krishna described the "daivaḥ" qualities in
detail? You know. He has just described in three verses. And if we look from
this chapter's point of view, from the verses, I went to practically the end of
the chapter. Until verse, you know, 20. You know. At least. You know. 19-20.
There is a description of the demoniac nature, only. So, then, as compared to
that, you know, you know, as compared to the length for, over which demoniac
nature is described, the, the divine is very short. So, why is Krishna using the
word "vistaraśaḥ"? "daivo vistaraśaḥ prokta". I have described in detail. So,
that detail does not refer to only what is described in the 6th Chapter..., 16th
Chapter. Krishna has defi..., you know, described the godly qualities many
times. In the Second Chapter, He has described it in the characteristic of
"sthita-prajña". From 2.54 to 72. In the Third Chapter, He has also described it
when He was talking about kings like Janaka. And others. Who live in detachment.
In the Fourth Chapter, also, He has described, you know, from 4.19 to 23. He has
talked about the karma, you know, nishkama karma yogi. Then, again, in the, you
know, you know, He has described, you know, the few, few verses in the 5th, 6th
Chapters also. You know. And then, especially, in the, you know, 10th Chapter,
He has described the godly qualities. You know. Which, the qualities which come
from Krishna. Then, in the 12th Chapter, especially, He has described the
qualities, you know, of the pure, devotees from 12.13 to 20. In the 13th
Chapter, He has described the characteristic of those in knowledge. That is 13.8
to 12. So, like that, and 14th Chapter, also, Krishna has described the
characteristic of those who are in goodness. And also, those who are,
transcended the modes. So, all these are description of those who have godly
qualities. So, Krishna is saying that I have described it elaborately in the
previous chapters, also. But now, "āsuraṁ pārtha me śṛṇu". So, Krishna says,
now, I will describe to you the demoniac qualities. And that description, we
will see, look at in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna. 
