Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8hWFpT4rB6Q
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_135_-_Bhagavad_Gita_17.01-17.04_-_Bhuta-upasana_and_Panchopasana_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=H7_0DeKNi69CrvAns9zMwVrojcV8MTU0ODQ4OTkyMkAxNTQ4NDAzNTIy&event=video_description&v=8hWFpT4rB6Q

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are in the penultimate Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. This 17th Chapter entitled
"Shraddha Traya Vibhaga Yoga". The three divisions of faith. So, the connection
between the 16th and 17th chapter is logical. And, you know, self-evident. 16th
Chapter ends with, you know, you know, you know, talking about the contrast. You
know. Those who reject fai..., you know, scripture. They do not attain any
perfection. Those who accept scripture, they attain perfection. You know.
Therefore, no, therefore, one should follow scripture. Then, one will be able
to act properly. So, you know, in, when Krishna is talking about those who
reject scripture. He says that:

        yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya
        vartate kāma-kārataḥ

So, those who reject scripture. And, you know, act according to s..., lust.
According to self-centered desire. Now, Krishna, Arjuna asks another
possibility. What about some people who reject scripture? But h..., act
according to some other faith. Which is not based on scripture. Then, what
happens to them? So, that is the connection. And then, Krishna's essential
answer is that, actually, you know, one's, you know, then one has to look at the
three modes of material nature. And see how a person is situated within the
three modes. And then, he gives characteristics for understanding, behavioral
characteristics for understanding which mode a person is situated in. And
thereby, we can deri..., directly to mean, understand what the level of the
faith of that person is. So, you know, you know, let us have a quick overview of
the chapter before we move forward and discuss the, you know, verses. So, 1 to 4
talks about recognise the level of the faith through the modes. Then, then, 5
to 6 talks about demoniac austerity. It means how, you know, we should not just
be mislead by externals. And certain austerity can be demoniac, also. And then,
Krishna talks about four behavioral characteristics, you know, which can help us
to understand the modes that a person is. Food. Sacrifice. Austerity. And
charity in the three modes. You know. So, after describing this. Then, Krishna
says that, ok, whatever activities one is doing. Whatever sacrifice one is
doing, we can make them transcendental by uttering "om tat sat". So, "om tat
sat" is not just an utterance. It is a profound philosophical understanding. And
the consciousness that we will und..., discuss when we come to that part. Let us
begin with the first, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know:

        arjuna uvāca

        ye śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya
        yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ
        teṣāṁ niṣṭhā tu kā kṛṣṇa
        sattvam āho rajas tamaḥ

"ye śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya". Those who reject "śāstra". But "yajante". They
worship how? "śraddhayānvitāḥ". With faith. You know. "ya...", "teṣāṁ niṣṭhā tu
kā kṛṣṇa". You know. What is the nature of their faith? Oh, Krishna. "sattvam
āho rajas tamaḥ". Is it in goodness? Passion? Or Ignorance? So, what is Arjuna
asking over here? You know. Going back to the metaphor of the, you know, tree of
material existence. So, the enjoying mentality is the seed of the tree. And the
15th Chapter describes the tree. The 14th Chapter describes the modes. Which,
you know, lead to the nourishment of the tree. 16th Chapter describe the two
extremities. The godly. And the demoniac natur..., "The Divine and Demoniac
Natures". Now, this is talking about somewhere in-between. Those people who are,
you know, who are not following scripture. But they are not necessarily
motivated by self..., by just selfish desire. They have some kind of faith. So,
non-scriptural faith. What happens to those people? So, Prabhupada explains in
the purport, you know, you know:

"if one, with faith, follows some rules which are not mentioned in the
scriptural injunctions, what is his position?"

Of such, per..., of such a person? So, you know, you know, you know, you know,
you know, that is the question. And Krishna will answer in a, you know,
"samatan enigmatic may", may:

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        tri-vidhā bhavati śraddhā
        dehināṁ sā svabhāva-jā
        sāttvikī rājasī caiva
        tāmasī ceti tāṁ śṛṇu

So, "śrī-bhagavān uvāca". What does "bhagavān" say? You know. "tri-vidhā bhavati
śraddhā". That "śraddhā" is of three types. "dehināṁ sā svabhāva-jā". For the
"dehināṁ", you know, for the embodied living beings, "svabhāva-jā". It is born
from faith. And "sāttvikī rājasī caiva". That there is goodness. There is
passion. And "tāmasī ceti tāṁ śṛṇu". And there is "tāmasī", also. So, basically,
"śraddhā" is of three types. So, sim..., and, the, now, Arjuna has already asked
the question that, ok, where, where is this faith? How, is that faith in
goodness? Passion? Ignorance? So, then, what is the point of, you know, Krishna
repeating the same thing? It is actually, the emphasi..., at the emphasis of
Krishna's point is "svabhāva-jā". "svabhāva-jā" means born of, you know, one's
nature. So, of course, we can say the nature is born of one's past karma. You
know. We have discussed about that in our earlier class. So, "sā", "dehināṁ sā
svabhāva-jā". So, our faith is determined by our nature. What does it mean? See,
nature means the kai..., the way we think. The way we act. The way we perceive.
The way we respond. That is our nature. So, now, you know, that is deter..., you
know, our nature is, you know, you know, our nature also determines our faith.
There is nobody who is faithless. Even a faithless person is not faithless.
Generally, the word faithless is used for somebody who is an atheist. So, even
atheists have their own version of faith. You know. Atheists have faith in the
non-existence of God. You know. Because there is no way anyone can prove that
God does not exist. There is no way that one can prove that, you know, there is
no God. No scientific experiment can just, just invisibility is no proof of
non-existence. So, you know, you know, when atheists say that God does not
exist, that simply means that, they are, you know, you know, putting their faith
in the non-existence of God. Just as theists are putting faith in the existence
of God. Atheists are putting faith in the non-existence of God. And is there any
essential difference between the two? Not really. Both are matt..., matters of faith,
ultimately. So, if both are matters of faith, then what is the difference? There
is no difference. Both are, you know, both are from the point of view of
empirical analysis. Both are equally unverifiable. But the problem is that with
respect to atheism, there is no experiential verification possible of it.
Whereas especially with respect to, not just general theism. But Vedic theism.
Which is experiential. You know. There is a whole process of yoga. There are
various yogas. And there is bhakti yoga. And the process of yoga enables one to
get experiential verification of what one i..., what is taught in the scripture.
And in that way, you know, one can realise what is the truth. So, actually, both
atheists and theists have to ascribe inconceivability to something. You know.
Where the universe has come from, and ma..., how all the majestic variety of
universe has come about. That is something which, you know, you know, you know,
you know, you know, there is no logical explanation for it. In terms of if we
just use logic in the narrow sense of, you know, material cause and effect.
Because how matter suddenly gave out consciousness. How matter developed
self-organising capabilities. How matter led to design of the level of
complexity and intricacy that we see around in the world. That is inconceivable.
You know. So, you know, you know, so, the atheists ascribe inconceivable
characteristics to God, matter. But there is no process by which one can realise
matter. So, that is why there is a matt..., you know, there, atheism is the
faith of, is faith in faithlessness. Atheism is also a religion. You know. It is
a religion of faith in faithlessness. You know. Then, Prabhupada comments in his
purport that this faith, this nature which we have acquired:

"can be changed if one associates with a bona fide spiritual master and abides
by his rules and the scriptures."

So, one can, the, change one's modes. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada says,
what one has to do?

"One has to consider things carefully, with intelligence,"

"with intelligence, in the association of a bona fide spiritual master."

So, "svabhāva-jā", we are born with faith. With a particular kind of nature. And
that shapes our faith. But it can be changed. In fact, the whole Bhagavad Gita
is spoken. So, elevate our understanding of faith.

        sattvānurūpā sarvasya
        śraddhā bhavati bhārata
        śraddhā-mayo ’yaṁ puruṣo
        yo yac-chraddhaḥ sa eva saḥ

"sattvānurūpā sarvasya". "sattva-anurūpā". "sattva-anurūpā" means, according to
one's nature. So, "sattvā" is one's existence. According to one's existence,
"sattva" can also, it is more or less same as ager. According to one's
existence. "śraddhā bhavati bhārata". So, one's faith is determined by one's
existence. And "śraddhā-mayo ’yaṁ puruṣo". "śraddhā-mayo ’yaṁ puruṣo". That
means the "puruṣaḥ" is made of "śraddhā". "śraddhā", "mayaḥ". Like "anandamaya"
is made of "Ananda". "śraddhā", "mayaḥ" is made of "śraddhā". "śraddhā-mayo ’yaṁ
puruṣo". You know. That a person is made of "śraddhā". "yo yac-chraddhaḥ sa eva
saḥ". "yo yac-chraddhaḥ sa eva saḥ". So, as is one's faith, so a person is. So,
Krishna is now, in this verse, talking about, you know, how, what a defining
role fai..., our faith, f..., place in, sha..., facing us, in shaping us. So,
you know, "śraddhā-mayo ’yaṁ puruṣo". That, actually, the "puruṣaḥ" is simply
made of "śraddhā". And "yo yac-chraddhaḥ sa eva saḥ". That as is the faith, so
is the person. So, as is the faith, so is the person. That means, actually,
everything about us is largely determined by our faith. Now, we may not
understand what a role, faith plays in our life. But f.., simple things. You
know. We work hard for a full month. And then, somebody gives us a piece of
paper. You know. Now, you know, somebody who does not know what is a currency,
he, you know, you worked for a whole month. And the person did not give you any
grains. Did not give you any kettle. Did not give you any, anything tangible
which is of wealth. He just gave you a piece of paper. And you are satisfied
with that? Now, we may say, oh, you are a fool. You do not understand what of
the value of this piece of paper is. It is a cheque. And there is a cheque. And
go to a bank. And then, you can get money from it. You know. You know. So, now,
we, we may say, we may call the person, who doubts this, as foolish. But
actually, what is it? We are putting faith. You know. These are, are, there have
been times in the history. Especially in, there was, in 1929, depression in
America. At that time, you know, you know, the currency became so terribly
devalued. So terribly devalued. That peop..., you know, not the, that, that, not
just that one time, alone. Zimbabwe, also, the currency became terribly
devalued. So, actually, when we put, you know, when we ascribe money to paper
currency. Or further now to, you know, cheques. And things like that. Ascribe
wealth to that. So, if the whole banking system collapses tomorrow, you know,
the currency gets devalued. There were times when people took a bucketful of
currency notes to a shop to get just some grains for one meal. And when they
went to the shop, at that time, you know, they threw away the currency notes.
And sold the bucket. And the bucket was worth more than the bucketful of
currency notes. So, now, the, we may say these are extreme situations. We are
being alarmist over here. Yes. The point is not to say that these are typical
situations. That the point is to indicate that there is a role of faith. In
every aspect of our life. So, when we are, you know, using currency, what are we
doing? We are putting faith in the monetary system. That when I put in, you
know, when I put in my labor. And I get a curr..., you know, get a currency
note. Or I get a cheque. That can be translated into money. Which can be,
eventually be translated into, you know, things that I need. So, faith plays a
role everywhere. You know. You know. When we go in a flight, we are putting
faith in the drive..., when, in the airplane company. In the com..., you know,
in the air pilot. And that they will take us safely. We may say that is a
reasonable faith.

So, here, we are not talking about, yes, it may be reasonable faith because that
company has taken so many people in the past safely to the destination. That is
fine. The point here is not about whether the faith is reasonable or not. The
point is that faith is present. And faith is essential. So, all of us are shaped
by our faith. How much our faith has shaped us, we may not even know until we
actually introspect seriously. You know. So, in the previous verse, Krishna has
said that our faith is determined by our nature. "sattvānurū...", you know,
then, then, He says, "śra...", "sā...", you know, "tri-vidhā bhavati śraddh...",
so, "śraddhā". "svabhāva-jā". It was based on "svabhāva". Now, He is telling
that, ok, actually, faith is not just a product of nature. But, you know, faith
is, in one sense, our essence. According to our existence, so, we have our
faith. "śraddhā". You know. "sarva...", "sattvānurūpā sa...", you know,
"sarvasya śraddhā bhavati bhārata". According to the way, people, according to
one's existence, the sha..., faith is shaped. But, you know, faith is not just
something which is externally expressed. Faith is, you know, it is intrinsic to
our make, makeup. "śraddhā-mayo ’yaṁ puruṣo". We are just made up of our
"śraddhā". "yo yac-chraddhaḥ sa eva saḥ". As is our faith, so we are. You know.
You know. Now, Srila Prabhupada explains interestingly that:

"Śraddhā, or faith, originally comes out of the mode of goodness. One’s faith
may be in a demigod or some created God or some mental concoction. One’s strong
faith is supposed to be productive of works of material goodness."

But so, now, that means, now, we may wonder here, where exactly is faith
situated? So, now, a faith is not a physical thing like a table which has to be
kept at a particular place. But that does not mean it is entirely intangible,
also. You know. The soul. Which is pure. The soul has got nothing to do with
matter. So, it does not have, got anything to do with, you know, matt..,
physical matter. That is gross matter. Or subtle matter. You know. Mind stuff as
they say. So, that soul, the soul's original pure transcendental faith is in
Krishna. The soul loves Krishna. And it is happy in loving and serving Krishna.
That is the soul's original faith. You know. Now, independent of that, the soul
also has faith in other things. What are the other things? The soul currently
has different faiths. So, the, that is in goodness. Passion. Ignorance. The
original faith is transcendental. So, when Prabhu..., you know, then it is in
pure goodness entirely. But nothing is pure in the material world. Even goodness
is not pure. It is, get contaminated by passion. Ignorance. Now, when the soul
is situated in the, you know, material world. It is covered by a subtle body.
And the subtle shapes the perceptions. And the actions of the soul. So, our
current faith is situated in our subtle body. So, our current faith, the,
depending on the way, our subtle body is situated. Maybe in goodness. Passion.
Or ignorance. You know. That is the way our faith presently is. And this faith
will gradually change. It will gradually evolve. It will develop and become, you
know, stronger. And purer. As we move upwards. As we become purified. So, you
know, you know, you know:

        śraddhā-mayo ’yaṁ puruṣo
        yo yac-chraddhaḥ sa eva saḥ

So, the soul's original, you know, as it is said, you know, you know, in the,
you know, you know, "Chaitanya Charitamrita", it is said that, you know, you
know, you know, "nitya-siddh...":

        nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-prema ‘sādhya’ kabhu naya
        śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya

So, "śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya". That "śravaṇādi". That if one does
"śravaṇa" systematically, then, you know, "udaya". It becomes, so, "udaya". Just
as sun rises, you know, at sun, at the, in the morning. Similarly, by regular
hearing, the faith become, you know, faith arises. So, faith is always there.
But it is just not realised. So, it is not realised in terms of what? The pure
spiritual natural faith of the soul is not realised. Whereas it is now, be 
distorted. Just like, if there is a light source. The light source originally
gives beauti..., is soothing white light. But it is covered by a red filter,
then, you know, jarring red light may come out of it. So, like that, the soul's
original faith is natural. Directed towards Krishna. But now, the soul's faith,
because of being covered by the modes, which influence the mind, is directed in
various directions. So, let us go to the next verse:

        yajante sāttvikā devān
        yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ
        pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye
        yajante tāmasā janāḥ

So, "yajante sāttvikā devān". So, "sāttvikā devān". The devata, so, faith in the
devatas is in goodness. "yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ". "yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi". You know.
So, even, even in passion, one worships the "yakṣa"s. And the "rākṣasa"s. And
when one is in ignorance, "pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye". One worships the
"pretān"s. The "bhūta"s. "bhūta-gaṇāṁś". So, all these kind of people. "yajante
tāmasā janāḥ". When one is in ignorance. So, now, you know, you know, you know,
we may have earlier heard that how, you know, you know, those in goodness
worship "Viṣṇu". Those in passion worship, you know, you know, you know, you
know, "Brahmā". And those in ignorance worship, you know, "Śiva". And "Durgā".
You know. "Kā...", and "Kālī". So, those in ignorance, so, that way, you know,
that is how the three "Matsya Purana" describes that the, say, 18 Puranas are
classified like the Sattvik Puranas. Rajasic Puranas. And tamasic Puranas. Now,
this is a simplistic understanding. Actually, you know, you know, you know, it
is not that in the Sattvik Puranas, there is no mention of Vishnu. Of Brahma. Or
Shiva. Nor is that in the Tamasic Puranas, there is no mention of Vishnu. They,
the, all these devatas, they all the, all the Puranas save, share more or less
the same universe in terms of what they are describing. And, you know, same, you
know, but then, the realities that are depicted, in terms of what are the
aspirations of the people. What are the conceptions of, what are the
understandings of people. What are their conceptions. Those change. And in the
Tamasic Puranas, the, largely, the aspirations and the conceptions are, are more
in tune with those in, who are in the mode of ignorance. So, it is not that, you
know, those Puranas do not mention Vishnu. But the focus is on tamasic
achievements. Tamasic ambitions. And accordingly, the whole Purana is molded.
So, therefore, these Puranas are not considered to be, you know, you know,
wrong. But they are, you know, considered to be catering to a lower level of
reality. And to the extent, these Puranas also talk about higher level. You
know. To the extent, these Puranas agree with the higher reality. To that
extent, they are accepted. Otherwi..., means, Sattvik Puranas, to that extent,
they are accepted. Otherwise, they are not. So, we will look at a verse about
this slightly later. But right now, the point, which we are making, is, you
know, that here, it is said that, you know, you know, those, who worship the
devatas, are in goodness. But then, we hear that those who worship, you know,
you know, say, Kali or, you know, Shiva, are in ignorance. So, how do we
understand this contradiction? The point is that there are levels. And first and
foremost, faith in scripture itself, it is in the mode of goodness. You know.
With, if I, one has, does not have some basic level of goodness, one cannot have
faith in scripture. So, if we could put like, you know, faith in Vishnu. Worship
of Vishnu is in goodness goodness. Faith in, you know, worship, sorry, worship
of Brahma is in goodness passion. And worship of, you know, Shiva is in goodness
ignorance. What does it mean goodness ignorance? That means there is basic
platform of goodness. But within that, there can be ranges. So, if goodness is a
spectrum. Then, within that, also, there can be variations. So, in goodness, so,
the idea of accepting some higher being who is talked about in the scripture,
that itself requires a faith. Which is indicative of the mode of goodness. To
understand this another way, you know, we also say that animals are in different
modes. For example, a cow is in the mode of goodness. Or, you know, you know, a
monkey is in the mode of passion. Or a jackal is in the mode of ignorance. You
know. So, now, you know, you know, you know, you know, what, how do we
understand this?

Or, we say, sorry, you know, sorry, you know, you know, you know, a lion is in
the mode, mode of, lion is in the mode of passion. And say, a jackal, or a, you
know, monkey is in the mode of ignorance. So, like that, we say often. Now, when
we say like this, you know, you know, it is basically understood that all
animals are in the mode of ignorance. You know. Gajendra says that "tama". In
one of his prayers in the Eighth Canto. You know. He says that, actually,
because I am in the mode of ign..., you know, mode, in an animal body,
therefore, I am in, I am covered by ignorance. So, then, what does it mean?
Basically, in the animal body, there is a general mode of ignorance. Because all
animals, they are so covered that they cannot perceive spiritual reality.
Unless, of course, it is exceptional occasions. Like Gajendra. Where, you know,
you know, the animals, you know, the souls in the animal bodies have practiced
devotional service or spiritual life in their prio..., previous human birth. So,
spiritual life cannot be started in an animal body. But spiritual, the, the life
may be continued in an animal body. You know. Spiritual life, once it is
started:

        pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva
        hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ

"hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ". One is helplessly atttracted. So, you know, that is
why one of ISKCON's sannyasis, Janananda Maharaja has written a book called
"Animals in Krishna Consciousness". And in that, he has described how various
temples all over the world, you know, there have been experience, devotees
have had experiences of some animals. In some, you know, one temple, there was
a, you know, dog who would come every evening at the time of Gaura arati. And
just sit peacefully outside the temple. And behold the deities where the arati
was going on. Another place, a cow would come just at the time of arati. And he
would be, then, now, herself. Not that the cow has to be brought. Cow does
herself. Like that. There are different animals. And the devotees, when the dog
would come, now, normally, dog is considered inauspicious. So, dog would be,
they would sue it away. So, when the dog, they would try to drive the dog away.
The dog would, does not bark. Dog would not deteriorate. Dog would just move
away. And again, sit down there. And eventually, the devotees understood. This
is a, this is a devotee dog. So, a devotee dog. Now, we may wonder. How can
somebody be, if somebody has practiced spiritual life in a previous life, then
how can somebody become a dog? We discussed this earlier, also, briefly.
Actually, you know, this is the same principle how "Jadbharat" became a, you
know, how Bharata Maharaja became a deer. See, there is a, so, there is a
spiritual principle. There is a material principle. And, you know, li..., in
real life, no principle applies, you know, you know, in isolation. Because real
life is complex. So, the spiritual principle is that once one has started
spiritual life, one will continue that. That one, whatever one:

        nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti
        pratyavāyo na vidyate

If one has developed the attraction for Krishna, that may be covered. But that
is never lost. That will stay. So, you know, on the other hand, if one gets
attached to something material. And thinks of that at the time of death, that is
what one will get. So, the spiritual principle is that, you know, the spiritual
consciousness, one has developed, that is never lost. But the material principle
is whatever one is, you know, attached to at the moment of death. That is what
one attains. So, both these principles, you know, you know, if they conflict,
then what happens? In the case of, you know, "Jadbharat", you know, Bharata
Maharaja, because he was thinking of a deer at the time of death, so he attained
the body of a deer. But because he had developed attraction for Krishna by his
steady practice of spiritual life. So, that attraction to spiritual princip...,
spirituality was not lost. So, that means what happened is, at a material level,
he got a deer's body. But he did not get deer consciousness. His consciousness
was far higher than of a deer. That is why, he was, even as a deer, he was not
constantly seaching for green grass. Whatever grass was available near the
hermitages of the sages, he would eat that grass. And be satisfied. And, you
know, try to associate with the sages. And hear about spirituality from them.
So, you know, that is how sometimes it may happen that if a soul is, you know,
Jayadvaita Maharaja writes that, you know, if a person is very fond of a dog. He
writes one of the BTG article that, you know, the dog is going around and where,
where the master is taking the dog around on a leash. So, what may happen is,
in the next life, the dog, the pet, and the pet master, master, they may
interchange positions. You know. The, for, if the pet is attached to the master.
The pet may become a human and may become the mas..., master of a dog. And the
dog, and the master, because attached to the dog, that, you know, dog, master
thinks of a dog. And they interchange position. Becomes a dog. So, what may
happen is, at the material level, depending on our attachment, we get a material
body accordingly. So, sometimes, even a devotee may be attached to a pet. You
know. You know. Too attached. And the devotee may think, instead of thinking of
Krishna at the time of death. Now, devotee may not be, not serious devotee. A
new devotee. Because of that, a devotee may get a dog's body. But at the same
time, because that devotee has practiced devotional service, so, the devotee
keeps advancing spiritually. You know. So, that is why this, we have a,
something like a devotee dog. So, anyway, the point which I am making over here
is that, you know, the dog's, the animals are in ignorance. But within
ignorance, also, there can be goodness. There can be pass..., ignor..., so,
there can be ignorance goodness. That is cows. There is, can be ignorance
passion. That will be, say, tigers and lions. Ignorance ignorance. That will be,
say, vultures. And monkeys. And other creatures like that. Jackals. So,
ignorance ignorance can also be there. So, you know, that is why sometimes, you
know, although we consider cows to be very sacred. But at the same time,
sometimes, in the "Bhāgavatam" when a person is considered to be a fool, is, at
that time, the person is considered to be cow ag..., like a cow, also. There is
that famous, would, verse that:

        yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij
        janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

A person who is doing a religious activities, but without understanding the
essential purpose, that person, you know, thinks that I am the body made of
three elements. Thinks that, you know, my bodily rela..., bodily conn..., you
know, related people are my people. Thinks that my country is worshipable.
Thinks that one has to go to holy places just to bath. And not to associate with
the learnt people over there. And such a person is, you know, "sa eva
go-kharaḥ", is like a donkey. Or a cow. Now, we may wonder, ok, donkey is,
donkey is ignorant. But cow is sacred. So, why is it compared to a cow? Because
a cow also is in an animal body. And in the animal, because of being an animal
body, there is ignorance over there. And that ignorance has to be acknowledged.
So, you know, you know, there is also the practical thing that the cow is
sometimes, just, you know, when milk has to be, you know, you know, brought from
the cow, sometimes, the cow can be deceived by making an artifact. Making a sort
of, you know, you know, ma..., a look-alike of a baby. Of a calf. And when that
look-alike of calf is brought near the calf, sometimes, the cow just starts
licking that. And then, milk starts flowing from its udder. That is how the milk
can also be brought out. So, basically, the cow is in the bod..., in a body that
is, you know, you know, in an animal body. So, it is in ignorance. So, that is
why, you know, just as we can have ignorance goodness, ignorance passion,
ignorance ignorance. Similarly, when we say "yajante sāttvikā devān". So, there
can be goodness goodness. There can be goodness passion. There can be goodness
ignorance. So, now, sometimes, these people become a little confused by seeing
various scriptures. And, you know, how the scriptures seem to teach different
things. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, yeah. So, mode of goodness
is devatas. And then, in goodness, ignorance is Shiva. Goodness passion is
Brahma. Goodness goodness is Vishnu. So, here, you know, here is the Shi...,
sa..., Shi..., Shiva, there is a verse from Shiva Purana. So, and this verse
about Shiva. You know. Shiva shastra. Shiva Purana generally. "Skanda Purana".
You know. So, it is from the "Skanda Purana", Lord Shiva himself is telling
"Kārttikeya". Now, "Skanda Purana" is a tamasic Purana. But what is it saying in
that? You know:

        shiva-shastreshu tad grahyam bhagavac-chastra-yogi yat
        paramo vishnur evaikas taj jnanam moksha-sadhanam
        shastranam nirnayas tv eshas tad anyam mohanaya hi
        
So, what is he saying? You know. You know. "shiva-shastreshu tad grahyam". You
know. It means any scripture that talks about Lord Shiva, that should be, for
example, like Shiva Purana, that should be accepted. "tad grahyam". When should
it be accepted? "bhagavac-chastra-yogi yat". Only when, "yogi" means a
connection. Or agreement. Only when it is an agreement with "bhagavac-chastra".
"bhagavac-chastra" is sattvik shastras. Shashtras like Vi..., you know, "Viṣṇu
Purāṇa". "Bhāgavata Purāṇa". "Padma Purana". "bhagavac-chastra-yogi yat". Why is
that? Because "paramo vishnur evaikas". It is very simple, it is. That sanskrit
is very straightforward in this particular puranic verse. That the "paramo" is
Vishnu. "taj jnanam moksha-sadhanam". "taj jnanam moksha-sadhanam". Now,
understanding this knowledge that Vishnu is supreme. That is the means for, you
know, liberation. And then, "shastranam nirnayas tv eshas". This is the
"nirnayas" of all the scriptures. "tad anyam". But if any..., somebody says
anything else, if anything else is said, "moha...", "tad anyam mohanaya hi". It
is all for "mohan". It is not for, it is not elus..., you know, truth. It is
elusion. Now, we may wonder, why would the scriptures talk about "mohanaya hi"?
The scriptures do not want to delude us. But the scriptures, they do not want to
impose what we are, you know, not ready to accept. So, that is why it is not a
matter of delusion. It is a matter of elusion. Illusion is not "i', 'l', 'l',
'u', 's', 'i', 'o', 'n'. It is a 'e', 'l', 'u', 's', 'i', 'o', 'n'. Elude. So,
you know, the scriptures do not delude. But the truth eludes us. What does it
mean? The scriptures are not intended to delude us. Scriptures are reciprocal.
Just like Krishna says, "ye yathā māṁ prapadyante". As all people surrender to
Me, I recipro..., the scriptures also reciprocate. So, if we want to, if we are
in tama-guna. And we are attached to tama-guna. Then, scriptures will
reciprocate. And reveal to us tamasic realities. If we are in passion,
scriptures reciprocate and reveal passionate real..., you know, realities to us.
That is why, you know, when we go with an open mind. You know. What is the
teaching of the scripture? That is what I want to know. Then, that will come to
us. Otherwise, you know, we will basically find within scripture, and become
attracted to, within scripture, those things that agree with our preconceptions.
And that way, we will stay trapped in material existence. So, if we want to go
out of material existence, we have to rise beyond the, you know, illu..., you
know, rise beyond the, the preconceptions that we have. By, you know,
submissively and open-mindedly, you know, loo..., scr..., looking at scripture.
And learning from those who are learnt in scriptures. Especially, learnt in the
conclusion of scriptures.

        shastranam nirnayas tv eshas

So, I am not going into, go into a whole elaborate discussion about demigod
worship. Because we have already done that in, you know, our discussion on, you
know, "Īśopaniṣad". When we talked about the worship of "sambhūtim". And
"asambhūtim ". But here, we are just discussing the point about the worship of
the, you know, devatas. Which, in general, is in the mode of goodness. You know.
So, you know, you know, now, let us try to understand. You know. Now, Krishna
says:

        pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye
        yajante tāmasā janāḥ

So, what is the difference between "pretān"s and "bhūta"s? You know. There is a,
there is, this can be a whole lecture. I will not go into that. But briefly,
what are "bhūta"s? "bhūta"s are souls with just subtle body. Without gross body.
When there is just the, you know, you know, you know, soul. Then, that is, you
know, ok, I will just explain this. You know. You know. Ok. Let us go here. So,
so, on my website, I have written an article which was published in BTG, also.
You know. You know. You know. You know. So, what exactly are ghosts? You know.
Generally, we use the word ghost quite often. And the Vedic culture gives us a
systematic explanation of what ghosts actually are. You know. So, let us try to
understand that. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You
know. You know. So, while this comes along, yeah. You know. So, see, this is
what is, we, all of us know. That the soul, there is subtle body. And the gross
body. These are three levels of being. So, now, when a person, how a person
becomes a ghost. So, what happens? At the time of death, this is what normally
happens. The gross become, it become, it is always dead. Matter is always dead.
But it becomes dead to our vision on the departure of the soul. You know. So,
now, at the time of death, the soul leaves along with the subtle body. When the
soul leaves along with the subtle body, normally, the soul and subtle body, will
go to another body. You know. You know. And when they go into another body, that
is what happ..., is called the, you know, that is transmigration. Soul gets
another body. But in some cases, when the person, you know, you know, say,
commits suicide. When the person commits suicide. Or when the person commits,
you know, extreme, engages in extreme tamasic activities. Then, that person has
done such karma, because of which, that person will not get a new body very
easily. So, we say, that person is supposed to live for 60 years. And commits
eight, suicide at the age of 25. Then, for the next 35 years, according to
karma, this person will not get, supposed to get a new body. So, you know, what
happens? This per..., but the soul has destroy..., that the, destroyed this
body. Then, the soul has to exist on a disembodied stage. State. You know.
Disembodied state. That means there is, there is just the subtle body. And the
soul. So, that is called a ghost. Ghost is a soul with a subtle body. Now,
sometimes, people feel very s..., fea..., scared of ghosts. You know. Sometimes,
in movies and in, you know, horror films, they may show, suddenly, a door opens.
And there is no one there. And suddenly, some screeching sound is heard. Or some
people start seeing different things. So, all these things happen. You know.
These are because of, you know, ghost. "pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye". These may be
because of ghost. Now, there may, there may be just, you know, it may just be
illusion, also, sometimes. Because of wind, only, the, this is moving. So, we
should not assume that ghosts are always behind the cause. Behind such things.
There can be hoaxes, also. There can be mistakes, also. But let us move forward.
You know. You know. You know. So, you know, you know, so, now, there is
something called as possession. Now, what happens in possession? Possession. How
possession works?

So, there is a normal person. You know. So, normal person is the soul. And
subtle body around that. But, you know, you know, when that person is possessed.
That means, what happens? This is the ghost. He is a soul along with the subtle
body. So, that enters into the gross body. So, that means, you know, the soul,
you know, so, the original person becomes dormant. Or inactive. And then, the
ghost, who has co..., entered into that body. That ghost takes over the body.
You know. So, this happens especially when a person is living in tama guna. See,
the ghosts, now, in the hierarchy, which is described, you know, of various
living beings, that is described in the Fifth Canto. You know. It is described
that, actually, the ghosts are above humans. Why? Because ghosts exist at a
subtle level. Not that they are more evolved in their consciousness. But in that
particular hierarchy, they, because they exist at subtle level, they sometimes
have more power than humans have. And especially, if the humans are acting in
the mode of ignorance. Then, are living largely in tamasic, say, intoxication.
And that sort of activities. Then, tuck. The ghosts can come inside. Now, why
would the ghost want to possess a body? Because, you know, the ghosts are
themselves miserable. Why are they miserable? Because, you know, they have a
mind. But they do not have a body with which to enjoy. You know. We can get some
example, or so, came, now, some understanding of the predicament of ghosts. If
we think of our situation in sickness. Suppose, we are sick, you know, suppose,
there is a big feast. You know. It may be twen..., may be 20-30 course feast.
With, you know, you know, a huge amount of delicacies available. And at that
time, we fall terribly sick. And we get loose motions. And we are very weak. And
doctor told, tells us, you have to take only soup. Only liquid soup. Nothing
else. So, now, we see, everybody else feasting. And that person is very, you
know, Gulab jamun was so delicious. Malpua was so wonderful. Pakora was so good.
Pulav was extraordinary. And then, what happens is, you know, we feel miserable.
We want to eat. But we just do not have the physical facility. Physical
capacity. The physical tool is not, the body has a tool, is not suited for
eating. So, that sickness can be very, very mortifying. Miserable. So, the, of
course, the sickness will go away. And later on, we will be able to eat. But in
the case of ghosts, that is their predicament for as long as they are in the
ghostly existence. You know. They have subtle body. Subtle body is filled with
desires for enjoyment. And they can, you know, the subtle body also has senses.
So, they can perceive. They have the knowledge acquiring senses. But they do
not have the working senses. With which they can enjoy. So, they can perceive.
They can cer..., perceive, say, delicious objects. They can perceive
good-looking forms. But they cannot enjoy any of it. So, that is why, out of the
desperate desire to get things, get something done. To get some enjoyment. When
some souls are tamasic. Some souls are living in tama..., tamasic modes.
Tama..., you know, then, the gho..., the ghosts possess that person. And when
the ghosts posses that person, then that person starts acting in, you know,
acting in frightened ways. You know. Acting in suddenly altered ways. Sometimes,
you know, when a person is possessed, that person may speak, also, in a
different voice. Although, the body is same. The person, who is speaking, is
different. And there, person is speaking, not just in different voice. But
completely have different behavior. And there are well-documented cases of even
respected scient..., researchers. You know.

The Darwin's theory of evolution, which is considered to be a, you know,
watershed moment. In the, you know, you know, so, wide spr..., in the, spr...,
spread of atheism. That was actually proposed by, you know, you know, Darwin.
And another scientist, then Alfred Wallace. So, Alfred Wallace also did a lot of
study in, you know, spiritism. You know. In the study of, you know, spirits. And
he writes, which I have quoted about him, also. He says that, you know, I have
spent a better part of my life using my best intelligence to study this. And
what I conclude is, you know, the, what, I do not expect you to believe what I
am saying. But all that I expect you is to, you know, to doubt the infallibility
of your preconceptions. Doubt the infallibility of your preconceptions. That
means do not assume that you know everything already. And that you alr...,
already know the correct thing. That, do not go sixist. Let us just be
open-minded. So, you know, there are many people who have done research. And
they have come up with, you know, you know, a significant evidence. So,
"Drutakarmā" Prabhu, in his book called "Human Devolution" talks about evidence
for the existence of subtle realm. So, you know, the, you know, there is matter.
There is mind. And there is consciousness. So, the evidence for consciousness
is in, you know, past life memories. In near-death experiences. And the evidence
for mind, you know, you know, you know, is in various things. There are random
number, random number generators. Whose, you know, number pattern can be changed
by the affect of, you know, you know, concentrated focus. That is mind affecting
matter. And he also gives the example of ghost. So, there can be actually three
levels. There is, you know, you know, you know, a communications. Appar...,
Apparitions. And possessions. Communications means that, you know, you know, you
know, sometimes, people get so much, if like there is a blank sheet. You know.
There is some mediums. And then, person starts moving a hand. And some message
gets written on that. And it is said that, some ghostly being, some spirit, as
possessing that person. And that person is writing something. That is plan. So,
that is communication. So, some people act as mediums. Then, the ghostly beings
communicate through them. That is one level. Second is apparitions. Apparitions
means people see something. Some relative has died. And suddenly, you know, the
other rel..., you know, relatives, they see, like, you know, that person
appearing. That is called apparition. And if you go there. You find that nothing
there. But then, you see the outline. So, it could, of course, in some cases, be
illusion. But in some cases, there are researches which indicate that, you know,
multiple people have seen it. So, it is apparitions. And then, there is
possession. So, possession is the strongest intervention. So, in communication,
you know, there is nothing seen. But some person's hand is moved. Or that person
speaks, you know, so, that person's hand is moved. And plan sheet, something
gets communicated. Apparition, something is seen. Whereas in communication, what
happens, in, you know, possession, that person enters in. Now, there are
examples of how devotees, you know, were, if were placed in, so, people can get
possessed. And houses can get haunted. So, if a, you know, if a pla..., if a
house is considered to be a place, where a hou..., hou..., where a, you know,
ghost lives, then that house is considered to be haunted.

So, people can get possessed. Houses, house can get haunted. And devotees have
gone to various places. For example, when the devotees were living in, you know,
you know, you know, John Lennon's real estate, who, at that time, you know,
there was reputed that certain area over there was haunted. So, devotees went
and did kirtan. And then, the people who were like the gardeners, and others who
were living there, were scared of going there, also. But then, they did kirtan.
And everybody could feel an increase of the pressure on that situation. It was
as if the ghosts were resisting. Not wanting to leave from there. And suddenly,
they felt a release of the pressure. The ghosts left over there. And after that,
they never had any disturbances. So, you know, you know, if we live in goodness.
And especially, if we practice devotion. Then, we can, we, not, we do not have to
be afraid of being possessed by ghosts. And we do not have to, you know, you
know, be apprehensive. Or paranoid about such things. You know. And even if
somebody is possessed. And that person chants regularly. Then, the ghosts will
go away. Anyway, our point is, we are not discussing about ghosts per say over
here. Our point is that:

        pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye
        yajante tāmasā janāḥ

You know. You know. That those in ignorance worship ghosts. You know. There is,
you know, Suhotra, you know, Swami, one of the ISKCON sannyasis wrote a book
called, he wrote an article in Back to Godhead, called Extrasensory Deception.
You know. Extrasensory perception is, some people have the capacity. If somebody
gave you an envelope, then without opening the envelope, people can read what is
the content of the envelope. That is called clairvoyance. Some people have that
sort of extrasensory perception. But there are others who have extrasensory
deception. Extrasensory deception means that people are, seem to be getting some
knowledge from some higher being. But often, the knowledge that they are getting
is not from a higher being. It is from a lower being. So, there are people who
say that, there are many, you know, popular authors who say that, actually, I am
not writing this. There is some spirit who is guiding me. And whatever that
spirit tells me, I am speaking that. So, now, that spirit is not necessarily a
higher being. That spirit can be a lower being. And that spirit may peo...,
spea..., spread tamasic knowledge. So, some people may even worship, you know,
devata, you know, ghosts and, you know, you know, ghostly beings. So, by that,
they co..., try to get some powers. Because the ghosts, as I said, they can,
they are lower in terms of the, you know, you know, their capacity for spiritual
evolution. And the receptivity towards spiritual scie..., spiritual knowledge.
But they are more powerful than us. Because they exist at subtle level. And, you
know, you know, you know, they, you know, can, if they are appeased, they can
give power to some person. But they can take control of that person, also, when
some..., some..., when somebody worships a ghost, the ghost gives power. But
the ghost con..., takes control of that person, also. So, that is tamasic
worship. So, "pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye". Now, what is a "pretān"? There is
a slight difference between of a "pretān" and a, you know, "bhūta". Let us look
at this. Yeah. You know. So, what happens is, you know, when the soul along with
the subtle body leaves. So, normally, when, sou..., only soul and subtle body.
Then, that is a "bhūta". But when the soul is going to get a next body. So,
during the transition, the Garuda Purana explains that, you know, the soul gets
another body. It is a transition body. That is grosser than the subtle body. And
subtler than the gross body. So, with that transition body, the soul goes. So,
then, normally, a person on death becomes a "pretān". So, everybody becomes a
"pretān". You know. The soul with a subtle body. And a transition body. And
then, that is why, and in the, you know, you know, scriptures, it is described
that when the pund..., pinda-dana is performed. So, normally, you know, food is
given in the Pinda-dana. So, when the food is given in the Pinda-dana, what
happens? It is said that by, you know, so, bourses of subtle, you know, th...,
subtle transubstantiation. Transubstantiation means by subtle change of, you
know, characteristics of things, the, you know, you know, food that is offered
in the Pinda-dana, in the rituals, that food goes towards making the next body
of the, you know, person. Now, this is of course, not for devotees to do.
Because devotees are, you know, their arrangement is taken fair by Krishna. But
the idea is Pinda-dana. What is the rep..., purpose of this? So, when the
Pinda-dana is complete, then it is said that the soul's next body gets prepared
by that. And then, the "pretān" becomes a pitra. You know. Pitra means ancestor.
So, "pretān", after Pinda-dana, becomes a pitra. You know. Now, we discussed
earlier, what is Pitraloka? It is not that all ancestors go to Pitraloka. Loka.
It depends on, the, if that person has lived the, a life of an average punya.
The person will go to Pitraloka. That is the normal expected destination for
ancestors. If they are living, you know, a life of average piety in Vedic
culture. If somebody does extraordinary piety, that person will go to Svarga.
And if that person does terrible impiety, that person will go to Naraka. You
know. So, you know:

        pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye
        yajante tāmasā janāḥ

You know. So, those who are in ignorance, they worship the, you know, you know,
you know, deva..., dev..., de..., deva..., the devatas. The, sorry. The
"pretān"s. And "bhūta". So, Prabhupada writes in the purport, you know, you
know, you know, how people worship anyone and everyone.

"during the Second World War a man in Calcutta worshiped Hitler because thanks
to that war he had amassed a large amount of wealth by dealing in the black
market."

So, this is, you know, you know, you know, ignorant worship. This is an example
of non-scriptural worship. And, you know, you know, then, Prabhupada talks about
"pañcopāsanā". You know. This is a complex subject. I will try to explain thus
briefly as possible over here. From a historical perspective. And then, you
know, from a, you know, from the perspective of how Bhaktivinoda Thakur has
explained it. So, what is "pañcopāsanā"? "pañca". "upāsanā". So, "upāsanā" means
to worship. "pañca" means five. So, historically speaking, you know, you know,
Sha..., when "Śaṅkarācārya" united. And before "Śaṅkarācārya", Buddhism and
Jainism had spread practically all over the world, all over the country. And,
you know, so, Buddh..., Buddhism and Jainism, they both started re...,
approximately at about Fifth Century BC. A few centuries back and forth. And
then, they gradually spread. Spread. Spread. And then, there were many kings.
Especially after "Aśoka" became Buddha. Then, he used all the national
resources, you know, all the state resources at his command to spread Buddhism
vigorously. And many kings became Buddhists. So much so that, you know, you
know, you know, Chanakya writes strongly cautioning kings against the influence
of Buddhism. Because his understanding was that Buddha, Buddhism is a very, is
a religion that is focused on, you know, too much on neg..., negation of the
world. And rejection of the world. And kings have to be responsible. They have
to be competent. They have to be acting in the world. If the kings are
renunciates, then the kings cannot really be responsible for competent and
diligent administration of the world. You know. You know. So, after this, you
know, so, anyway, you know, "Śaṅkar...", "Śaṅkarācārya" came. And spread Ved...,
you know, Vedic culture. So, that time, he saw that, whoever per..., following
Vedic culture, they were having a wide variety of different kinds of worships
they were doing. So, he said that, basically, the Vedas talk about different
deities. So, you can worship these five primary deities. So, what is
"pañcopāsanā"? There is "Viṣṇu". There is "Śiva". There is the goddess. There is
"Sūrya". And there is "Gaṇeśa". You know. You know. So, these five, you can
worship. And these five, they, basically, the idea is, we, now, we, the idea was
that, of course, now, "Śaṅkarācārya" was a covered personalist. That means he
has written many songs, like "Bhaja Govindam". Where he talks about personalism.
About pure, about devotion. But as far as his philosophy that, you know, was
taught. He taught "Advaita Vedanta". And his philosophical con..., understanding
was that, ultimately, the philosophical understanding which he propagated at
that time was that beyond Brahma, these forms of various Gods is the impersonal
Brahman. That is the highest reality. So, the understanding of "pañcopāsanā" in
that case was, you know, that one worships so that, you know, you know, you
know, you know, one goes beyond form to formless. So, these are the five
"iṣṭa-devatā"s. One can choose whichever "iṣṭa-devatā" one likes. Worship that
"iṣṭa-devatā". And by worshipping that "iṣṭa-devatā", one will move ahead. And
go beyond matter to spirit. You know. Go, go, be, attain spiritual reality
eventually. So, the idea was, you could choose whichev..., one can choose
whichever "devatā" one wants to worship. You know. You know. You know. That is
the idea of "pañcopāsanā". Now, "pañcopāsanā" is different from
"pāñcarātrika-vidhi". "pāñcarātrika-vidhi" is about deity worship.

It is about how the, when the Lord manifests in the deity, how He is to be
worshipped. But "pañcopāsanā" is about, you know, these five kinds of "devatā"s.
You know. For, five "devatā"s. And whi..., whichever one, one wants to worship.
So, Prabhupada talks about "pañcopāsanā" over here, also. And now, Bhaktivinoda
Thakur gives a very intriguing explanation of "pañcopāsanā" in his book. So,
let us look at that explanation. You know. You know. You know. Yeah. You know.
So, what Bhaktivinoda Thakur explains is these five, how "pañcopāsanā" elevates
as explained by Bhaktivinoda Thakur. So, he says that, there are these five
kinds of worshippers. Shaktas. Sauryas. Ganapatyas. Saivite. And Vaishnavas. You
know. You know. So, this is, there is a gradual progression from shaktas to
vaishnavas. So, what happens is in sha..., in the case of shakti. Shakti means
energy. Or nature. You know. Energy is present in nature. So, these are nature
worshippers. Nature worshippers means, their understanding is that, oh, that is,
you know, nature that is pervading. Nature that is arranging everything. And we
have to understand. We have to worship nature. So, now, broad way, we could say
that scientists are nature worshippers. They are shaktas in a sense. Because
they just, in shakta, one just sees shakti. And just sees matter. And energy.
And does not see anything beyond that. Beyond material nature. So, that is
shaktas. Now, when a person starts, you know, you know, you know, when a per...,
when a, say, a person is, say, a tribal without much access to spiritual
knowledge is living, you know, that doing, person starts looking around. Even
nature, there is so many powerful things. You know. When, you know, I work so
hard to build a house. And tuck. One lightening bolt, and the whole house is
destroyed. It is devastating. So, nature has so much power. So, I bow down to
the power of nature. That is the first stage in the evolution of wor..., you
know, co..., the worship. Then, you know, you know, after that, the next stage
is, one moves forward. And one thinks, ok, nature has all this power. There is
lightening. And there are rains. And there is storms. Where is all this power
coming from? Ultimately, it is coming from the sun. Sun is the source of all
power. There, you know, sun is the source of all energy. Therefore, the sun
should be worshipped. So, one moves from matter, you know, g..., you know, in
terms of, you know, you know, material phenomena to energy which activates this
material phenomena. So, this is, now, you know, when people are worshipping
"Sūrya". They may not be thinking about all these things. But Bhaktivinoda
Thakur explains that this is the program by which the evolution can take place.
So, there is sauryas. Sauryas are those who worship, you know, "Sūrya". Now,
after that, one starts thinking, ok, you know, you know, ok, all this is fine.
But beyond that, you know, you know, you know, ok, I see nature. I see energy.
But then, I see also energetic beings. You know. We see, you know, we see
powerful beings like lions. And tigers. And Hippopotamus. And whales. And
elephants. So, they have such majestic power. So, there is matter. And there is
energy combined together. That is, so, then one starts worshipping some, you
know, one starts worshipping that, you know, one star..., some higher reality.
Manifested in a form of an animal.

You know. That is what is, you know, you know, you know, in the terminology of
philosophy called as "Zoomorphism". You know. You know. So, zoomorphism means,
you know, you know, morphised form. Morphised form. Zoo is animal. So,
worshipping the Absolute Truth in the form of an animal. So, one understand that
supervising nature and energy is an animal-like being. So, now, Ganapati, you
know, you know, you know, has an elephant-like head. So, you know, one, now,
starts wor..., the, one come, Ganapatya. So, now, the idea is that it is not
that, you know, people all over the world who come to this conclusion will
necessarily be worshipping "Gaṇeśa". But the "Gaṇeśa"-like worship is con..., is
corresponding to this level of consciousness. Worship of somebody like "Gaṇeśa"
is corresponding this level of consciousness. So, basically, through this
"pañcopāsanā", the consciousness is evolving. Evolving. Evolving gradually. And
then, one starts thinking, ok, you know, you know, there is, there is matter.
And there may be something which is beyond matter. And that is spirit. So, then,
that, one comes to the level of Shaivism. So, beyond all temporary matter is
eternal spirit. When one understand this, then one comes to the level of
impersonalism. Impersonalism means one understands that, you know, we have to go
beyond matter to spirit. But at this time, one is thinking that spirit, just as
matter has forms. So, spirit is formless. So, I have to go beyond form to
formless. And then, one starts thinking, ok, then one comes to the level of
vaishnavism. So, then, there is a conception of a human-like being controlling
all of existence. What does it mean? A human-like being controlling all of
existence. You know. You know. That means, one starts thinking that, ok, you
know, the, you know, you know, the, I see that there is energy over here. You
know. For example, there is a government. The government is controlling
everyone. You know. Now, the government, as it appears to an ignorant person is
impersonal. But we know that the government, there is a person in charge of the
government. So, like that, one understands. Then, one moves forward. You know.
One step higher in one's spiritual evolution. So, conception of a human-like
being controlling all of existence, that is "Viṣṇu". That, that is Vaishnavism.
Now, here, now, there is one important point that, you know, Bhaktivinoda Thakur
differentiates between material vaishnavism and transcendental vaishnavism. Now,
what does it mean? How can we have material vaishnavism? You know. See, when
people's consciousness is still materialistic. They have not understood their
own spiritual identity. They have not understood that the existence of a
transcendental reality. They have not understood that God reigns supreme in the
transcendental reality. Then, even they are, if they are practicing vaishnavism,
their vaishnavism is affected by the modes. That is why, if we study the Third
Canto of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam", there, Kapila Deva is instructing "Devahūti". And
there, he describes bhakti in goodness. Bhakti in passion. Bhakti in ignorance.
And he talks about how, you know, when, you know, devotees keep quarreling with
each other. That is bhakti in the mode of ignorance. So, when devotees practice
bhakti to get name and fame. Power and prestige. Then, that is bhakti in the
mode of passion. When devotees practice bhakti for the sake of liberation. Not
for the sake of pleasure of Krishna. But for the sake of liberation. That is in
the mode of goodness.

You know. This is a rough analysis. It is quite technical over there. But I am
just giving the point that, you know, stating the point here that bhakti, in and
of itself is transcendental. But when we are practicing bhakti, that time, we
may be, practice bhakti within the modes. So, similarly, vaishnavism can also be
within the modes. And that sort of vaishnavism is not universal. That can be
restrictive. That can be divisive. You know. We see within ISKCON. We say that
Krishna Consciousness movement meant for the whole world. You know. You know.
Hindus. Christians. Muslims. Pakistanis. African. Ju..., Europeans. All people
can come and practice. You know. Krishna Consciousness. But when it comes to
actual practice, we start saying, you know, you know, you should take initiation
from my guru, only. Not your guru. You know. My guru is better than your guru.
So, my guru is an Indian guru. Your guru is an American guru. Or my guru is
this. Your guru is that. So, you know, we, now, we may talk lofty things in
philosophy. But often, in our practices, we g..., we tend to be quite divisive.
You know. If I have preached somebody. And I expect that person to take
initiation from my guru. And that person involved decides, I want to take
initiation from some other guru. Then, people get angry. You know. You are
betraying me. You know. What betraying? He, that person, he never owned that 
person. You know. We cannot legislate inspiration. And that person wants to take
initia..., initiation from somebody. He is inspired by somebody. Then, it is,
that person has complete right to take initiation. So, you know, we cannot
assume that because vaishnavism is transcendental, our practice of vaishnavism
is transcendental. So, Bhaktivinoda Thakur explains that there is
transcendental vaishnavism, is the highest of all forms of worship. So, all
these forms, there, there is universal. When one, one is, one is oneself
situated at the spiritual level of consciousness. And one is, one is situated at
the spiritual level of consciousness, at that time, you know, you know, you
know, you know, one, you know, sees the true unity of all living beings. And
works for the wellfare of all. You know. As, you know, on behalf of Krishna. So,
that is what will truly unify. And Bhaktivinoda Thakur explains that all the
different forms of worship, now, he is not talking specifically about the
"Gaṇeśa" worshippers when he is talking about Ganapatyas. Yes. He is talking
about "Gaṇeśa" worshippers. But along with that, he is making a point that, you
know, the various systems of worship, that are there all over the world, they
can be classed into these five levels. And above them, is transcendental
worship..., vaishnavism. Where, you know, the pure spiritual soul serves a
supre..., pure spiritual personal Absolute with pure spiritual law. That is
completely transcendental. And all systems of worship are gradually meant to
take us. It is like a pyramid. To the pinnacle. To the top. That is of pure
devotional, pure..., you know, unity, pure devo..., n..., devotional, you know,
love. And the reality where this pure devotional love is eternally facilitated.
And relished. So, in this way, this is, you know, this transcendence is the
ultimate goal beyond all that we are practicing. So, after discussing this, we
will discuss about, you know, the, you know, you know, demoniac way of
worshipping in the next verse. Demoniac austerity in the next ver..., you know,
next verse. And next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
