Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fU97nsyL3Ys
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_123_-_Bhagavad_Gita_14.01-14.06_-_How_the_modes_bind_the_soul_to_matter_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=6yWS3H0JIv9b_fajvsQQgkxAvxl8MTU0ODQ4OTYzMkAxNTQ4NDAzMjMy&v=fU97nsyL3Ys&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

You know. You know. You know. You know. Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our
Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We completed the 13th Chapter in our last
class. And now, we are looking at the 14th Chapter. You know. You know. To
understand the link between the 13th and the 14th Chapters. You know. Let us
have a quick review of the, you know, 13th Chapter's conclusion. You know. You
know. You know. 13th Chapter, the last section was gaining "jñāna-cakṣu". So,
there is 27, you know, you know, to 35. You know. So, 27 basically said
everything is a combination of matter and spirit. 28th stated that, by this, we
can see, when we see the spiritual, there is equal vision. So, when, what, so,
see everything material equally to attain s..., liberation. "tato yāti parāṁ
gatim". So, at material level, there is difference. But we see it equally.
Because we see beyond matter to the spirit. And then, see that spirit is the
non-doer. That was the 30th verse. See that all material variety originates in
spiritual similarity. That is, you know, the 31st verse. That is "yadā
bhūta-pṛthag-bhāvam". Then, see that the soul always remains transcendental. And
does not get entangled. And does not act. "na karoti na lipyate". And then, how
that is "na karoti na lipyate"? You know. That is talked about in the next two
verses. And then, lastly, it is, the told, the benefit is told that if one gets
this "jñāna-cakṣu", one will attain liberation. So, now, in this overview, the
important point is to recognise that, you know, you know, you know, this whole
the..., you know, analysis is implying a good level of understanding of the
modes. You know.

        anāditvān nirguṇatvāt

You know. That that the "guṇa"s do not affect a person. You know. Or the soul
remains transcendental to the "guṇa"s. And before that, also, it is, saw, it, it
was told that the, "gu...", it is the "guṇa" because of contact with the "guṇa"s
that the soul becomes bound. So, in 13.22, the bija vakhya, as it is often being
called:

        puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi
        bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān
        kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya
        sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

So, "kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya". Because of association with the three modes. What
happens because of it? "sad-asad-yoni-janmasu". That one meets with good and bad
in various species. So, you know, you know, "kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya". So, that
means "guṇa-saṅgaḥ" is the cause of bondage. And the soul is originally
"nirguṇatvāt". It is originally transcendental. And when the soul similarly goes
beyond the influence of the modes, one becomes free from bondage. So, basically,
the modes are considered to be the, you know, the, you know, critical factors
which bring about the bondage. We cannot say they are the cause of the bondage.
The cause, it is "bhuṅkte". The cause is the soul's desire to enjoy the material
world. But the way in which that bondage is executed, is through the modes. You
know. You know. So, recognising this enables one to develop some seriousness. In
knowing what are the modes. So, you know, you know, you know, the mode is a
mechanism by which the soul is bound within material existence. So, that will
be explained. That means these transcendental souls, entanglement in material
existence will be explained. So, this topic has not yet been explained anywhere
in the Gita. In detail. In the mechanism. Earlier, it has been talked about how
one should stay detached. While practicing spiritual life. While li..., living
in the material world, also. By doing one's professional du..., you know, you
know, professional duties. Varnashram duties. How one should remain, you know,
transenden..., you know, detached. And how one can transcend. That is talked
about. But here, how the bondage takes place. You know. Through the instrument
of the modes. That will be de..., you know, described in the 14th Chapter. So,
let us have an overview of the 14th Chapter. You know. You know. So, you know,
there are 27 verses in the 14th Chapter. So, the first 13 verses talk about how
the soul is conditioned by the modes. Then, verses 14 to 18 talk about the
effect of conditioning by the modes. And then, after that, 19 to 27 talk about
transcending the modes. You know. You know. So, you know, you know, first
section is how the soul is conditioned by the modes. So, like in several other
chapters. Like the Seventh and the Ninth chapters, the, you know, you know,
first section talks about glorification of the knowledge. You know. You know.
You know. Glorification of the knowledge means that this knowledge, how it is,
you know, valuable. Why it should be heard. What is the benefit. So, the, in the
Seventh and Nineth Chapters. Krishna had done something similarly. Ninth
Chapter, He says "rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ". Or Seventh Chapter, He says, you
know, you know, jna..., "idaṁ vakṣyāmy aśeṣataḥ". That, you know, this is, I am
giving you complete knowledge. After knowing which, nothing more is to be known.
Like that, there are glorificatory passages. Even in the Tenth Chapter, also,
Krishna has said that "jñānānāṁ jñānam uttamam". Sorry. No.

        bhūya eva mahā-bāho
        śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ

"paramaṁ vacaḥ". He had said. The supreme knowledge. You know. So, like that,
you know, you know, a, the glorification is done several cases. So, here, also,
something similar. Then, third and fourth verses talk about how the soul
contacts matter. Then, 5 to 9 talk about the, how the modes bind the soul. And
after that, you know, you know, 10 to 13 talk about identifying the modes
dominating us by their principal characteristics. By their principal
characteristics. Let us look at, you know, these one by one now. So, if 14.1:

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        paraṁ bhūyaḥ pravakṣyāmi
        jñānānāṁ jñānam uttamam
        yaj jñātvā munayaḥ sarve
        parāṁ siddhim ito gatāḥ

So, "paraṁ bhūyaḥ pravakṣyāmi". "paraṁ bhūyaḥ pravakṣyāmi". "bhūyaḥ" means
again. "pravakṣyāmi" is I am speaking. "paraṁ bhūyaḥ pravakṣyāmi". "paraṁ" is
that highest. Transcendental. The transcendental "jñānānāṁ jñānam uttamam". So,
that transcendental knowledge is the actually the best among all forms of
knowledge. "jñānānāṁ jñānam uttamam". So, again, I am speaking this. "yaj
jñātvā". And what happens? "yaj jñātv...". By knowing this, "munayaḥ sarve". The
great sages. "parāṁ siddhim ito gatāḥ". They have attained the supreme
destination. "parāṁ siddhim". What does it mean? "parāṁ siddhim ito gatāḥ". You
know. So, you know, this knowledge, basically, Krishna is telling that, the
glory of this knowledge is that, by understanding this, the great sages have
attained liberation. And, you know, He is using a significant word, "bhūyaḥ".
Why "bhūyaḥ"? Krishna has not talked about the three modes of material nature in
detail before. But the analysis of the three modes culminates in, you know, call
for devotional service. And that devotional service, Krishna has mentioned
earlier. So, in technical details, this knowledge has not been spoken before.
But in terms of the conclusive action plan, you know, you know, the knowledge
has already been spoken. So, in the Seventh Chapter. In Ninth Chapter
especially. Then, again, in the Tenth Chapter. The call for devotional service
has been consistent. And insistent. And, you know, you know, you know, also, you
know, of course, no doubt in the Twelfth Chapter. Which is about bhakti yoga
itself. And talks about multiple levels of bhakti. So, we will see that this
chapter will end with, you know, bhak..., you know, now, with, you know, you
know, two verses which establish the glory of bhakti. And the glory of Bhagavan.
And that has been what has, that is what has been done in the whole bhatki
section. So, that is why "bhūyaḥ". "bhūyaḥ" means again. What I have spoken
earlier, I am speaking again now. "yaj jñātvā". By knowing this, the great sages
have attained liberation. So, this knowledge is with, that which is used by
"munayaḥ"s. So, now, it is interesting, Krishna does not say that "yaj jñā...,
"jñātvā bhaktah sarve parāṁ siddhim ito gatāḥ". He says "munayaḥ sarve". Why?
Because, you know, the bhaktas do not necessarily need this kind of analytical,
you know, you know, understanding of the three modes. They will have some basic
philosophical understanding. But this verse is, this chapter is going to talk
about how the muni is, you know, take to devotional service. Why the munis
practice devotional service. Remember the 16th Chapter. Sorry. The, remember the
Twelfth, you know, 13th to 18th Chapters. The jnana section of the Gita talks
about how one can, you know, raise from the jnana level to the bhakti level. So,
one can raise from the jnana level to the bhakti level. You know. You know. You
know. By the practice of devotional service. In a, you know, so, now, you know,
so, by, by recognising the potency of devotional serivice intellectually. So,
this 14th Chapter will talk about the three modes of material nature. But after
talking about the three modes, it will eventually come to the conclusion that,
you know, you know, one should practice devotional service. You know. You know.
So, one should practice devotional service. And that is the essential conclusion
which comes, not because one has a spontaneous attraction to Krishna. But one
recognises that, you know, you know, devotional service is the best means to
gain liberation from the modes of material nature. You know. The, there is a
significant difference between the two. You know. The, just like we have the
levels fear. Desire. Duty. And love. At which people can approach God.
Similarly, there can be multiple levels at which people approach the Supreme
Being.

That means they may approach the Absolute Truth at the level, you know, you
know, fear. Desire. Duty. And knowledge. So, like that, you know, similarly,
people may approach, you know, the specific process of devotional service not
out of love. They may app..., you know, you know, approach it because of
knowledge. So, you know, that means, at the level of duty, they understand. At
the level of duty, we understand. This is what I am expected to do. This is what
I am supposed to do. So, at the level of knowledge, one understands, I am
trapped in material existence. I have to get out material existence. And the
way to get out is, is by practicing devotional service. And that is how one
approaches the process of bhakti. So, that is also, you know, fine. In the sense
that, you know:

        yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet

So, that is why in this chapter, the focus will be on else of the modes. How the
bondage because of the modes is so complex. And it is so difficult to break free
from. And then, you know, one recognises that by taking shelter of Krishna, one
can break free from this. So, therefore, "munayaḥ". The, it is the munis. Those
who are, you know, who used to agitating their minds. To try to come towards
certain conclusions. Those munis will attain the shelter of Krishna. By taking
the, you know, by taking to the process of devotional, you know, will not attain
to the shelter of Krishna. Sorry. Will take the shelter of Krishna to, you know,
attain transcendence from the modes. "munayaḥ sarve". So, Prabhupada writes in
the purport, you know, you know, that, you know:

"The knowledge explained in this chapter is proclaimed by the Supreme Lord to be
superior to the knowledge given so far in other chapters."

Now, this is interesting. Now, it is interesting because Krishna has said, this
is "bhūyaḥ". And then, this is also "jñānānāṁ jñānam uttamam". So, how do we
understand this? Krishna says, among all the knowledge that I have spoken, this
is better than all other forms of knowledge. You know. You know. You know.
Superior to other forms of knowledge. Or other knowledge, other kinds of
knowledge that I have given. And yet, Krishna is saying I am speaking this again
to you. So, if Krishna has spoken this earlier, then it is not superior to what
has been given earlier. But, you know, if it is superior, you know, i...,
i..., if it is su..., if it is superior to what He has given earlier, you know,
you know, you know, then, you know, how can He be giving it again? So, the point
is that Kri..., in, you know, previously, Krishna has given various kinds of
knowledge. He has talked about karma yoga. He has talked about dhyana yoga. He
has talked about, you know, jnana yoga. He has talked about various subject
matters. And among those subject, many subject matters, one subject matter which
He has also talked about is bhakti. Of course, He has talked about bhakti
repeatedly in the bhakti section. You know. So, de..., so, definitely, the
talking has been much more. But the point is He has talked about it earlier. But
among the various subjects that He has talked about, bhakti is the highest. And
He has spoken it earlier. So, He is repeating it. But He is also telling that
this is better than all the other forms of knowledge that I have given. So, in
that is way, we can re..., you know, we can reconcile both these understandings.
And "parāṁ siddhim". By this, one can attain the supreme destination. The
supreme destination for the jnani is, is brahman. For the bhaktas, it is the
spiritual world. So, depending on one's understanding of the Absolute Truth, one
can attain either of destinations. You know. Now, Krishna goes, goes on and
glorify this knowledge further.

        idaṁ jñānam upāśritya
        mama sādharmyam āgatāḥ
        sarge ’pi nopajāyante
        pralaye na vyathanti ca

So, "idaṁ jñānam upāśritya". If one takes shelter of Krishna, "upāśritya". You
know. Sorry. Not of Krishna, you know, of this knowledge. It is interesting. We
will see, talk about this difference. "mama sādharmyam āgatāḥ". One will attain
"sādharmyam". One will attain the same destination. "mama sādharmyam āgatāḥ".
And "sarge ’pi nopajāyante". "sarge". At the beginning, one will not, because of
this, "sarge ’pi nopajāyante". You know. You know. You know. You know. One will
not be able to attain, you know, again, one will not attain. Or one will not
know have to undergo. "sarge" at the time of creation. "upajāyante". One will
not have to take birth again. And "pralaye". At the time of destruction, one
will not, not have to "na vyathanti ca". One will not, not have to undergo
destruction again. "pralaye na vyathanti ca". So, "idaṁ jñānam upāśritya". You
know. You know. You know. You know. And, now, here, Krishna is talking about
"idaṁ jñānam upāśritya". So, He is not saying that take shelter of Me. He is
saying, by taking shelter of this knowledge, you will attain a nature like Mine.
What is the meaning of this? You know. That, actually, this, you know, it, you
know, the, the message of Krishna, you know, is also something which we can take
shelter of. You know. You know. You know. The philosophy is also to be taken
shelter of. The philosophy is not to be approached, you know, you know, merely
for the sake of, you know, you know, analysis from a controlling perspective.
You know. Normally, when we study a subject, you know, if it is, for example,
now, if we have to solve a crossword puzzle. You know. Then, yeah, I cracked it.
Or when we have to give an exam. And then, there is some difficult question. I
s..., cracked it. I did it. So, the whole idea is that there is a difficult
problem to solve. And then, I solve it. And then, I get that "īśvara-bhāva".
That sense of victory. That sense of controllership in the arena of spirit. In
the arena of, sorry, not in the spirit. In the arena of spirit. In the arena of
ideas. Yes. I did. May, it means, it is, it is actually intellectual, you know,
sovereignty. Intellectual supremacy. Intellectual conquest. Not just of any
ordinary subject. We are seeking intellectual conquest now when we study
scripture of Krishna. And Krishna cannot be conquered by intellect. That is a
wrong approach. And Krishna has, saw, told earlier, also, "nāhaṁ vedair". That I
cannot be known merely by the study of the Vedas. So, actually, "jñānam
upāśritya". When we take the, you know, when we, are, study the knowledge, also.
You know. You know. You know. At that time, you know, you know, one, you know,
studies it so that one can release and relief from the, you know, confusion of
material existence. From the inevitable doubts. Perplexities. And dilemmas that
we are presented with in material existence. And to find, ok, what is the way I
should act ahead. So, we approach this knowledge to take shelter of the
knowledge. You know. You know. Or there is some people wear a crown on the
head. Now, a crown, you know, if I am going out in the rains. A crown does not
serve very well as an umbrella. You know. A crown may just, just slightly
protect my head. But the crown is primarily meant for ornamental purposes. If I
want protection from the rains, what I need is umbrella. I do not need a crown
at that time. So, if we treat, you know, the spiritual knowledge like a crown on
our head, then it will not act as an umbrella. And we will not get relief from
the elements by that knowledge. That, elderly, from the elements is, they are,
say, you know, a crown cannot really offer much protection from, you know, you
know, the stormy rains. Or the scorching heat of the sun. You know. You know.
Fro..., you know, it cannot offer, you know, that kind of protection. But
umbrella can.

So, similarly, if we try to, you know, take the spiritual knowledge. And try to
make it an ornament for our own egos. I know so much. I know so much. You know.
And accordingly, we try to practice. Then, at that time, we do not really get
much benefit. Because we are missing the whole point. The point is, you know,
you know, you know, you know, that we want to learn. We want to move forward.
And we want to attain the supreme destination. What is that supreme destination?
We want to attain love for Krishna. And love is not a matter of conquering. Love
of, matt.., matter, you know, love of matter of giving. You know. You know. We
give ourselves to another person. You know. In love. And then, when we give
ourselves, that person reciprocates. And then, when two people give themselves
to each other, that is the deepest love. You know. So, like that, you know, the
whole idea of, you know, you know, love, there is conquest. No doubt. But then,
that is not a, you know, we do not go out to conquer. You know. You know. When
we love, we actually say, say, fall in love. We do not say conquer in love. You
know. We fall in love. What does it mean? You know. You know. That means we let
ourselves be conquered by love. So, similarly, with respect to jnana, we, with
respect, when we are trying to develop a relationship with Krishna. Our goal is
not to conquer Krishna with jnana. Our goal is to, you know, you know, you know,
you know, be conquered by Krishna's love. And to be conquered by Krishna's love,
we want to, you know, you know, you know, offer ourselves to Him entirely. And
we offer ourselves to Him, you know, in various ways. One way is through the
intellect. So, the intellect is also meant to be used as a means to surrender to
Krishna. To attain His shelter. So, "idaṁ jñānam upāśritya". You know. So, as
devotees, when we, we take shelter of Krishna's message. We take shel...,
shelter of the knowledge that He has given us. That is, you know, now, all this,
I am talking from the bhakta perspective. From the jnana perspective, also, one
tries to do, imm..., one, immerse ver..., self, oneself in knowledge. And, you
know, vimar..., "vimarsanam". "vimarsanam". The word "vimarsanam" sounds like
the English word immersion. Immersion means just put oneself completely within.
So, like that, "vimarsanam". We absorb ourselves in knowledge. When we absorb
ourselves in knowledge, to "vimarsanam". Jnana "vimarsanam". Then, by that, we
are able to go beyond to a large extent of material natures. And it is by, it
i..., and its complications. So:

        idaṁ jñānam upāśritya
        mama sādharmyam āgatāḥ

I will attain, Krishna says, "mama sādharmyam". What is the "sādharmyam"? You
know. Nature. So, dharma, as we know, has many meanings. Here is an example
where the word dharma means nature. So, yeah, you know, just like we say,
Prabhupada has talked about in the, you know, Bhagavad Gita that, in his
Bhagavad Gita introduction that "mama sādharmyam āgatāḥ". He has talked about
how, you know, My, you know, you know, you know, you know, how our dharma is
eternal. He has talked about sanatan dharma. Our goal is to love and serve. And
that is our dharma. Not our goal. That is our her..., nature itself. So, our
purpose. Our perfection. Our nature is to love and serve. And then, when we
direct that loving and serving nature towards Krishna, then our, we, you know,
we, our dharma becomes our sanatan dharma. We act according to our eternal
nature. And that brings us eternal happiness. So, ma..., so, that sense of the
word dharma. When Krishna uses the word sense, you know, He uses the word dharma
in many different ways. So, He has used the word "sarva-dharmā...", He has,
then, so, for example:

        dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya
        sambhavāmi yuge yuge

So, when He uses that word in 4.8, you know, you know, at that time, you know,
you know, He is using it in terms of the social order. You know. The
sociocultural, the social, cul..., you know, social spiritual, the sociocultural
spiritual order. That is conducive for one's devotional advancement. So, He uses
the word dharma in that sense of a, the dharmic order in society.
"dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya". And even Krishna uses the word dharma in 14, in
18.66:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

At that time, He uses it, you know, in the sense of talking about, you know,
"sarva-dharmān parityajya". That give up the lower dharmas. So that one can take
shelter of the highest dharma. The highest dharma is bhakti. So, in order to
take shelter of the highest dharma, one should give up the lower dharma. And
that will happen by the practice of bhakti. So, that is what has been talked
about over here. "mama sādharmyam āgatāḥ". So, there are, you know, there are,
you know, different levels of, you know, so, there are different usages of the
word dharma. And, you know, you know, when Krishna has said that, you know, you
know, here, He uses the word "mama sādharmyam". That one will attain My dharma.
That refers to, they will attain My nature. "mama sādharmyam āgatāḥ". And then,
"sarge ’pi nopajāyante". "sarge". At the beginning, there will be, at the time
of creation, there will be no "upajāyante". "upajāyante" means there will be no
destruction. You know. You know. You know. There will be no, you know, taking
birth again. And "pralaye na vyathanti ca". And when one, you know, die..., one
does destruction, there will be no bewilderment. That means, basically, one will
go beyond bodily consciousness. When one goes beyond bodily consciousness,
for..., one does not have to take birth again in this material existence. Not
only that, you know, when we are not in bodily consciousness so much, we will
not have to suffer so much at the time of death, also. Because we will go beyond
the body to a large extent. You know. You know, You know. So, now, in a, here,
Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport that, you know, you know, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada explains, what, so, it means. You
know. This.

"One who thus develops the spiritual qualities is not affected either by the
creation or by the destruction of the material world."

You know. So, because we attain the spiritual nature. We develop the spiritual
qualities. You know. So, therefore, one does not have to go through the cycle of
birth and death. One tran..., one's consciousness goes so high that one can
transcend it. You know. You know. Now, the next section is going now. What is
the next section? Or next subsection, we could say. How the soul contacts
matter. You know.

        mama yonir mahad brahma
        tasmin garbhaṁ dadhāmy aham
        sambhavaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        tato bhavati bhārata

So, "mama yonir mahad brahma". Now, here, Krishna is using the word brahma, you
know, to refer to material nature. We have discussed earlier how the same word
can have different meanings in the Gita. So, here, the word brahman refers to
material nature. You know. So, "mama yonir mahad brahma". So, this is, you know,
you know, this brahma is the, you know, you know, you know, "yoniḥ". The womb in
which I give the "garbhaṁ". "tasmin garbhaṁ dadhāmy aham". "aham". I. "dadhāmi".
I give the seed. From which, the womb is formed. The pregnancy takes place. The,
you know, impregnation happens. And then, "sambhavaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ". Then,
"sambhavaḥ" is to manifest. To become possible. All living beings. "tato bhavati
bhārata". So, here, what is Krishna telling, essentially, what is the
connection? Krishna has glorified the knowledge in the previous chap...,
previous two verses. Yes. Caught Arjuna's attention. Oh. This knowledge. So
important. That by which, one can become cy..., free from the cycle of birth and
death. So, let me hear it. Just caught, you know, the reader's attention. You
know. Through this description. Now, He is telling, He start going, beginning
the knowledge. And saying that, you know, actually, right from the beginning of
creation, right from the beginning of material existence, He plays a vital role.
So, "mama yonir mahad brahma". So, actually, "mahad brahma". That great brahma.
"tasmin garbhaṁ dadhāmy aham". You know. You know. "garbhaṁ dadhāmy". One, you
know, in that brahma, one give...., one impregnates oneself. So, Krishna
impregnates, you know, a Himsel..., how do we understand by Himself? Actually,
ultimately, even material nature is His own energy. And the souls are His
energy, also. So, in that sense, "Ekoham bahusyam". The one becomes many. "to
akamyitah", you know, "tato". So, that Absolute Truth desired. That Absolu..., so,
srijatah", you know, "sa akamyitah". So, that Absolute Truth desired, and then
that is, Abso..., Absolute, you know, to the glanced. And then, the creation,
all of it, took place. "asrijata". You know. You know. So, you know, you know,
basically, "asrijata" means so, that, that cretion begins. How does it begin?
"saeksitah". "sakamyitah". "sa eksitah". So, these are different small, small
sutra like verses from the Upanishads. "sa asrijata". The Absolute Truth
created. How? "sa eksitah". The Absolute Truth took, glanced. "kamyatah". So,
that, the, He desired. So, actually, this is talking about the beginning of
creation. When the Lord glances up. When "Mahavishnu" glances up. And then, you
know, takes all the, collects all the souls. Who are then, you know, you know,
you know, who are then actually injected into material nature. So, it is through
the glance. So, we know that, at the start of creation, you know, at the start
of the creation, the souls are brought into the material nature. You know. The,
you know, so, the souls are withdrawn in the body of "Mahavishnu" at the end of
creation. And at the start of creation once again. The souls are, you know, you
know, you know, the souls are injected into material existence. And how are they
injected into material existence? Through the, you know, they are injected into
material existence through the, the glance of the Supreme Personality Godhead.
Towards the, you know, you know, towards the material nature. Which is, and, you
know, in a balanced inactive stage at that time. So, you know, "pradanta
mahatattva". It is a whole process of creation that happens. And then, it
becomes activated. And so, basically, the Lord injects His energy. When the Lord
injects His energy, from there, the creation moves forward. So, that is what is
being talked about over here. That the creation moves forward. You know. Through
the injection of the souls. Through the sight of the, through the vision of the
Lord. So, here, the point of the vision is not being talked about.

Bas..., the simple point is made that, you know, Krishna is saying I am the seed
giver. I am the seed giver. So, the material nature is "garbhaṁ". And it is, you
know, "mam...", it is the "mama yon...", sorry, it is the "yoniḥ". You know. You
know. It is the womb. And that womb, I impregnate. So, now, Krishna, in the next
verse, will more or less say the same theme. But in a sligh..., with a slightly
different emphasis. You know. So, Prabhupada gives the example, you know, that,
the standard example re..., from traditional logic:

"The scorpion lays its eggs in piles of rice, and sometimes it is said that the
scorpion is born out of rice."

But actually, the eggs have come from elsewhere. You know. The eggs have not
come from the rice. So, similarly, you know, the souls may appear in material
nature. But the souls do not come from material nature. The souls have got
seeds. From where they have come. You know. From where they have come means
that, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, the souls, you know,
have come from the Supreme Lord. So, just like that, that means, there is
app..., there is app..., there is apparent, you know, the source. And there is
an actual source. So, the apparent source of the scorpions is the rice. But the
actual source of the scorpions is the mother who has given the eggs. That is
what Srila Prabhupada's, you know, statement, life comes from life. What does it
mean? It means both things. That it, it firstly, it means that life does not
come from matter. Although, it appears that, you know, the, ok, there is a,
there is a child. And the child does, ju..., you know, just by, of chemicals.
And that has come alive. So, it appears as if life has come from matter. But no.
Life comes from life. The child has come from, you know, the mother. The mother
is living. And the soul has also come into the body of the mother from
elsewhere. So, the point of the statement is that the appearant source is not
always the sou..., the actual source. So, matter is the route. 'R'. 'O'. 'U',
'T'. 'E'. Through which consciousness manifests. And not the, 'R', double 'O'.
'T'. Root. You know. You know. It is not the source of consciousness. So, just
as, you know, material nature does not become active independently. On its own.
That is the main point which has been told by this verse. We are moving forward. 
You know. You know. You know.

        sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya
        mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ
        tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir
        ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

"sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya". All living beings, oh, "kaur...", "kaunteya". "mūrtayaḥ
sambhavanti yāḥ". So, Krishna has used the word "sambhavaḥ" in the previous
verse, also. They become possible. They manifest. "mūrtayaḥ". Their various
forms. The word, used the word "mūrti". "mūrti" reveal, refer to the, you know,
the deity form of the Lord. So, the form. "mūrtayaḥ". "amūrtayaḥ" is
non-manifested. So, "mūr...", "mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ". Their various forms of
the living beings become manifest. "tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir". "tāsāṁ brahma
mahad yonir" is, you know, that the "mahad yonir". That is the Brahma. "ahaṁ
bīja-pradaḥ pitā". So, Krishna makes it very clear that I am the seed-giving
father. So, we may say that the Lord, previous verse and this verse are tell,
saying the same thing. You know. That actually, you know, what i..., what is the
difference between the Lor..., previous verse and this verse? You know. Both are
talking about the same thing. That how there is a "bhokta". There is a
"garbhaṁ". And then, that "garbhaṁ", how there is a "yoniḥ". And that "yoniḥ" is
impregnated by the Supreme Lord. If we look at the focus, the focus of the two
verses is different. The focus is "sarva-yoni...", here, it is "sarva-yoniṣu
kaunteya". There, it is, you know, you know, you know, you know, in the previous
verse, the focus was just on bringing the point that the Lord is a factor in the
whole thing. There is, we do not see the, so, there, "mama yonir". So, "mama
yonir mahad brahma". So, it is I who impregnate. And therefore, thereafter, all
the living beings become manifest. Now, here, He is saying that all living
beings are manifest by the grace of the Supreme Lord. How is that grace? You
know. Through the seed that the Lord gives. "bīja-pradaḥ pitā". "bīja-pradaḥ
pitā". So, now, let us look at the purport. You know. You know. You know. You
know. You know. You know. You know. So, I am the seed, Prabhupada writes in the
purport:

"Everywhere there are living entities; within the earth there are living
entities, even within water and within fire."

So, now:

"All these appearances are due to the mother, material nature, and Kṛṣṇa’s
seed-giving process."

So, "Kṛṣṇa’s seed-giving process". So, how does all this happen? It happens by a
certain method. That method is, you know, Krishna's, you know, you know,
arrangement. Through Krishna, you know, Krishna's arrangement is the whole
system is, be there. But Krishna's intervention is there, also, in that system
through the injection of the souls. Through His vision. And that is how the
whole process takes off. And, you know, now, Prabhupada writes that they come,
"come out", "according to their past deeds." That means that whatever karma the
soul had done, you know, you know, in the past. Accordingly, the soul get...,
bussels, get bodies now. What now Krishna is not specifically talking about the
birth of children during normal times. He is talking about the process of
creation at throughout. You know. At the start of the creation. That means, you
know, throughout means, where all, all living beings are created. "sarva-yoniṣu
kaunteya". What this refers to is, you know, you know, all living beings. All
living beings are manifested over here. And at the start of creation, pro...,
you know, now, the whole process of creation is described in the "Bhāgavatam".
In the Second Canto. The emphasis is that this whole process of creation happens
step by step, by step. And when it happens step by step, it moves forward. And
it allows one to, you know, you know, you know, you know, take one's, you know,
steps forward in the spiritual life. One when understand the creation. One
understands the glory of the Supreme Lord. One understands the sup..., pervasive
coordination and controllership. And one in..., feels inspired to surrender to
Him. So, the Bhagavad Gita is only giving the skeletal outline of this process.
It is not going to, you know, going to the technical details. So, what it says
over here is that, you know, actually, the material nature is like the mother.
The Lord is like the father. And both of them together bring about the creation.
So, this is talking, so, this is talking about, you know, at the start of the
whole creation. And the start of a, you know, you know, you know, of a, en...,
life of a new brahma. What happens at that time? That the Lord, you know, so,
the Brahmaji's body comes out. So that, sorry, the Brahmaji comes out of the
body of, you know, "Garbhodakaśāyī Vishnu". And before that, you know, you know,
the universes, in which "Garbhodakaśāyī" manif..., manifests, they come out from
the body of the "Mahavishnu". So, at the stage of that "Mahavishnu", you know,
and from that point onwards, the creation begins. That there is a contact of the
souls with the material nature through the vision of the Supreme Lord. And that
is how the creation starts ta..., going ahead. Now, then, Krishna will now start
describing about the modes. You know. You know. So, we discu..., you know, so,
verses 5 to 9 will talk about how the modes bind the soul. So, how does the soul
contact matter? It was through the, you know, the, through the insemination by
the Lord. Now, we will discuss about how the modes bind the, you know, liv...,
living entity.

        sattvaṁ rajas tama iti
        guṇāḥ prakṛti-sambhavāḥ
        nibadhnanti mahā-bāho
        dehe dehinam avyayam

So, "sattvaṁ rajas tama iti". That "sattvam". "rajaḥ". and "tamaḥ". You know.
You know. These three are there. These three modes. "guṇāḥ prakṛti-sambhavāḥ".
"prakṛti-sambhavāḥ". They are born from material nature. And then, they are born
from material nature, what happens? "nibadhnanti mahā-bāho". "nibadhnanti". You
know. You know. You know. You know. You know. "mahā-bāho". "mahā-bāho" means
this, that Arjuna, you are extremely powerful. But no matter how powerful you
are, you also, including all living beings, they are all "nibadhnanti". They are
bound. "dehe dehinam avyayam". "dehe dehinam avyayam" refers to the fact that
"dehe dehinam". That, you know, the, you know, you know, soul, the soul becomes
bound to the body. "avyayam". It is imperishable. It does not get old. It does
not get deteriorated. So, Krishna is introducing the concept of the three modes
over here. And He is telling, you know, you know, you know, "sattv...", that
these three modes. "sattvaṁ rajas tama iti". You know. "guṇāḥ
prakṛti-sambhavāḥ". They are born from material nature. When they are born from
material nature. What, what they, you know, bind the soul. No matter how
powerful the soul may be. The soul becomes bound. Now, what exactly is the
mo..., are the modes? Maybe used the word modes very frequently within
devotional servi..., within the devotional discussions. But what exactly are the
modes? You know. Are they things? You know. Is it that, you know, just like I
can see this stool. I can touch a chair. So, are the modes things like that? Or
are they just concepts? So, so, actually, the modes are not just concepts. They
are things. But they are not gross things. They are subtle things. Generally, we
will not, we often do not think of subtle things as things. But, you know, they
are, when we talk about something as a concept, concept is oft..., the word
often, concept is used as, as a, in the sense of a convenient fiction. That ok,
I think about things like this. Now, whether they exist or not, who knows about
it? We do not really care about it. But, you know, that is how it is seen to be.
So, you know, you know, you know, the, we, what we do is, we focus on the idea
that, you know, the, con..., this is not just a concept. This is an actual, you
know, ontological thing. Ontological means connected with existence. That which
something, which really exists. It exists. And what that we have to do is, we
have to, we have to gain our, harmonise our intellectual, you know, concept...,
or conception with it. Then, we will be able to understand how it is. So, it is
like, you know, you know, there is a territory. And un..., in that territory,
below the terri..., below the surface, if we dig down, there is a gold mi...,
that, the area is a gold mine. And there is gold underneath. So, now, it is not
just a concept. That this is a, this area is a gold o..., you know, gold mine
area. No. There is gold over there. But I have to dig deep enough to reach that
gold. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, similarly, there are certain
concepts. You know. You know. That means, you know, they, we have to think about
them. We have to get a conceptual understanding of them. But that does not mean
that they are only concepts. They are actually things. They have their own
existence. In their own right. But, you know, their existence is not gross. It
is not physical. You know. As is the existence of, say, a table. Or a chair. Or
a computer. Their existence is more subtle. And being subtle, that existence has
to be perceived accordingly. And that accor..., that perception accordingly is
through the ma..., arena of, you know, you know, understanding. Through the
arena of focusing our intellect to go below the surface Just like I have to
take, you know, my drill or, you know, you know, drill or spade, or whatever
device I am using for digging, to go below the surface. So, they are all, you
know, the, you know, they are all subtle. Now, what do the modes do? Let us look
at this once. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You
know. Modes are the subtle force..., modes are the subtle forces that shape the
interaction between gross matter and consciousness through the route of subtle
matter.

You know. So, let us understand this more carefully. They are the subtle forces.
Subtle. They are exis..., they have the whole concept of modes exist at the
level of the subtle reality. It is not gross physical reality. Are the subtle
forces that shape what? Shape the interaction between gross matter and
consciousness. You know. Being, now, gross matter is physical matter. So,
for example, how we act. You know. Somebo..., you know, somebody may, you know,
wave the fist angrily. Somebody may, you know, you know, you know, you know,
some, different people will react differently in different situations. So,
somebody may just, when that person gets angry, that person is, wave the fist in
anger. And swipe. Trying to hit somebody. Another person, when that person
becomes angry, may just shrink in depression. And try to, you know, forget one's
worry. One's, one's, you know, misery. You know. You know. Through drinking. So,
there are different people. Or somebody may try to seek wisdom. You know. And
try to gain some sort of acceptance. And undersetanding. You know. You know. So,
that is how things move forward. And the different people respond differently.
If there is a, in, there is a movie theater. And suddenly, there is a fire
inside the movie theater. And when there is a fire, now, some people, most
people will jus..., you know, they will just basically scream. And panic. And
rush off. That, towards the exit. And as they rush off towards the exit like
that. There may well be a stampede. Stampede means that people may just crush
each other. If somebody falls down, with, they just, people are so desperate
to themselves go out. That they do not even care wheth..., how, whether they are
hurting somebody. Or not. They just rush. Just stamp on people. And go away.
That is how a stampede happens. You know. You know. You know. So, when a
stampede happens like that, you know, then, the people are widely in the mode of
passion. Some people may be in the mode of ignorance. And then, they just may get
petrified. Petrified. Petrified means to become like a stone. Phew. Completely
frozen. Aaa..., aaa..., comp..., cannot even scream. Oh. panic struck. And there
may be some people. They, you know, look around. Oh, think, oh, there is the
fire extinguisher. Take. Rush to the fire extinguisher. And then, extinguish the
fire. So, these are examples of reaction in passion. Ignorance. And goodness.
So, in passion, one just, you know, acts without thinking much. You know. In
ignorance, one just becomes, you know, frozen. Immobilised. And in goodness, one
thinks and acts. So, now, what is, what is that makes the difference? It is the
modes that the people are in. Of course, the mo..., what creates the mo..., what
creates the diff..., what, why does, certain people are in differ..., certain
modes. That is a whole different subject. Which we will come to later. But, so,
again, the rea..., that means the, that shape, the interaction of consciousness
and gross matter. So, gross matter is, ok, I see the fire. And then, I respond
to it. What is I re..., what is my response? I run away from there. And
desp..., in desperate frenzy. So, why does that happen? That is because the
modes affect in a particular way. So, the route, there is a route. The
staircase. And there is the modes. So, to understand this concept of, you know,
modes comprising the routes. Say, now, if there is a, you know, ten-storey
building. Or con..., you know, as us..., you know, ok, there is a s..., three,
let us say a, you know, ten-storey building. So, there, now, there may be
certain staircase which are like just straight down. You know. I mean, gener...,
you know, there may be certain staircases, which are con..., which are, you
know, which are, generally, the people do not keep long stairs thirst...,
straight down. Because if somebody falls, that can be just disaster. If there
are one hundred. Two hundred. Five hundred steps. So, generally, there are long
staircases. They are kept within 15 steps like this. Then, there is a break. And
then, there are 10-15 steps like this. Then, there are 10-15 steps like this.
Then, there are 10-15 steps like this. So, you know, you know, you know, you
know, therefore, you know, they, there are different ways in which this can be
created. You know. And then, when it is created in different way. Another way
could be that there is just, you know, artistically, aesthetically round and
round stairs. You know. They, they may be a little more difficult to navigate
for people. Because it is round and round. But there is some aesthetic appeal to
it.

So, basically, now, there are upper store, you know, storey, there are upper
floors. There are lower stores. And the way to go down upper and lower stores is
through the staircase. So, the staircase is basically the route. But now, just
because the staircase is there, that staircase does not determine whether a
person will go up. Or a person will go down. The person can go both ways. The
person can also, you know, move literally at the same level, also. Move left and
right at the same level. But essentially, the staircase as a route by which a
person will go or down. So, like that, our consciousness, there is an
interaction between gross matter and consciousness. And that interaction happens
through the medium of the modes. Through the medium of the modes means that, you
know, you know, you know, just like if there are these three predefined
staircase. And depending on whichever staircase one chooses, then afterwards,
once one choose..., chosen this stair..., particular staircase, one will move
along that way. You know. So, similarly, once we choose the mode of passion,
then we will act passionately. We cannot avoid that afterwards. Once we have
chosen the mode of passion, we will act accordingly. So, same way, once we
choose a particular, you know, kind of behavior, accordingly, we will act. So,
let us move forward. And understand this concept further. You know. I will
explain this concept of, you know, you know, you know, stairs again as we move
forward. But let us get introduced to the three modes right now.

        tatra sattvaṁ nirmalatvāt
        prakāśakam anāmayam
        sukha-saṅgena badhnāti
        jñāna-saṅgena cānagha

"tatra sattvaṁ nirmalatvā". Among them, "sattvaṁ" is "nirmala". "nirmala" is
pure. "mala" is impure. "nirmala" is pure. The "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam" is called as
"amala purana". "amala purana" means the Purana that does not have any spots.
You know. You know. The Purana that is spotlessly pure. So, like that, "tatra
sattvaṁ nirmalatvāt". "nirmalatvāt" means that this is so, this is, that which
is "nirmala". That is very swee..., you know, spotlessly beautiful. "prakāśakam
anāmayam". "prakāśakam". You know. How is it, you know, "nirmalatvāt". That is
for the extent. "prakāśakam". It is illuminating. "anāmayam". It frees from sin.
What does it mean this mode frees? Actually, once one chooses a particular mode.
Then, one's behavior is largely, you know, accordingly directed. Of course, we
choose it. But once we choose it, then we act accordingly. You know. You know.
So, you know, you know, then, that means when one chooses the mode of goodness,
then "nirmalatvāt prakāśakam anāmayam" happens. Illuminating. Things become
clear. One who is in the mode of goodne..., you know, goodness. That person is
the, the seeker of knowledge. Is a seeker of understanding. A seeker of, you
know, wisdom. And because one is the seeker of wisdom like this. "prakāśakam
anāmayam". When one seeks knowledge, then one understands it, to some extent,
that, you know, actions have consequences. And therefore, I should choose the
action which will bring me good consequences. Not actions which will cause me
bad consequences. So, therefore, "anāmayam". Therefore, one does not, you know,
you know, one does not lead to, you know, one does not act in sinful, you know,
ways. And that is how one becomes free from sinful reactions. Now, you know,
because of this, more, so on one side, the, this seems to be very positive
description of the modes. Which are quite, you know, quite a, you know,
attractive description. One say, oh, that means, mode of goodness is very good.
No. But Krishna has told that, the, all the three modes bind the soul to
material existence. And that is what He is describing over here. So:

        sukha-saṅgena badhnāti
        jñāna-saṅgena cānagha

That one becomes bound by "sukha". And one becomes bound by "jñāna". "sukha" and
"jñāna". By, that is how one bec..., you know, one becomes bound. You know. You
know. You know. You know. So, the, you know, you know, the "prakāśakam" part,
that because the soul is illuminated. So, that illumination leads to "jñāna".
And that, that leads to "jñāna-saṅga". One feels that, oh, I am cleverer than
others. I know more than others. And because one feels like that. I am cleverer
than others. I know more than others. That is what causes bondage. So,
"sukha-saṅgena badhnāti". And because one is "anāmayam". Because one is
relatively free from sins and sinful reactions, so, sufferings is also less.
Sufferings are also less. And then, you know, the, one gets a sense of
happiness. You know. In being situated peacefully. And that is also, cause, a
cause of bondage. You know. So, Srila Prabhupada would use the examples of
different kinds of shackles. You know. There may be, if there are irons, there
are, somebody might be bound by iron shackles. And somebody might be bound by
gold shackles. So, ult..., you know, basically, you know, the fundamental
reality is that both, both are bound. What shackles are there does not matter.
But still, there is bondage. So, like that, in this material world, there is
bondage. And one has to seek liberation. And so, one, when one has to seek
liberation, at that time, how does one seek liberation? You know. You know. You
know. You know. You know. To, because how, how, or rather, how does one seek?
One seeks liberation by the process of, you know, devotional service. The
process of devotional service is, you know, you know, the process by which one
will get free from all the kinds of shackles. Whichever made, they may be. As
has been discussed. As we have discussed in the Eighth chapter. But here,
Prabhupada explains in the purport that the poet, the scientist, the
philosopher, they are often more evolved in their thinking. They try to think of
deeper concepts. And they try to gain understandings which are not easily
available for people. You know. So, that search for deeper understandings, it,
it is not necessarily always s..., spiritual. But it is not superficial
material, also. People are thinking, looking for towards deeper material things.
And as they look for towards deeper material things, they start, you know,
getting elevated by that. They start getting attracted towards Krishna by that.

        sukha-saṅgena badhnāti
        jñāna-saṅgena cānagha

"jñāna-saṅgena". That one gets "sukha". And one uses "jñāna". And by these two,
you know, one becomes bound. So, the mode of goodness is in many ways good.
Prabhupada talks about the brahmana being in broo..., goodness. So, the,
Prabhupada also makes it very clear. You know.

"there is no likelihood of liberation, or of being transferred to the spiritual
world."

So:

"Repeatedly one may become a philosopher, a scientist or a poet, and repeatedly
become entangled in the same disadvantages of birth and death. But, due to the
illusion of the material energy, one thinks that that sort of life is pleasant."

"one thinks that", "life is pleasant."

Then:

        rajo rāgātmakaṁ viddhi
        tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam
        tan nibadhnāti kaunteya
        karma-saṅgena dehinam

So, you know, you know, you know, "rajo rāgātmakaṁ viddhi". You know. "rajo
rāgātmakaṁ viddhi". You know. The mode of, you know, ig..., igno..., igno...,
igno..., you know, passion. "rajo rāgātmakaṁ". "ātmakam". Its essence, it is
born of, it comprises of what? "rāga". So, the word "rāga" here means
attachment. So, what mode of passion does is, is, brings attachment. You know.
You know. So, you know, "tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam". So, attachment to what
one has. And "tṛṣṇā". For what one does not have. What does it mean? That means
if I have a car. Then, I am passionately attached to my car. But at the same
time, while being passionately attached, I want something better, also. Yeah. I
want that car. I want that. I want that. I wand that. "tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam".
And "tan nibadhnāti kaunteya". Thereby, one becomes bound. You know.
"karma-saṅgena dehinam". So, why "kar...", "tan"? Why l..., it, does say, it is 
"sukarma"? Bon..., bondage? By karma? Because, you know, to protect what we
have. And to gain what we do not have, one has to work. So, work. You know. If I
have a very attra..., you know, a very attractive majestic house, then if I am
attached to that, then I have to work to maintain it. And another nature is
that, I will want a bigger house. I want better facilities in that. And for
that, also, I have to work. So, "karma". "tan nibadhnāti kaunteya".
"nibadhnāti". When, oh, "kaunteya". One becomes bound. How? "karma-saṅgena". You
know. So, attachment. So, Prabhupada explains that, you know, you know,
generally, sex life is characteristic of the mode of passion. And in that, there
is attachment between male and female. And by that male and female, we,
Prabhupada would often quote the verse:

        puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ
        tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ
        ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair
        janasya moho ’yam ahaṁ mameti

"janasya moho ’yam ahaṁ". That among the living entities, the "mohaḥ". The
peo..., among the people that "ahaṁ". "ahaṁ" and this, I am the body. And all
this is mine. How does this come about? From the, in the mode of passion. The
male, because there is bod..., bodily consciousness. So, there is naturally
male-female attraction. From that male-female attraction, then the "saṅg...",
the, there is the, you know, "rāga" and, you know, "tṛṣṇā". Yes. I want more.
So, when a man and woman come together, they want a house. And then, they want
to expand. You know. Then, we have to have a source of income. And we have to
up this. And that. And that. And that. And then, so many things are needed. And
in that way, one's material existence becomes more and more complicated. So, you
know, you know, "karma". Now, even in, Prabhupada would quote oven, the, even
the economist Malthus. They say that, actually, you know, family is the primary
impetus for people for work. The, his idea was that, you know, that peop...,
when people want to improve their family life. Then, and they see the
possibility, you know, for improving their family life. Then, they will work
hard. Then, they will think, yes, let me do this. Let me do this. Let me do
this. And that way, they will try to improve their life. And "kar...", that is
how "karma-saṅgena". "vadanāti". So, the, for the sake of, you know, you know,
improving their family life, they will work. Now, actually, this is integrated
even in the dharma, artha, kama system of the Vedic culture, also. So that, you
know, people want artha. You know. That they want, people, to family, want artha
and kama. They want artha for the sake of kama. They want to fulfill their
desires. And that is why they want artha. And, but, this, all this is made
within a, all this arrangements for fulfilling is then made within dharmic
framework. One does dharma. And then, one, artha and kama will also come.
"tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam". So, Prabhupada makes a significant point in the
purport, you know, that, you know, you know, you know:

"Modern civilization is considered to be advanced in the standard of the mode of
passion. Formerly, the advanced condition was considered to be in the mode of
goodness."

So, what does this refer to?

"Modern civilization is considered to be advanced in the standard of the mode of
passion."

That means, now, today, you know, a person who has, one has perverted standard.
A person who can, you know, exhibit. You know. I have a girlfriend. I have a
boyfriend. I have a big house. I have this. I have that. That is the person who
is considered to be the most successful. In today's standards. So, people's, you
know, status, people's, you know, you know, you know, value, social value is
determined by how much they are successful according to the definition of, in,
given by the mode of passion. See, it is modes will give us different
definitions of success. In the mode of goodness, the definition of success will
be different. That ev..., even the mode of goodness, the definition of success
will be: how much knowledge does one have? How much wisdom does one have? How
much freedom from sinful action does one have? That is what will be considered
as the definition of success. And mode of passion, how much power does one have?
You know. That is, we see that, you know, you know, you know, you know, say,
bi..., as the mode of passion is increasing in America. You know. The president
of America may have some illicit sexual affairs. But if that president is able
to keep the economy going well, people say, it does not matter. Why? Because
their definition of success is not relaying in the mode of goodness. In that, a
person should have good character. The definition of success is, yes, you know,
you enjoy. And let us enjoy, also. You know. As long as you give us our artha
and kama, whether you are having dharma or not, it does not matter at all. You
know. When there is, you know, when there is relatively mode of goodness, the
artha and kama is of course required in this world. And that is also, you know,
that is also valued. But then, there has to be dharma. So, 59:07
