aVideo: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b30c7X5kl3E
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_128_-_Bhagavad_Gita_15.07-15.10_-_How_the_mind_integrates_sensory_inputs_and_causes_our_struggles_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=qxv74f5kltxsjRe7MY43uVxLlo98MTU0ODQ4OTc1MkAxNTQ4NDAzMzUy&event=video_description&v=b30c7X5kl3E

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the 15th Chapter. Starting with verse 7. Let us look at the chapter
overview. Before we move forward. So, the first section we completed, attain
liberation by detachment. So, that was based on the, you know, you know, you
know, understanding of the upside-down banyan tree metaphor. And then, if one
does not attain liberation in this way. Then, one will have to, you know, un...,
you know, stay in bondage. And undergo transmigration. So, that is the section
from 7 to 11. You know. Sta..., so, the 7, so, 15.6 ended by saying that, yes,
this is the spiritual world. And the spiritual world is, you know, Krishna's
abode. It is self-luminous. And it is beyond, you know, it is once attained, one
does not come back from there. So, three characteristics were described in,
about the spiritual world. So, that, those three characteristics are glorifying
the spiritual world. After that glorification is done, now, it is told that, ok,
if the spiritual world, if that is the abode. That is where we belong. Then, why
is the soul, you know, here? So, that will be discussed in this verse. And the
soul's, you know, journey in the material world will also be discussed in
subsequent verses. You know.

        mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke
        jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ
        manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi
        prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

So, "mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke". That "mama", "aṁśaḥ". Krishna is telling that all
living beings, "jīva", you know, "jīva-loke". They are in the world of
conditional life. They are My "aṁśaḥ"s. And "jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ". You know.
They are eternally my parts and parcels. And:

        manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi
        prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

That they are undergoing "karṣati". "karṣati" is struggling. And suffering. They
are struggling and suffering in, you know, this material existence. Bec...,
where? Because of what? "manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi". That the six senses which
include the mind. You know. That is the cause of their suffering.
"manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi". So, you know, you know, now, this verse has two parts.
And both of them are important. And then, the combination of those two parts is
also important. So, A and B are telling a very important philosophical truth.

        mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke
        jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

So, this is telling that, you know, the living entity is eternally a part of
Krishna. So, we are "aṁśaḥ". And we are "sanātanaḥ", "aṁśaḥ". So, this is
important. Because, you know, the impersonalists have the idea that we will
eventually become one with God. And we will merge in his existence. But here,
the verse very clearly says that we are "aṁśaḥ". We are parts. And how do one?
The part will, never becomes the whole. And the part is such a part that will it
merge? No. "sanātanaḥ". Earlier, also, it has been said that the soul is, you
know, you know, you know, can, soul cannot be cut by anything. So:

        acchedyo ’yam adāhyo ’yam
        akledyo ’śoṣya eva ca

So, whatever material transformations happen because of the various elements of
nature. You know. Wind. Water. All those. They do not affect, you know, the
soul. You know. You know. So, so, that, if the soul is not cuttable, then that
means, if the soul is a part. It has always been a part. And it will always be a
part. Soul is not cuttable. The soul is not changeable. Then, if it is "aṁśaḥ".
Then, it will always be an "aṁśaḥ". So, that can be inferred even from the
earlier verses. But it is made even more emphatic. And unambiguous. By the word
"sanātanaḥ". So, we are "aṁśaḥ"s. And we are "sanātanaḥ". Eternally, the
"aṁśaḥ"s. And whose "aṁśaḥ"s? "mamaivāṁśo". That is also important. "mama".
"aṁśaḥ". It is not just a brahma "aṁśaḥ". You know. You know. You know. We are
not just, you know, we are not just sparks of spirit. We are a parts of the
spiritual person's, supreme spiritual person. So, sparks of spirit. You know.
So, the example sometimes is definitely given of how the Supreme Lord is like a
flame. And we are like sparks. So, that is gi..., you know, example that
illustrates the qualitative oneness of all living beings. But it does not
necessarily illustrate, you know, you know, anything more than that. It simply
makes the point that this is how the living entity, you know, how, this is how
we all exist. You know. In relationship with Krishna. In terms of qualitative
oneness. But the, the fire itself does not have any personal, you know,
personality directly. At least the way we perceive it. And, you know, you know,
the, fla..., similarly, the flame, also. The spark also does not have
personality. But when we talk about the supreme absolute reality, the absolute
reality is a person. Krishna has also said "ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo". "mattaḥ
parataraṁ nānyat". 10.8. 7.7. He has said there is no reality higher than Him.
So, "mama" is important over here. Krishna is saying that they are all My
"aṁśaḥ"s. Not just brahma "aṁśaḥ"s. Or brahma, you know, you know, you know, you
know, pa..., some, you know, some, you know, temporary, you know, emanations
from Brahman. Or something like that. No. They are My parts. And they are
eternally My parts. You know. The, and then, they are "jīva-loke". So, that word
"jīva-loke" is the connection with the, you know, next part. So, you know, the
first part ex..., expresses the philosophical truth. That, you know, you know,
this is the, you know, this world is a place o..., you know, that we are parts
of Krishna, eternally. It is, it is very strong refutation of mayavada. Now,
second part also contains a very important truth. You know. What is that?

        manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi
        prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

So, you know, "karṣati". "karṣati" is struggling and suffering. So, that is
itself an important truth. But that has been mentioned by Krishna earlier in the
Bhagavad Gita. "duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam", He has talked about in 8.15. And then,
again, in 9.33. He has said.

        anityam asukhaṁ lokam
        imaṁ prāpya bhajasva mām

So, the, and then:

        janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-
        duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam

He has also talked about in 13.11. So, that has been mentioned that "karṣati".
"prakṛti-sthāni karṣati". That this material world is a place of misery. So, and
the living entity is suffering over here. So, of course, the slightly more
emphasis. The earlier verses were talking about how material world is miserable.
And this verse is talking about how we are miserable over here. How the living
entity is miserable. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, but the
important point over here, the addition is:

        manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi
        prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

So, the "karṣati". The struggle and suffering is happening because of the mind
and the senses. "manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi". So, you know, you know, so, normally,
the "indri...", "indriyāṇi"s are considered to be five. But in the Bhagavad
Gita, you know, you know, the, you know, "indriyāṇi"s are often groupped with
the mind. Even when Krishna was talking about sankhya. In 13.6. So, the, there,
also, He said "indriyāṇi daśaikaṁ ca". So, "daśaikaṁ". "daśaikaṁ" is eleven. So,
there, Krishna included in that eleven, the Karmendriyas. 5 Karmendriyas. 5
Jnanendriyas. And the mind. So, you know, you know, in general, in the Bhagavad
Gita's analysis, the mind is groupped as one of the senses. Even in the "Vibhuti
Yoga". 10th Chapter. You know. You know. You know. Krishna has said "indriyāṇāṁ
manaś cāsmi". That I am the mind among the senses. So, the mind is consider...,
is groupped along with the other senses. Generally, in the, you know, in the
methology of the Bhagavad Gita. In the nomenclature. And the taxonomy. The way
Bhagavad Gita classifies things. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
know, now, you know, "manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi". What is the significance of
stating that, you know, you know, the living entity is suffering because of the
senses? Or in, is, is suffering. And it has senses. You know. The six senses
which includes the mind. The significance is that, actually, most people think
that the, you know, senses are the sources of happiness. You know. You know. You
know. People have the idea that, oh, by my eyes I will see beautiful things. By
the tongue, I will eat delicious things. And like that, through all the senses,
I will enjoy. And people think of the senses as the sources of happiness. But
Krishna is telling, by associating in, in this phrase. "karṣati".
"manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi". So, the mind and the senses. The soul is a part of
Krishna. And it is well-known that that the soul being a part of Krishna,
has the nature of Krishna. So, Krishna is sat-cid-ananda. Similarly, we are also
sat-cid-ananda. So, then, why are we suffering? Because of
"manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi". So, material world, itself, is a place of suffering.
And that suffering is aggravated. And multiplied. You know. You know. Worsened.
By, you know, the entanglement with the mind and the senses. So, there will be
old age. Disease. And death. You know. Which is largely inevitable. You know.
But, you know, when the mind and senses are uncontrolled. And that leads to
great attachment to worldly things. And due to the attachment to wordly things,
one ends up suffering far more, you know, you know, than what one needs to. For
example, if a person becomes alcoholic. Then, all the su..., the suffering that
comes upon oneself, one's health. One's career. One's, you know, family. The
society at large. All that suffering is because of, you know, you know, the,
this is, self-indu..., this is self-induced. It is, you know, you know, it is a
self-sentence. You know. Generally, a court sentence if somebody to, suffering
when the person has done wrong. But when we make wrong choices. We, there is a
self-sentence. We sentence ourselves to suffering. So, why do we, why would
anyone sentence oneself to suffering like that? That is the effect of, insidious
effect of the mind and the senses. "manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi".

So, the mind and the senses, they alienate us from Krishna. You know. You know.
They alienate us from Krishna. Alie..., alienate means take us away. To make
aliens. So, when alien, the word of, alien is, you know, generally used to talk
about, say, life, you know, for..., lifeforms of some other planets. Maybe, they
come here. They are aliens on this. So, do, are they aliens on our earth? The
word alien is used in that sense. So, people have fascination. That oh, maybe,
there are aliens. Will they do, they come on the earth? And do they explore the
earth? Do they do research over here? So, the Bhagavad Gita turns that whole,
you know, you know, telescope around. Telescope that is searching for aliens.
And it points to us. Points to the real me. That is the soul. And it tells us
that, actually, it is we who are the aliens. You know. Instead of searching
whether there are some aliens on earth. We have to recognise that we ourselves
are aliens. And not just on earth. We are aliens within all of material
existence. We are actually souls who belong to the spiritual world. You know.
You know. So, the, we do not belong to the material world. "prakṛti-sthāni". You
know. To be situated in material nature. Which is perishable. And miserable. Is,
you know, you know, not the consti..., not the nature of the soul. It is
unnatural situation. So, "prakṛti-sthāni" is 15.7, is similar to:

        puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi
        bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān
        kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya
        sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

So, in 13.22, Krishna says "prakṛti-stho hi". The soul is situated in material
nature. So, we are ourselves the aliens in this material world. And being
aliens, being in a foreign territory which is perishable. And miserable. We
suffer, also, because of that. So, the way to break free from the suffering is
by returning to our original nature. That is the spiritual nature. So, the
second part that is worth, conveys is the senses are the cause of our "karṣati".
They are the cause of our sufferings. So, Srila Prabhupada highlihts both these
points in this purport. You know. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada explains
that, you know:

"The personal expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the individual
identities of the Godhead, are always present. Similarly, the separated
expansions of living entities have their identities."

So, when Prabhupada talks about "aṁśaḥ", he makes the point that even the, you
know, even the Supreme Absolute Truth is not a homogenous, you know, oneness.
That there is diversity even in the Supreme Absolute Truth. That there are many
forms of the Supreme Lord. As Prabhupada mentions. "Rāma". "Nṛsiṁha-deva".
"Viṣṇumūrti". So, all these are different incarnations. Which are there. And
they are also the "aṁśaḥ"s. Now, of course, they are "sva-aṁśaḥ"s. There is
"vibina-aṁśaḥ". And there is "sva-aṁśaḥ". So, "sva-aṁśaḥ" is, "sva-aṁśaḥ" is
the, you know, you know, one's own expansion. That is the Vishnu-tattva. And
"vibina-vibinna" is a separated expansions. Those are the, you know, jivas. So,
the jivas do not have the same potency as the "vibina-aṁśaḥ"s. You know. But,
you know, they are also parts of the Lord. So, both, so, Prabhupada emphasises
the point that both are eternal.

        mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke
        jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

Just as the various incarnations are, have their eternal abodes in the spiritual
world where they reside eternally. Similarly, in this world, also, similarly,
the souls are eternal. So, both "aṁśaḥ"s are "sanātanaḥ". Then, Prabhupada
explains that, you know, you know, all living entities are parts in Krishna. You
know. When:

"The word karṣati"

You know:

"karṣati (“struggling” or “grappling hard”) is very significant."

What is significance? Prabhupada says that:

"The conditioned soul is bound up, as though shackled by iron chains."

We may say I do not see any iron chains. Yes. Be..., these are the chains which
are subtler than iron. They are made of "asapas". They are the desire. Our own
desires. Which are shackling us. So:

"He is bound up by the false ego,"

So, actually, what binds the soul to matter is the false ego.

"and the mind is the chief agent which is driving him in this material existence."

And then, Prabhupada explai..., correlates this with the modes.

"When the mind is in the mode of goodness, his activities are good; when the
mind is in the mode of passion, his activities are troublesome; and when the
mind is in the mode of ignorance, he travels in the lower species of life."

You know. "in the lower species of life". So, to understand this point about how
the false ego i..., i..., binds. And the mind is the agent that drives, let us
return back to the example of watching a movie. Or a virtual reality show. So,
you know, you know, you know, suppose I am the spectator. And, you know, or I am
the person who is participating in the virtual reality show. And then, in front
of me is the monitor. On which the virtual reality show is going on. So, now, I
can look here. I can look there. And I can come out of the spell that the movie
may be causing on me. But it is nearly impossible for me to come out of that
spell. Because my eyes are riveted to that. How are they riveted? Now, suppose,
I am watching a, you know, computer screen. Or a TV monitor. Or, or TV screen.
So, now, if, you know, if we visualise that, suppose there is, you know, you
know, you know, a tunnel-like structure. You know. It starts a pipe, a pipe-like
structure. It starts from my head. And moves right up to the movie screen. So,
that, I cannot look anywhere else. You know. My vision is locked onto that
screen. So, that, you know, that, you know, you know, you know, you know,
pipe-like structure. The tunnel-like structure which locks my vision to the TV
screen, that is the false ego. I am the soul. The false ego is what? It rivets
to bodily reality. And then, the, you know, screen, screen is the computer. So,
you know, sorry, the, the scr..., the computer screen is the mind. The, so, this
is I am, what I am speaking, this is based on, you know, the analogy of
Puranjana. The allegory of Puranjana rather. Analogy is an example in which come,
correlations are made. Allegory is w..., a more elaborate story. In which, you
know, you know, the, you know, same, with the, some philosophical points are
illustrated. But not just, you know, in an abstract concept. But it is the, that
concept is illustrated through some characters. And those dynamics between those
characters. So, there is analogy of Puranjana in the Fourth Chapt..., Fourth
Canto of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". And I will not go into the full analogy over
there. But "Drutakarmā" Prabhu, one of Srila Prabhupada's, you know, scientist
disciples. Has he written a, you know, you know, has published a paper on this.
"The City of Nine Gates". Which is published also in "Back to Godhead". So,
there, he, to explain this Puran..., Puranjana analogy, he uses this virtual
reality concept. And he explains that, you know, you know, this, you know, mind
is like a multimedia computer. That integrates inputs from all the various
senses. And, and puts them for display for the, you know, soul to behold. And
respond to. So, that we will, that will be talked about in the next verse. About
how the mind integrates. You know. But at this point, the point is that:

        manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi
        prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

So, if we were watching a, you know, you know, movie screen. But there was no
movie being played over there. Then, we will soon get bored by it. And then,
even if our head is shackled to that. We will try to find out, what is the way
to become free? But if the very captivating movie is playing over there, then we
become more and more riveted. More and more focused on that. And then, we cannot
see any. Even if we try to look here. Look there. You know. We are just caught
over there. We cannot see anywhere else. And that is how we get, become
captivated. So, the false ego, it, what, bi..., it binds and the mind it drives.
How does the mind drive? Because on that, you know, video screen, might, various
images come up. And when different images come up, then we get captivated. Oh,
this looks good. This ta..., this tastes good. This, this feel very soft to
touch. Let me do this. Let me enjoy. Enjoy. Enjoy. So, mind drives. So, drives
how? By providing images. By providing, you know, obje..., by presenting on its
screen. Objects for enjoyment. The objects that captivate. Now, you know, we,
even when we have a TV, it can have many channels. So, it is some channels can,
may be educational. Some channels may be, you know, you know, filled with
sexuality. And passion. And some channe..., or fa..., channels will be perverse.
You know. Brutal. Violence. And bloody murder. And, you know, you know, you
know, you know, grew some forms of, you know, violence. Sexuality. And abuse.
And things like that. So, you know, is like goodness. Passion. Ignorance. So,
Prabhupada is saying that, when a, you know, when the soul is in goodness, the
activities are, as Prabhupada ens..., mentions over here.

"When the mind is in the mode of goodness, his activities are good;"

You know. Well, they are reasonable good. They are, they are still in material
existence. But they are good. When the mind is in the mode of passion. That
means what is being displayed on the screen of the mind is, you know, filled
with, you know, you know, you know, sexuality. And passion. Then, the activities
are troublesome. Then, we exp..., we increase our, you know, complications. Our
bondage.

"and when the mind is in the mode of ignorance, he travels in the lower species
of life."

"lower species of life". So, one goes downwards. You know. One does terrible,

        jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā
        adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ

As was said in 14.18, "jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā". "jaghanya" is abominable. You
know. So, that is how that person goes down. Now, you know, you know, when this
is happening like this. The mind is going up or down. Or, so, the one is, you
know, the mind is in different modes. Basically, it means that what is being
displayed in the mind is, you know, different at different times. And depending
on, now, all these three ultimately cause struggles. Because even when we say
the mind's activities are good in goodness. Still, in goodness, also, one has to
grow, go, undergo old age. Disease. And death. One cannot avoid that. So, that
is inevitably there. But basically, there is this difference that, you know, you
know, there may be degrees of suffering depending on the mode in which one is
situated. And Prabhupada, you know, quotes from the, you know, "Mādhyandinā...",
youy know, "Mādhyandināyana-śruti". "sa", "eṣa". You know.

"sa vā eṣa brahma-niṣṭha idaṁ śarīraṁ martyam atisṛjya brahmābhisampadya brahmaṇā
paśyati brahmaṇā śṛṇoti brahmaṇaivedaṁ sarvam anubhavati"

So, you know, "sa vā eṣa brahma-niṣṭha idaṁ". Brahman, when one, one becomes
situated in the Brah..., you know, spiritual platform. "brahma-niṣṭha idaṁ
śarīraṁ martyam atisṛjya". You know. You know. So, one gives up, you know, the,
you know, one gives up the material body. "śarīraṁ mart...", at the time of
death, then "brahmābhisampadya brahmaṇā paśyati". So, one sees the Brahman.
One, "brahmaṇā śṛṇoti", one hears the Brahman. And "brahmaṇaivedaṁ sarvam
anubhavati". One actually experiences Brahman. So, you know, so, the point here
is, that, it is very clea..., it is mentioning over here that there are senses.
And, you know, you know, one perceives with the senses. So, "śṛṇoti". "paśyati".
One sees with the eyes. One hears with the senses. So, this is actually talking
about two things. Two significant things. First is that, even when the soul
becomes liberated, the soul has perceptions. And not just perceptions. But it is
talking about sensory perceptions. "śṛṇoti". And "paśyati". So, wi..., with
eyes. And with ears. And along with that, the second point is that there is
something to perceive. If the Brahman, if the Brahman were just a
non-differentiated oneness as the impersonalists conceive. Then, there will be
nothing to perceive, actually. Everything will simply be one. What is there to
perceive at such a time? But then, the, there is definitely a lot to perceive.
And what is there to perceive? That depends on, you know, you know, the
recognition that there is a personal reality. You know. That the highest reality
is person. There is the, Brahman is the Supreme Absolute Truth as a person. And
the living entity is even after liberation, they are also persons. So, they are
persons endowed with senses. And the Lord is a person endowed with form. And the
living entity endowed with senses. "brahmaṇā paśyati". With eyes. Senses. So,
this "brahmaṇā paśyati" is referring to the living entities taking darshan of
the Supreme Lord. "brahmaṇā śṛṇoti" refers to the living entities relishing the
sweet, you know, speech of Krishna:

        madhurayā girā valgu-vākyayā
        budha-manojñayā puṣkarekṣaṇa

The gopis describe that "brahmaṇā śṛṇoti". What is that? In the Gopi Gita, they
are saying that when we hear You. "madhurayā girā". You know. Your voice is so
sweet. And then, with it, with that voice, "valgu-vākyayā". The words that You
speak are also so charming. You know. And, and they are so charm... , this
combination of sweet voice and charming words, what does it do?
"budha-manojñayā". That even the wise become bewildered by it. Even the wise
become attracted. Even their minds become captivated by it. So, you know, that
is the real life in the spiritual world where there is reciprocation. Between
the living entity and the Supreme Lord. Now, Srila Prabhupada further explains
in his purport that, you know, you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada quotes
from "smṛti".

        vasanti yatra puruṣāḥ sarve vaikuṇṭha-mūrtayaḥ

So, "vasanti". "vasanti" means reside. "yatra". "yatra". What, what is this
"yatra" referring to? This is referring to the spiritual world. "puruṣāḥ sarve".
All, you know, you know, the, the, all the forms of Supreme Lord.
"vaikuṇṭha-mūrtayaḥ". You know. So, you know, so, not all forms of Supreme Lord.
All the persons over there. "vaikuṇṭha-mūrtayaḥ". So, everybody in the spiritual
world has a "vaikuṇṭha-mūrti", means has a form. Which is, you know, the form of
the Su..., you know, Su..., which akin to the form of the Supreme Lord. So,
"vaikuṇṭha-mūrtayaḥ". So, that means four-handed forms. So, all of them has a
four-handed form. Of course, Vishnu has some distinctive characteristics. That
Vishnu alone has the, you know, you know, you know, has the Kaustubha jewel. But
there are other forms, also. Now, you know, beyond that, Prabhupada also
mention, the point is, you know, Prabhupada explain that how they they are
"sanātanaḥ". And that they cannot be cut. What I explained earlier. And then,
Prabhupada gives the example that how are we parts?

"just as the parts and parcels of gold are also gold."

So, like that, we are also God in the sense that we are parts of God. So, we are
godly. We cannot be God in an entirety. So, now, you know, you know, you know,
after looking at these two parts, so, first part is saying that we are eternally
parts of Krishna. And second part is saying that, you know, whe..., when we
disconnect, we become disconnected from Krishna. Then, we come under the spell
of the mind and senses. And then, we suffer. We struggle and suffer. You know.
So, as "karṣati". So, the seco..., two parts basically can be integrated by the
phrase, you know, be a part. Be not apart. Be a part. Let us live as a part of
Krishna. We are parts of Krishna. Let us cooperate with Krishna. And by living
in harmony with the whole, we will get happiness. You know. The wonderful thing
about Krishna Consciousness is that, although as souls, we are limited. But our
happiness does not have to be limited. You know. You know. We are limited. So,
if we are i..., seeking happiness independently of Krishna. Then, our happiness
will be limited. But if we connect with Krishna, then, the happiness that we can
get can be unlimited, also. Because Krishna is all-attractive. And Krishna is
infinite. So, connection with Him can give us happiness forever. And ever. And
ever. And that is how, you know, you know, soul, we do not have to necessarily
be, you know, you know, li..., limited by our finiteness in terms of our
capacity to experience happiness. So, that is the wonderful part of Krishna. So,
be a part. So, it is not something that we have to become a slave of Krishna.
No. Actually, what it essentially means is that we have to serve Krishna. And we
serve Krishna according to our, you know, individuality. Even in the spiritual
world. And that pleases Krishna. And He reciprocates. And then, there is supreme
joy over there. So, you know, you know, being a part of Krishna is a natural
aspect of our spiritual lives. You know. That is our nature, actually. It is not
something we have to do. But our current situation is unnatural. So, be a part.
Be not apart. But instead of being a part. A part is two words. A part. But now,
instead of that, we are A. P. A..., A. P. A. R. T. One word. Apart. We become
apart from Krishna. And when we become apart from Krishna, then "karṣati". We
suffer. Because nothing can satisfy us. Ultimately, the Sup..., Sup..., Supreme
is one. By definition, Supreme means one. And there cannot be any substitute for
the Supreme. So, in this world, the mind and senses are offering us various
objects for enjoyment. Objects that, you know, that promises to be sub..., that
promises substitutes. So, ok. Why don't you enjoy this? Why don't you enjoy
that? Why don't you that? But actually, we cannot enjoy any of those things. So,
therefore, the, you know, you know, sufferings in this world are inevitable.
They are created by the, they are created by the, you know, sou..., our own
karma. But then, we, also, when we are entangled with the mind and senses, we
also do further bad karma. Which causes even greater suffering. So, in this way,
there is suffering. So, the first part. And the second part is, first part is
telling this is the nature of the soul. Liberated. As a part of Krishna. But
then, when the soul does not act at the liberated platform, then the soul
undergoes "karṣati". Undergoes the struggle of material existence. So, what is
that "karṣati"? That will be explained in the next verse. You know. So, let us
look at the next verse. You know.

        śarīraṁ yad avāpnoti
        yac cāpy utkrāmatīśvaraḥ
        gṛhītvaitāni saṁyāti
        vāyur gandhān ivāśayāt

So, "śarīraṁ yad avāpnoti". One gets the "śarīraṁ". You know. What kind of
"śarīraṁ"? One. One. "avāpnoti". That will depend on one's karma. "yac cāpy
utkrāmatīśvaraḥ". You know. You know. "utkrāmati". "utkrāmati" means one gives
up. Departs from the body. So, it is "īśvaraḥ". So, the soul is the "īśvaraḥ".
Why is the soul considered to be "īśvaraḥ"? You know.

        gṛhītvaitāni saṁyāti
        vāyur gandhān ivāśayāt

So, "gṛhītvaitāni". So, "īśvaraḥ", we will discuss a little later. Let us look at
the sanskrit verse. "gṛhītvaitāni". So, "gṛhītvā" is to take up. "saṁyāti" is to
give up. You know. "vāyur gandhān ivāśayāt". So, you know, you know, you know,
what is "vāyur gandhān"? "vāyur" is, you know, fra..., fragrance. Or aroma. Or
smell. So, that "vāyur" is wind. And "gandhān" is fragrance. Or aroma. Smell.
"ivāśayāt". So, "āśayāt" is the source. So, the example that is given is that,
you know, when wind is blowing. So, if the wind blows to a, you know, fragrant
flower garden, you know, then the wind will carry that fragrance. But if the
wind goes through the area of outhouse. Where there is the pan..., there is the
repellent order of excreta. Then, when one, the wind goes through that, the wind
will acquire that order. So, similarly, the soul acquires different conceptions.
Different conceptions of what is life. What is, how is life meant to be enjoyed.
So, some people are sadists. You know. Sadists means that by causing others
pain, they get pleasure. You know. They, the more if somebody causes pain. And
there is some people. You know. They, they want to see. They may, you know, take
ants. And they pour scalding hot water on the ants. And when they see, a...,
a..., a..., the ant is suffering. And they get some pleasure in that. So, you
know, Mugari was a sadist. What was Mu..., Mugari? You know. He was to k...,
half kill the animals. And, you know, actually, when, you know, when this, we
shoo..., when the shooting is done. It depends on where we shoot the arrows. The
wound, arrow can be fatal immediately. Or they can be fatal gradually. So, he
would shoot in such a way that the animal would not be able to escape. The wound
would be fatal. But it would be, you know, gradually fatal. You know. This sort
of thing, this sort of wounding is often done in, you know, when there are wars.
And then, terrorists kidnap. And when there are bru..., brutal people involved.
Often, they, they do not want the person to die immediately. So, you know, you
know, they, you know, torture others. So, torture others for a slow death. You
know. When there was a conspiracy against Hitler. And then, he wa..., he, the,
some Germans wanted to oppose. They did not want the fight to go on. So, war to
go on. So, they tried to, you know, kill him. So, one of, he, when, you know,
there were several attempts to kill him, actually. So, one of, in one of the
attempts, those people who were installed. You know. Whoever, you know, you
know, who were, you know, involved in the conspiracy. What he did was he hung
them u..., he had them hung using piano strings. So, what was the idea is that,
that normally, when an..., hanging is done, the in..., one moment itself, the
neck gets choked. But there, the piano strings, what they were do..., is, slowly
cut through the flesh of the neck. And sometimes, when peo..., that is a very
torturous way of killing. The killing is inevitable. But sometimes, the person
may just feel, the torture is painful. Days. And days. And days together. Until
finally, that string cuts off. The neck, so much that the person dies. So, it is
a very brutal way of killing. So, the point is, you know, the, some people get
pleasure in causing pain to others. We may wonder, how can such a thing happen?
You know. How can somebody get pleasure in causing pain to others? So, that is
the perversity of the mode of, you know, ignorance. So, when one is in, so,
actually, you know, in goodness, you know, we want to be happy. And we want
others, also, to be happy. In, you know, transcendence, we may even give up our
happiness for the sake of others' happiness. That is actually love. In passion,
you know, I want to be happy. You know. What happens to others does not matter.
You know. If others enjoy, that is also, they can enjoy, also. But I want to be
happy. And in ignorance, I want to be happy. And often, you know, I want to, my
happiness should be exclusive. You know. I should be happy. And others should be
miserable. So, it is very horrible. So, different people can have different
conceptions of what makes them happy. So, how do they get that? You know. They
get, they acquire that. The soul is pure originally. So, you know, even Hitler's
soul is pure soul. You know. You know. But there, that person can get terrible
misconceptions about what is life. And how one is meant to love. And what one is
meant to do. You know. Based on, you know, based on, you know, you know,
you know, one's circumstances. Now, this may seem to indicate that, is the soul
not responsible at all? You know. When the wind goes through a, you know, you
know, they, of outhouse. Then, it acquires a bad order. So, is it that the wind
is not responsible. Ok. Just went through that area. So, it acquired that
order. So, like that, is it that, you know, ok, we were exposed to certain
experiences. That is why we became conditioned. And that is why we are acting in
this way. Is it like that? No. Not necessarily. The soul has free will. You know.
We may not be able to choose our experiences. But, you know, you know, we can
choose our experiecces. You know. What does it mean?

You know. The word experience can mean two things. The word experience can refer
to the external situation. Which we go through. So, you know, you know, that
means, we, you know, can, we, you know, we, for example, if we have to travel in
a crowded local. You know. We can, we, we, if that is the only way of traveling
available, then we have to travel through that. So, we can, we may not be able
to choose our experience. Ok. That is what I have to go through. But while
physically, I may have to go through certain experience. But I do not have to
emotionally go through that experience. We may not have, we may not be able to
choose our experience. But we, still, we can choose our experiences. That means,
what do I experience? You know. If I just, I am resenting. Oh, there is so much
crowd. There are, people are pushing me. And, you know, what a miserable thing.
Then, if I s..., keep myself emotionally in that, focused and, resentfully
on that, you know, circumstance which I am, you know, physically experiencing.
Then, that becomes my emotional experience, also. And that becomes torturous.
But I can choose to think of something else. You know. Especially, Krishna
Consciousness can enable us to think of higher reality. By which, we transcend
the worldly situation. So, that is how we can go beyond our experiences. You
know. You know. You know. And we can, we can, you know, the physical experiences
that we have, the material experiences that we have, at the physical level, they
do not have to, you know, define us. They do not have to determine us. They
affect us. They will shape us. But we can choose to respond differently. You
know. Some person who is abused in childhood, you know, may become a, you know,
those people may become abusers themselves later on. Or otherwise, some people
who were abusing the child, do, they may choose instead to become, you know, you
know, not abusers. But they may choose to become, you know, you know, those who
work for rehabilitation of those who have been used. So, the experience is the
same. But, you know, two people may choose to become, respond differently. So,
why is that? That means we have free will. So, we have free will. And we can
choose how we respond. The emphasis of this verse however is that, you know,
generally, the soul is affected by the circumstances that the soul goes through.
So, you know, you know, if we expose ourselves to certain circumstances
repeatedly. Then, we become habituated to those circumstances. And when we
become habituated, then that habituation makes us, you know, you know, you know,
makes us, you know, act according to, you know, accept thus the situation as
normal. Accept that kind of actions as normal. And then, we act accordingly. So,
you know, you know, for example, if some Indian goes to America. Now, Indians do
not know anything about baseball. You know. It is not a game that is played at
all in India. But an Indian may go to America. And then, just, then, then, they
are, say, in the coll..., goes to study in the college. Everybody is, say, mad
about baseball. That person gets exposed. And then, maybe, that person is,
starts getting infatuated. So, what happens? So, "gṛhīt...", you know, "vāyur
gandhān ivāśayāt". That just as the wind in a particular place, goes to a
particular place, acquires that fragrance. So, we acquire particular
conceptions. Prabhupada writes conceptions of life over here. We acquire of
conceptions of how we are going to enjoy. You know. So, we are all shaped by our
experiences. But we do not have to be determined by our experiences. You know.
You know. You know. We, you know, are, we can actually respond in different
ways. So, that is why this is, this is not fatalistic. Yes. It is not
deterministic entirely. It, deterministic means, we are just, the, the
determinism is a philosophical school of thought. Which says that we are
determined by external factors. You know. Or whatever. By, certain factors
determine us. But actually, you know, the Bhagavad Gita's understanding is not
deterministic. And that we will see as it moves forward, you know, in this
chapter itself. So, we are shaped by our circumstances. And, you know, we, we
should, that is why, try to choose our circumstances as much as possible. So,
choose our circumstances. That means, rather than, you know, hanging out, you
know, with people who have, you know, undesirable traits. Rather than, you know,
lis..., exp..., pu..., going to circumstances. Which it, drag out our lower
self. We have to choose, you know, that association and that frie..., the, that
friend.  Social circle. That social environment. Which brings out, you know,
the, our higher side. Not our lower side. So, but the soul is shaped. So, what
is this verse's emphasis is? So, you know, you know, it is talking about
expanding in the theme of "karṣati". The soul is "karṣati". So, how about, what
is the "karṣati"? Basically, the "karṣati" is the cycle of birth and death.
Which the soul goes through in the hope of material enjoyment. Now:

        śarīra abidyā-jāl, joḍendriya tāhe kāl,

So, the body is "avidyā". It is filled with "avidyā". Ignorance. But it is not
just filled, you know, i..., with ignorance. It is a trap of ignorance.
"abidyā-jāl". It not only covers us. But it traps us in its covering of
ignorance. And then, within that, "joḍendriya tāhe kāl". The senses are pathways
to destruction. "kāl". They are pathways to destruction. You know. We accelerate
when we pa..., go along the path with the senses. We go faster and faster into
misery. And, you know, "śa...", misery. And the repetition of birth and death.
And even to hellish, you know, situations. That is how, you know, life is.
"śarīra abidyā-jāl, joḍendriya tāhe kāl,". So, here, what, the that same point
is expanded.

        śarīraṁ yad avāpnoti
        yac cāpy utkrāmatīśvaraḥ
        gṛhītvaitāni saṁyāti
        vāyur gandhān ivāśayāt

So, "vāyur gandhān". So, the soul acquires, you know, so, why do I have a
particular kind of body? And you have a particular kind of body? Because in our
past lives, we have chosen to develop a particular kind of conception. And based
on the kind of conception, we have acquired, we have got a particular mindset.
And we have got a particular, you know, physical set, also. Physical bod..., a
body accordingly. So, that is how the soul goes through. Now, the word "īśvaraḥ"
is used to indicate the point that the soul can choose. So, although, you know,
you know, "vāyur gandhān ivāśayāt" is there. It is true that, the soul, you
know, is exposed to certain circumstances. But, you know, "iv...", "īśvaraḥ".
You know. We can, you know, direct the journey of our transmigration.
Transmigration will have to go through. But where we will go, that choice we
have. "īśvaraḥ". So, the soul is, you know, gives up one body. Takes up another
body. But what kind of body the soul will take? That will depend on the, you
know, kind of conceptions that the soul acquires. And that is something which we
are, which we can choose. So, we can decide how we are going to respond to our
experiences. So, that is "īśvaraḥ". Now, you know, you know, Srila Prabhupada
writes in the body that, you know, we have, you know, you know, you know,
Prabhupada emphasises the point the:

"Minute independence is there. The change his body undergoes depends upon him."

So, what is the independence? Ok. The, we are going to change our body. But what
kind of change we will undergo? That will depend on us. If we want a dog's body,
we will get a dog's body. So, then, Prabhupada says, what is "karṣati"? That was
mentioned in the previous verse.

"This process of transmigrating from one body to another and struggling while in
the body is called karṣati,"

So, "karṣati" is both. You know. Going from one body to another. At that time,
the death. And the post-mortem journey. And birth. Both come in. And then, while
we are in the body, also, there are the, you know, various "klesas" that come
along. So, then:

        śrotraṁ cakṣuḥ sparśanaṁ ca
        rasanaṁ ghrāṇam eva ca
        adhiṣṭhāya manaś cāyaṁ
        viṣayān upasevate

So, "śrotraṁ cakṣuḥ sparśanaṁ". So, these are describing the five senses. The
ears. The eyes. The, you know, you know, skin. You know. The tongue. And then.
the, you know, nose. The smelling power. So:

        śrotraṁ cakṣuḥ sparśanaṁ ca
        rasanaṁ ghrāṇam eva ca

"adhiṣṭhāya". "adhiṣṭhāya" means centered around. Supervised by. Situated
around. Or situated in. "manaś cāyaṁ". So, these are centered around the mind.
You know. "cāyaṁ viṣayān upasevate". You know. So, what does the person do? Such
a soul? The five, you know, fi..., acquiring the five senses. Which are centered
around the mind. The soul "viṣayān". Sense objects. "upasevate". The
soul. Actually, "upasevate" means to enjoy. So, the "upasevate" actually
contains the word, you know, "seva". So, actually, the soul, soul serves the
sense objects. You know. The soul serves the sense objects. So, actually, you
know, depending on the "ivāśayāt", the, becau..., depending on the conception of
life that we have acquired, then, you know, accordingly we are given a next
body. So, you know, ba..., then, with that body, which is like, you know, if,
you know, if there is a, you know, carpenter. The carpenter has a toolkit. So,
the toolkit is required. You know. It contains all the tools to do the job.
Whatever is the job, of carpenter that is required. You know. The soul is just
like a carpenter. And the soul is out to do the job of sense gratification. And
the senses is a toolkit. So, the whole body is like the toolkit we have got. But
actually, this toolkit is such that it itself causes misery. And the job that we
do also f..., causes further misery. The job of sense gratification gives a
little pleasure. But "duhkha yona ya evate". There is suffering after that. And
the toolkit itself, this body, it also grows old. It gets diseased. And it dies.
So, "upasevate". So, actually, we are thinking that we are enjoying. But we are,
serving. We are enslaved by the spell of the senses. And that causes us
suffering. You know. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, Prahlada
Maharaja also talks about this in his prayers, in the Ninth, in the Ninth
Chapter of the Seven Canto of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". He says that:

        bahvyaḥ sapatnya iva geha-patiṁ lunanti

That just as a person who has, you know, many wives is dragged by the different
wives. Come on. Come with me. Come with me. Come with me. Do this for me. Do
this for me. Do this, get this for me. Get this for me. So, like that, the soul
is dragged by the various senses. And sometimes, this is, senses are
all-attractive towards one sense object. But quite often, they are
all-attractive to different sense objects. And then, it becomes very difficult
for the soul to survive in such a situation.

        adhiṣṭhāya manaś cāyaṁ
        viṣayān upasevate

In this way, the soul tries to enjoy. But the soul gets bound. So, you know, you
know, just like there are five fingers which are centered around the palm. So,
like that, there are the five senses. You know. They are centered around the
mind. They inputs from all the senses comes to the mind. Earlier, I had given
the example of the virtual reality. The comput..., you know. setup. The computer
screen. So, the computer screen can have inputs. You know. There are, and the
inputs can come from various sensors. So, like that, the mind is like the
computer screen. It is, the mind is basically like computer, com..., multimedia
computer. Which has a screen. Which gives the output. But the inputs are coming
from various sources. So, from the, so, right now, if I am sitting, right now,
so, I am speaking something. So, the, I am hearing the sound which I am
speaking. So, that is one input coming in. Along with that, you know, you know,
there is another input that is coming in, is the input of, you know, you know,
the, the, I am sitting on a particular chair. Say. So, then, how does the chair
feel? That is, there is an input coming from there, also. Then, along with that,
there is also an input coming from different sources. Like that. Now, what are
the different sources from which we get inputs like that? Many, many sources.
So, those sour..., you know, sources which give that input, they are all, you
know, you know, the sources that, you know, are integrated by the mind. Now,
some of them, you know, are coming to the conscious mind. And we perceive them.
Just like, when various sensors are coming into the computer. Now, all of them
are going into the hard disk of the computer. Not all of them are necessarily
displayed on the monitor. So, what is displayed on the monitor is like the
conscious mind. And what is going inside, that is all the subconscious mind. So,
you know, we are not conscious of those things. So, Freu..., you know, Sigmund
Freud had the idea of subconscious mind. He, he, now, of course, that idea was
there before, also. But he, he pioneered its study in a systematic way. Of
course, he was more of a, a, a creative thinker in the garbaha scientist. And
he, many of his theories were widely speculative. And his ideas of con...,
con..., un..., the unconscius, Carl Jung, also one of his, you know, proteges.
Who eventually become a, became a, a ribald. You know. You know. He, so, he also
had a lot of ideas. He did a lot of study a lot of subconscious. Especially, in
terms of the patterns of behavior that are there. That co..., you know, that
cause, to be common among all people. You know. The subconscious level. So,
anyway, the point is that "manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi", what was talked about
earlier, that is being expanded over here. "adhiṣṭhāya manaś cāyaṁ". So, the
mind along with the six senses cause "karṣati". So, how? The mind brings in all
the inputs. Integrates them. And presents it for display. You know. And displays
it for action. So, that is how it works. Now, you know, when we talk about the
various senses. What exactly is happening with respect to the various senses?
All the senses are bringing in the input from the various sources. And they are
bring it to the, you know, mind. So, now, the mind chooses. Which input should I
take? Which input should I focus on? And then, how should I, you know, you know,
you know, respon..., you know, respond? That is decided by the soul. But the
mind integrates. And gives us a composite picture. So, we can, you know, for
now, right now, I am sitting on a chair. We say, right now, we are sitting on a
chair. Maybe, there is, there is some music going on in the background. Maybe,
somebody is talking in the background. And maybe, something is cooking in the
kitchen. So, you are having some fragrance coming of that, also. So, you may,
you know, we may, we may be having something coming from the f..., some input
coming from the nose. Some input coming from the ear. Some coming from the skin.
We are sitting on a chair. Maybe, the chair is not comfortable. So, like that,
all of the inputs are coming. And then, we integrate them. You know. And the
mind integrates them. So, then, you know, we fo..., choose to focus on a
particular input. And then, we respond to it accordingly. So, now, in the study
of neurology. Neurology is the study of the brain. Brain cells are called
neurons. So, therefore, study of brain is, is called as neurology. So, there
is, you know, this something which is called as a, a, a, every intractable.
Intractable means unsolvable problem. That is called a pro...,
integration problem. See, integration problem means, you know, researchers have
found that different areas of the brain correlate with different, you know,
functions. So, for example, you know, if I am raising my hand. And bringing it
down. There is the motor nervous system. And then, there is a, you know, area of
the brain which controls that. See, the parietal law. Above. Or whatever. Which
controls that part of the brain. You know. You know. Which, you know, controls
that particular function. So, if, so, for example, so, if a parrot flows, flies
in front of me. It goes right in front of my eyes. You know. The parrot goes in
front of my eyes. Then, there are, you know, four inputs that are going into me.
First is, ok, there is color. Oh, it is green color. It has a red beak. So,
color input goes in. Second is that there is shape. Ok. It is shape like a bird.
You know. Then, you know, you know, third is, say, motion. It is moving. And
say, fourth is, maybe it is chirping, also. So, as a bird is chirping, so, there
is sound. So, then, there is, co..., see, that there is color. There is shape.
There is motion. And there is sound. Now, these four inputs go to four different
parts of the brain. Why? Because, you know, the parts of the brain which, you
know, correlate with, you know, you know, hearing. With, correlate with motion.
Which, which pursue motion. Which pursue shape. And pursue color. They are
different. And even there is no one part of the brain that is connected with all 
other parts. Where, say, integration can happen. Because, you know, it is a very
complex ele..., complex structure. There are mi..., millions of neurons in the
brain. And it is not possible that one neuron is, one neuron, or one group of,
of neurons is connected with everything else. So, that means, all these inputs
are going to different parts of the brain. But when I perceive it, it is not
that I perceive it as discrete inputs. I get a composite picture. You know. It
is not that, ok, at one moment, you know, ok, a color signals come in. Ok.
Something green. Then, after some time, oh, something is, you know, something is
shaped like a bird comes in. Another signal comes in. No. When the shape, we do
not perceive co..., sha..., color. And shape. And motion. And sound separately.
It is synchronous. It, you know, what I am, what, if we want to understand, what
is, what do we mean by asynchronous? Sometimes, if we have done some home-made
videos. Some recording. Say, if the tech..., recording gadget is not very good.
Then, you know, you know, you know, the video and the audio are not synchronised
properly. So, somebody is fighting. And when the person is fighting, you know,
sound effects are not done properly. You know. Even before the fist goes and
hits. Boom. The sound comes. And then, it becomes like, it becomes a joke. So,
what happens is, if there is, if things are asynchronous, then the inte...,
in..., in..., integra..., that indicates the integration is not proper. And that
are, in..., indicates that these are basically different inputs coming from
different sources. So, that integration is vital in our, in..., perception of
things. Properly. So, who does the integration? From the point of neuroscience,
it is an intractable problem. In, not just in practice. But in principle.
Because there are different areas of the brain are concerned with, you know,
different, you know, functions. Then, you know, which, the, is there any
part, one area of the brain which combines all functions? Now, the neuro
surgery, different parts of the brains are also removed. But it is not that
removing one part of the brain completely makes everything else disfunctional.
Yes. Certain parts are important. And their removal can cause, you know, you
know, serious damage. Even irreversible damage. Even damage that makes, that can
be completely incapacitating, also. But the point is, it is not that one area of
the brain is the center. Where everything else is coming. No. You know. You
know. There are different centers for different purposes. So, there, integration
of the sensory inputs does not happen in the physical brain. It happens in the
mind. The mind is the integrator. So, all the signals that come in the brain,
from the brain, they are rooted through the subtle, you know, through the, you
know, through the subtle body. And the subtle body integrates it. And presents
it to the soul. So, presents it to the soul. To just like, you know, say, a
cricket match is going on somewhere. So, you know, you know, the, for, the
cricket match is going on. Then, whatever inputs are there. There is motion.
There is, you know, action. There is, you know, there is motion. There is sound.
Whatever. Those inputs come into the TV screen from various sources. And they
are integrated. And they are displayed. So, that integration is not happening on
the, you know, the, say, not happening on the cricket field. On the cricket
field, inputs are taken. You know. Say, when a cricketer hits a sixer. So, at
that time, there is motion. But along with that that motion, there is sound. So,
now, now, video camera, we are perceiving, you know, the sound. Perceiving the
vi..., video. But then, they may have some other cameras. Which are wrapped close.
Sometimes, you know, there are, there are some sort of cameras. Or sound sensors.
That are placed in the stumps itself. So that if the batsman is, hit the ball.
And there is a nick. So, then the peak, keeper catches it. So, whether there was
actually a nick or not. To detect that, they may check the sound. Because from
the visual point of view, the batsman, the ball are so close to each other. That
he cannot make out whether the ball has got deflected or not. But it might just
be a slight touch. Then, the ball may not get deflected.

So, at that time, how is that perceived? Then, they have to have the sound. So,
the point which I am making is sound and sight, they are different inputs. And
their integration can happen at a different place. The action is happening at
one place. The perception is also happening over, the reception of those sensory
inputs are happening. But afterwards, the integration happens elsewhere. So,
like that, you know, you know, the, we, physical body along with the physical
senses is in this physical world. But and the inputs coming from there. They go
to the physical brain. And from the brain, they are transformed to the mind. And
in the mind, everything is integrated. And then, after the integration, it is
presented to the soul. For, you know, display and response. So, that is, you
know, you know, "manaḥ-ṣaṣ...", you know, so, you know, you know, "adhiṣṭhāya
manaś cāyaṁ". It is all centered around the mind. And then, "viṣayān upasevate".
The soul tries to enjoy accordingly. Now, you know, after this, Krishna
describes, you know, that, you know, Prabhupada writes:

"Consciousness is originally pure, like water. But if we mix water with a
certain color, it changes. Similarly, consciousness is pure, for the spirit soul
is pure."

But the soul changes according to the circumstances that is exposed to. You
know. You know. You know. You know. So, you know, you know, Krishna will now
introduce a very concept in this next verse. We will just look at it briefly. We
will talk about it in the next class, also:

        utkrāmantaṁ sthitaṁ vāpi
        bhuñjānaṁ vā guṇānvitam
        vimūḍhā nānupaśyanti
        paśyanti jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ

So, "utkrāmantaṁ". So, Krishna is talking about the same theme. "utkrāmantaṁ" is
giving up. "sthitaṁ vā...". Giving up the body. "sthitaṁ vāpi". Situated in the
body. "bhuñjānaṁ" means enjoying. "guṇānvitam". Under the spell of the modes.
"vimūḍhā nānupaśyanti". The foolish cannot see. But who can see? "paśyanti
jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ". One who has the eyes of knowledge can see. You know. So,
Krishna is using the word "jñāna-cakṣu" second time in the Bhagavad Gita now.
First time, He used in 13., you know, the last verse of 13, 13th Chapter. 13.35.

        kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor evam
        antaraṁ jñāna-cakṣuṣā

So, one should use "jñāna-cakṣu". The eyes of knowledge to see the difference
between "kṣetra" and "kṣetrajña". So, Krishna is similarly using the word, point
over here. "jñāna-cakṣu". The eyes of knowledge. So, with the eyes of knowledge,
what does one see? Actually, the, one sees that the soul is entangled in
material existence. And the soul is suffering. Without the eyes of knowledge,
one thinks I am enjoying. You know. Drunkard is thinking. I am drinking. But,
you know, sober person sees that this drunkard is sha..., sha..., shackled by
an addiction. And that addiction is making the, you know, you know, per...,
drunkard per..., run here and there. Plur to paused. To somehow try to fulfill
addictions. Addictions. Urges. So, you know, like that, "guṇānvitam". The soul
is subordinate to the, you know, you know, modes. "guṇānvitam". Controlled by
the modes. Impelled by the modes. So, you know, you know, you know, the soul is
under the spell of the modes. Moving here. And moving there. But "vimūḍhā
nānupaśyanti". They are, the foolish person does not perceive this. The foolish
person thinks I am enjoying. I am enjoy..., I am doing this. I am doing that.
But actually, that is, "kartāham iti manyate" is "mūḍhāḥ". So, is, Kri...,
Kri..., what Krishna has told in 3.27:

        prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni
        guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ
        ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā
        kartāham iti manyate

So, same word, "vimūḍha". There, also, the word "vimūḍha" was used in connection
with the modes. So, here, also, the word "vimūḍha" is used connection with the
modes. "guṇānvitam". That one, one is actually coming in a particular body. And
trying to enjoying that buddy. But all this is happening under the influence of
the modes. "guṇānvitam". But "vimūḍhā nānupaśyanti". The foolish person cannot
see. Who can see? "jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ". The person who has the eyes of knowledge.
That person can see. So, Prabhupada writes in the purport, you know, you know,
you know, now, it is an interesting sa..., sa...., statement. Prabhupada says:

"he is suffering different kinds of happiness and distress, under the illusion
of sense enjoyment."

So, it is interesting, normally, we wi..., we will say, suffering different kinds
of distress. But Prabhupada says, suffering different kinds of happiness, also.
So, how can one suffer happiness? So, actually, that happiness is a part of the
package. So, overall, the package is a package of suffering. And, you know, that
package, doesn't that package sometimes a little happiness comes along? And that
happiness traps us. But overall, what we get is suffering. So, we are suff...,
you know, we suffer happiness in the sense that, you know, there is, say, for
example, a person drinks alcohol. So, there is a little happiness over there.
But the overall product of it all is misery. So, one suffers happiness. And one
suffers miseries. One suffers distresses. And it is all under the illusion of
sense enjoyment. Under the illusion. And that illusion is something which we all
can become free of. And we become free by taking shelter of Krishna. So, how one
acquires that "jñāna-cakṣu". And what is the difference between those who
"vimūḍhā" and "anupaśyati". Those who cannot see. And those who can see. You
know. That will be discussed in the next section. Which we will discuss in our
next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
