Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3WnMUIeqBn0 Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya totra vetraika panaye jnana mudraya krishnaya gitamrita
duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the 18th Chapter. We discussed the first section of the, the 18th Chapter
where Krishna is telling how action with detachment, action with the mood of
renunciation is far better than the renunciation of action. So, let us look at a
few analytical points. We have discussed this until verse 9. But let us look at
a few analytical points over here. You know. So, this is the overview of the
chapter. We are in, right now, in the first section on karma-yoga. That it is
better to do one's activities than to renounce one, to renounce activity. So, we
discussed about, you know, kaya. And about sannya..., nitya karma. And ni...,
nitya karma. So, now, we will see some important point. You know. How action in
renunciation, which ultimately culminates in bhakti, you know, integrates the
virtues of both. You know. Karma, here, we had, discussing these three paths.
Karma. Jnana. And bhakti. So, here, bhakti is more or less karma with the
detachment. And attachment, with detachment to matter and attachment to Krishna.
Karma here refers not to karma-yoga. It refers to karma-kanda. So, the positive
of karma is that it is natural. So, the positive of karma is that it is natural.
We all want to be active. You know. But the negative of karma is that most of
the actions that we do cause bondage in material existence. Then, a positive of
jnana is that it is liberating. You know. Because one is not going to get into
activity. You know. It is slowly liberating. But the prob..., negative is that
being inactive is unnatural. So, in he..., in Hegelian analysis, Hegel was a
European thinker, so, he though..., he had the idea that first one proposes one
particular idea. That is thesis. Then, one tries to counter that idea. That is
antithesis. And then, one combines both thesis and antithesis together. And
then, one arrives at a synthesis. Synthesis means a higher understanding which
integrates the virtues of both the contrary schools of thought. You know. While
removing their blemishes. So, we will see how bhakti is a synthesis. You know.
So, when we act out of devotion of the Supreme Lord. Action is natural. But
because that action is not motivated by our own desires, it is motivated for, by
the longing to serve the Lord. So, it is non-libera..., non-binding. It is
liberating. So, in this way, bhakti is natural as well as liberating. And the
negatives of both. That is binding. Our natural are removed. So, this is the
spirit in which we act. So, now, when we talk about jnana, there are different
kinds of jnanis. So, those who do not practice bhakti at all. They are just
perpetuating jnana sadhana. There is, also practice bhakti. But offend the
Lord's form. They both fall back. This is what Chakravarti Pada explains. And
there is practice bhakti to attain "sayujya". So, this is referred to by 12.3,
4, 5. And again, it will come in 18..., 18.54-55. And practice bhakti. And by
devotee association, attain prema. They are the topmost jnanis. So, we will
discuss about these jnanis, you know, more when we come to 18.54 and 55. But
suffice it to say that the word jnani should not be equated just with mayavadis
all the time. So, Krishna has said earlier that "naiva tyāga-phalaṁ labhet".
That if one, you know, renounces out of, you know, you know, you know, you know,
frustration because "kāya-kleśa-bhayāt tyajet", then "tyāga", we will not get
the "phalaṁ" of "tyāga". Renunciation itself is not the fruit. Our goal for
renunciation is purification and illumination. We want to be free from our
anarthas. And we are going to get higher understanding. So, misery can be an
initial spark. But not a sustainer for renunciation. This is fi..., if you want
sustainer, then, and there has to be philosophical conviction. And there has to
be devotional attraction. So, we discussed this earlier. The renunciation is not
of lack of ambition. But it is superambition. Renounced not because what the
world offers is too tough. But too little. One who renounces, the person thinks
that, oh, there must, the, oh, even the most glamorised happiness in this world
is so temporary. There must be some higher happiness in life. And I want that
higher happiness. You know. You know. You know. In material life, the pleasure
is not worth the trouble. Whereas in spiritual life, the happiness is worth
whatever the trouble is required. So, you know, now, we are going forward.

        kāya-kleśa-bhayāt tyajet

That is what we had discussed in an earlier verse. So, "kāya-kleśa" is trouble
for the body. Now, Krishna has selen, seven, sold in 17.5 and 6 that do not
torment the body unnecessarily. You know.

        māṁ caivāntaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ tān viddhy āsura-niścayān

So, Krishna talks about those who trouble, the, torment their bodies out of a
false sense of illusion. And, you know, they are, you know, you know, they are
foolish. So, do not, you know, Krishna says that they are demoniac, actually, He
says. But then, He sa..., so, there, He is, there are two extremes. One is by
torment the body. And the other is we pamper the body. And if some, if any
activity causes us trouble, we want to give it up. Even if it is a prescribed
duty. So, that is also not good. That means we focus not on what causes trouble.
Or what gives pleasure. But on what will be required for bringing about
purification. Elevation. And liberation. So, accept bodily trouble when it is
necessary for the sake of duty. Prabhupada's standard example is that when we,
you know, have to take, bathe in the morning. Or a wi..., housewife has to cook
in the summer. Like that. So, this is what we have discussed until now. Now, let
us move forward. And discuss from 18.10 onwards. So, in, you know, until now,
18.7 to 9, Krishna has talked about "tyāgaḥ" in the three modes. Now, He will
colla..., elaborate on how "tyāgaḥ" will lead to liberation. You know. How, now
"tyāgaḥ" in terms of "tyāgaḥ" in goodness will lead to liberation.

        na dveṣṭy akuśalaṁ karma kuśale nānuṣajjate tyāgī sattva-samāviṣṭo
medhāvī chinna-saṁśayaḥ

So, "na dveṣṭy akuśalaṁ karma". "akuśalaṁ karma" is that work which is
inauspicious. "kuśalaṁ" can mean expert. It can mean, you know, expertise in
terms of that which brings good results. So, there is some works which cause,
which are pleasurable to us. Some ways which go, which are unpleasant to us.
But, you know, "na dveṣṭy akuśalaṁ karma". So, it is some works which we do not
like to do. But still, we do them. Because it is duty. "kuśale nānuṣajjate". And
some works we like to do. But that does not mean that, we just, you know, we
just keep doing them. And forget that there is a higher reality to life. So,
bo..., either way, one does not let the material dominate one's conceptions.
"tyāgī sattva-samāviṣṭo". So, such a person is a "tyāgī". Who is neither
attached. Nor averse. "sattva-samāviṣṭo". Such a person is absorbed in
"sattva-guna". You know. In goodness, absorbed. "medhāvī chinna-saṁśayaḥ".
"medhāvī". Such a person is truly intelligent. Because that intelligence has
been able to comprehend that the material does not have to have a monopoly on
the emotional. That means all our emotions do not have to be restricted to
material things. We can have em..., emotions for higher things, also. You know.
So, "medhāvī chinna-saṁśayaḥ". "chinna-saṁśayaḥ". "chinn...", you know, that
person's, all doubts are removed. Because that person has understood that, you
know, the art of work is of to work with detachment. Otherwise, one has so many
doubts. If I do this, will I get enjoyment? Or if I get the enjoyment, will I
also get bondage? How can I save myself from bondage? Should I renounce all the
work? All this "saṁśayaḥ" is there. All the "saṁśayaḥ"s go away for a person who
acts, who is "medhāvī". And who acts in karma-yoga. So, at this point, Krishna
is talking about karma-yoga. And how this karma-yoga will mature into bhakti
yoga? Krishna will explain in the later part of this chapter. Prabhupada
explains everything from the perspective of bhakti yoga over here. Let us move
forward. Which is what? So, bhakti yoga will come later on. Prabhupada is giving
us everything from the point of view, the conclusion. You know. Now, the
question may be, some people may say that, why should one work? You know. If one
wants to avoid bondage, it is best to avoid work, also. Then, there will be no
bondage. So, then, Krishna is telling over here, actually, that is not possible.

        na hi deha-bhṛtā śakyaṁ tyaktuṁ armāṇy aśeṣataḥ yas tu karma-phala-tyāgī
sa tyāgīty abhidhīyate

You know. You know. "na hi deha-bhṛtā śakyaṁ". You know. You know. "śakyaṁ". It
is not possible, oh, Arjuna, "śakyaṁ". For "deha-bhṛtā". For one, who is a
living entity, having a body. "deh...", "deha-bhṛtā śakyaṁ". "tyaktuṁ karmāṇy
aśeṣataḥ". To give all work up completely. Comp..., "aśeṣataḥ". Krishna has used
the word "aśeṣataḥ" several times. You know. Most prominently, in 7.2, you know,
where He has stated that, you know:

        jñānaṁ te ’haṁ sa-vijñānam idaṁ vakṣyāmy aśeṣataḥ

So, I am speaking to you in complete. With nothing left. So, like that, "tyaktuṁ
karmāṇy aśeṣataḥ". So, without anything remaining. Without any "śeṣa" remaining,
to give up all karma is not possible. You know. You know. Therefore, you know,
"yas tu karma-phala-tyāgī". You know. "karma-phala-tyāgī". That one who is a
"karma-phala-tyāgī", "sa tyāgīty abhidhīyate". You know. So, therefore, one who
ives up the fruits of work, that person is it to renunciate. Now, because,
ultimately, the point is, as long as we are embodied, the body itself, even for
its basic survival, requires us to do certain activities. Voluntary activities.
And as science has advanced more, we also come to know that there are so many
activities which go on inside the body even without our knowledge. They are
involuntary activities. Right now, all of us are breathing. Food is getting
digested. The, you know, blood is getting circulated. And all this is happening.
There is no way we can stop it. So, you know, you know, "na hi". And this is not
just, this is just one kind of activity. But even the kind of activity is
required for basic bodily maintenance. We have to eat. And we have to do
something for that. We have to protect ourselves. So, all this kind of bon...,
bod..., you know, action, will caught bondage. And how does one free, stay free
from that? Giving up all action is not possible. Because that will make even
survival impossible. So, from a practical point of view, it is impossible from
our survival perspective. And moreover, it is our very nature to be active.
Whether it be embodied nature. Whether it is by liberated nature. The soul also
is active. So, this same theme has been talked by, you know, Krishna in the
Third, when He says:

        na hi kaścit kṣaṇam api jātu tiṣṭhaty akarma-kṛt kāryate hy avaśaḥ karma
sarvaḥ prakṛti-jair guṇaiḥ

So, He says there:

        na hi kaścit kṣaṇam api jātu tiṣṭhaty akarma-kṛt

That even for one "kṣaṇam", even for one moment, it is not a..., possible to
stay away from action. Therefore, one should act in a way that does not cause
bondage. "sa tyāgīty abhidhīyate". Then, after that, let us move to the next
verse. Yeah. So:

        aniṣṭam iṣṭaṁ miśraṁ ca tri-vidhaṁ karmaṇaḥ phalam bhavaty atyāgināṁ
pretya na tu sannyāsināṁ kvacit

So, you know, so, now, Krishna concludes that yes, it is better to renounce, you
know, than to, to act with renunciation. But now, He is giving a broad
contradiction. One person who is attached. And a person who is detached.
"atyāgināṁ". And "sannyāsināṁ". So, an "atyāgināṁ". A person who is not
renounced. That means a person who is attached. That person will get the
results. What kind of results? "aniṣṭam iṣṭaṁ miśraṁ ca". That, you know, you
know, when we do good karma, we get good results. "iṣṭaṁ", that is. When we do
bad karma, we get bad result. That is "aniṣṭam". And then, there is "miśraṁ".
Sometimes, our actions are comb..., a combination of the good and bad. And
accordingly, we get results which are good and bad.

        aniṣṭam iṣṭaṁ miśraṁ ca tri-vidhaṁ karmaṇaḥ phalam

These three kinds of fruits are there. And, you know:

        bhavaty atyāgināṁ pretya

So, Krishna has used the word "pretya", also, earlier. "pretya" means after
death. "atyāgināṁ pretya". So, for one who is not renounced, that person will
get all these results in due course of time.

        na tu sannyāsināṁ kvacit

But a sannyasi will not get these results. A sannyasi will not get, the sannyasi
will sta..., you know, stay free from these results. And will eventually become
liberated. So, basically, Krishna is concluding here that means there are two
broad contra..., contradictions which Krishna is making. First is, between a
person who is acting, you know, who, previous verses, you know, contrast between
the person who is trying to give up all action. And whereas a person who is, you
know, acting, but with detachment. So, a person who is trying to give up all
actions, that is practically not possible. A person who is giving, acting
without attachment, that person will neg..., become liberated. That is one
comparison. Now, here, both of them are trying to, you know, seek liberation.
Both the persons who is trying to give up attachmen..., action. And the person
who is trying to do action. But without attachment. Both are seeking liberation.
But among these two, Krishna is saying, what is preferable? To act with
detachment. But now, you know, Krishna does a broad comparison. One is a person
who is acting with detachment. And a person who is acting without detachment.
So, if we compare these two, a person who is acting with attachment will lead to
bondage. You know. You know. Will experience bondage. And a person who is acting
with detachment will experience liberation. You know. "na tu sannyāsināṁ
kvacit". Krishna says certainly. Sannyasi will not become bound. Even slightly.
Now, we move the second section. You know. The jnana of a karma yogi, which
keeps the karma yogi free from bondage. Let us look at that. You know. So,
Krishna will provide this expression in terms of sankhya yoga. Sankhya. You
know. The analysis of material elements into material factors.

        pañcaitāni mahā-bāho kāraṇāni nibodha me sāṅkhye kṛtānte proktāni
siddhaye sarva-karmaṇām

So, "pañcaitāni mahā-bāho". Oh, "mahā-bāho". Krishna is second time referring to
Arjuna in this, this chapter as "mahā-bāho". "pañcaitāni". Five, there are.
"kāraṇāni nibodha me". There are five factors of action. You know. "sāṅkhye
kṛtānte proktāni". "sāṅkhye". Within an..., Vedic analysis, "ni...", "me",
"sāṅkhye". "kṛtānte". So, for the "kṛta". For the action to lead to its, you
know, con..., "ante". To its conclusion. "proktāni". So, these are known in
sankhya as five action. Five factors. "siddhaye sarva-karmaṇām". If a fact, what
if a, now, of, action is, to, leads to its fruit, these five factors are
involved. And Prabhupada explains the ultimate control is invested in the
Supersoul. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada gives an interesting analysis over
here.

"Sāṅkhya means the stock of knowledge, and Vedānta is the final stock of
knowledge accepted by all leading ācāryas."

So, "Sāṅkhya" is the stock of knowledge. Now, what does stock mean? You know.
The word "stock" can mean that which support. That which sustains like a flower
has a stock. And then, you know, it has a lower part by which it is connected
with the tree. Or the shrub. Or the creeper. And then, there is the body of the
flower. The upper part of the flower. So, like that, the fully blossomed flower
is the "Vedānta". And "Sāṅkhya" is the stock. So, "Sāṅkhya" and "Vedānta" are
not conn..., disconnected. They are connected. With "Sāṅkhya", it is
metaphysical division is accepted as an integral part of "Vedānta". But
"Vedānta" goes beyond matter to spirit. "Sāṅkhya" and "Vedānta" as we have
discussed, They are two different systems of, you know, thought. Schools of
thought. Two different philosophies. Within the Vedic, you know, tradition,
within the six systems of philosophy, and among them, "Vedānta" is considered
the conclusion. You know. So, Kri..., Krishna is saying that this "Vedānta"
conclusion is there. But now, it does not reject "Sāṅkhya", you know, in its
entirety. So, "Sāṅkhya", conceptual analysis being used over here. "siddhaye
sarva-karmaṇām". For any action, to attain its perfection, these factors are
involved. Now, let us go to the next verse to see what are those factors.

        adhiṣṭhānaṁ tathā kartā karaṇaṁ ca pṛthag-vidham vividhāś ca pṛthak
ceṣṭā daivaṁ caivātra pañcamam

So, "adhiṣṭhānaṁ tathā kartā". "adhiṣṭhānaṁ". You know. You know. So,
"adhiṣṭhānaṁ" means the place. "kartā" is the doer. "karaṇa...", "karaṇaṁ ca
pṛthag-vidham". "karaṇaṁ" refers to the instruments through which ac..., action
is done. That mean..., that refers to the senses. "vividhāś ca pṛthak ceṣṭā".
The various endeavors that are done. And then, lastly, "daivaṁ caivātra
pañcamam". "daivaṁ" is destiny. Or the will of the Lord. Or the, will of, or we
could say, the Supersoul, specifically. Because we are talking about material
actions over here. Let us try to understand these five factors with a simple
example. So:

        adhiṣṭhānaṁ tathā kartā karaṇaṁ ca pṛthag-vidham

So, for example, if there is a cricket. If there is a cricket, say, a batsman is
batting. And another batsman has to hit a sixer. You know. Has to hit a big shot
on the, you know, ba..., delivery. Now, what all the factors that are involved?
First of all, the batsman has to be alive. You know. Dead batsman cannot hit.
So, "kartā". "kartā" is there. And then, after that, there is "karaṇaṁ" that is
required. You know. The batsman may be there. But if the hand is fractured. It
is, the hand is in one, one plaster. And the other hand is in another plaster.
He cannot even hold the bats. So, how can the batsman hit a sixer? So, there is
the, "karaṇaṁ" is there. So, like this. So, that means, first of all, there has
to be a doer. And there has to be instrument for doing the action. But this is
count. But f..., along with that, along with, Krishna is going deeper analysis.
So, it is not that any term, they can hire, they can just, somebody is bowling.
Some top class bowler is bowling. And just, somebody just swings the bat. And
goes for a sixer. It does not happen like that. There has to be endeavor. There
has to be practice. Practice makes a man perfect. Even if a person is talented.
You know. For talent to transform into achievement, there has to be serious
practice. So, so, that is, you know, you know, that is "ceṣṭā". "vividhāś ca
pṛthak ceṣṭā". And then, there is "daivaṁ caivātra pañcamam". Actually, every
batsman, or every co..., sports person, in fact, knows in general that destiny
plays a significant role in life. In all walks of life, actually. Without
destiny, nothing, you know, noth..., ultimately works out. Now, cricket, you
know, as, for example, sport stars, all cricketers have their own, many
cricketers have their own superstitions. You know. There are some cricketers who
may, who may say, you know, tie person, you know, tie a sort of kerchief around
their neck. Or some sort of bandana around their neck. Or something like that.
Because they feel that is sign of good fortune. You know. One famous cricketer,
you know, who would keep a red handkerchief in his pocket. With one third of the
pocket, a handkerchief showing out. And two third stuffed inside. There was
another cricketer who would always, you know, when he would go out to bat,
before that, he would go to the washrooms. In the dressing room. And make sure
that every commode's lid was closed. His idea was that if the commode lids are
not closed, then it, I will not be able to perform well. So, you know, now, we
may say that this is stupid. What is the commode's lid close got to do with the
persons that were able to bat in the crick..., field. Yes. That particular
linkage may be superstitious. But the point is that any performer that these
performers know that actually peak performance is not just a matter of their own
diligence. You know. There is some higher providence also involved in it. And
these are various ways in which they are trying to reach out to the higher
providence. Reach out to higher providence. That is what they are trying to do
over here. So, you know, generally, as we have discussed. You know. Say,
cricketers also. They may be bat..., playing. And they suddenly, you know,
that person who is a champion, batsman suddenly swingning the bat. And finds his
middle stump knocked out. That person. It is clean bowled. It is dismissed. So,
then, that person does not want to do that. That person is a champion batsman.
You know. Yet, why does the person become bowled like that? Because the,
imagine, he is out of form. Now, who wants to be out of form? Actually, nobody
wants to be out of form. That person li..., person goes out of form. So, these
are not factors, you know, which are in our control entirely. So, sometimes,
despite our diligence, despite our strong desire and, you know, willpower,
things may just not work. So, every performer knows that there has to be some
higher factor that is involved. And that higher factor, now, of course, there is
s..., a contrary saying that fortune favors the brave. That means those who
tr..., are courageous. And those who are enterprising. And those who are, try
various things. You know. You know. For the, fortune favors them. So, that is
true. Fortune favors the brave. There is no doubt about that. But that does not
mean that a wise person should not, you know, you know, you know, you know, that
does not mean that a wise person should not acknowledge that there is fortune.
There is fortune. There is some, some higher factor which is onvolu..., also
involved in our discussion. In our analysis. Now, this is the fourth factor
which we have discucsed. We have not yet discussed the first. That is
"adhiṣṭhānaṁ". What is "adhiṣṭhānaṁ"? "adhiṣṭhānaṁ", Prabhupada translates, is
a place of action. And then, in that, you know, that is what he use in the word
toward. And, you know, you know, then, Prabhupada puts in the, you know, you
know, in the sentence translation as the act..., the body. So, the place of
action. In general, we have, for ex..., you know, my overall body also needs to
be healthy. And my specific, you know, organ which I am going to use for that
particular action has to also, have, be healthy. So, for a batsman, say, the
bat..., ha..., hands have to be in s..., good condition. And along with that,
the body also has to be in a basic fitne..., basically fit. Or for that matter,
if a person is going to speak. So, for a, you know, you know, person who is an
orator, the specific organ which is used for performance over there is the
power, is the speaking organ. This is speaking organ, that "karaṇaṁ" has to be
important. That is important. Vitally important. Indispensably important. And
that has to be functional. But along with that, the whole body also has to be
functional. So, some, some commentators also used the word "adhiṣṭhānaṁ" to
refer to the place of action. So, if we could say that the arena also has to be
conducive. So, you know, batsman, if the bats person ha..., batsman has to
perform, then there has to be, you know, you know, the pitch has to be, you
know, good. You know. If the pitch is very bad. Then, for the batsman to perform
becomes a little more difficult. That is also one factor in the performance. So,
like that, these factors have to be considered. So, you know, basically, the
point is, Krishna is telling there are these different factors of action. And
one should consider these factors of action. And then, act accordingly. So,
si..., you know, why is Krishna talking about these factors of action? He
describe that a wise person, a jnani acknowledges all these factors. And that is
why does not, you know, you know, does not arrogate to oneself. Means assume for
oneself. Credit when credit is not due. So, let us go to the next verse. You
know. You know. So:

        śarīra-vāṅ-manobhir yat
        karma prārabhate naraḥ
        nyāyyaṁ vā viparītaṁ vā
        pañcaite tasya hetavaḥ

So, "śarīra-vāṅ-manobhir yat". "śarīra-vāṅ-manobhir". You know. So, Body. Mind.
And speech.

        śarīra-vāṅ-manobhir yat
        karma prārabhate naraḥ

The "karma" that a person starts that may sometimes "nyāyyaṁ vā viparītaṁ vā".
That means "nyāyyaṁ" is that which is right. "viparītaṁ" is that which is wrong.
"nyāyyaṁ vā viparītaṁ vā". That means sometimes when the wha..., activity which
we do, it sometimes gives good results. Sometimes bad results. But for whatever
the results are coming, "pañcaite tasya hetavaḥ". These five factors are
involved in getting those results. For "śarīra-vāṅ-manobhir". You know. That
means, you know, we may do activities with the body. With the mind. And with the
words. But still, you know, and those activities may give good or bad results.
But whatever, they are the activities, bodily, mental, verbal, whether they be
auspicious or inauspicious, all of them involve these five factors. So, Krishna
is empha..., emphasising, you know, you know, the, you know, you know, the
pervasiveness of these five factors of action. And Prabhupada in the purport
mentions that, right and wrong is determined by whether it is according to
scripture. Or not according to scripture. So, let us move to the next verse.

        tatraivaṁ sati kartāram
        ātmānaṁ kevalaṁ tu yaḥ
        paśyaty akṛta-buddhitvān
        na sa paśyati durmatiḥ

"tatraivaṁ sati kartāram". So, you know, you know, "tatraivaṁ" means among
these. "kartāram". "kartāram" means the worker. "ātmānaṁ kevalaṁ tu yaḥ". So, if
somebody thinks that I am the only doer. And there is no doer apart from me.

        ātmānaṁ kevalaṁ tu yaḥ
        paśyaty akṛta-buddhitvān

So, such a person is a "paśyaty akṛta-buddhitvān". Such a per..., one who sees
like this is, "akṛta-buddhi". That means there is, person's intelligence is not
very, you know, you know, is not good. You know. It is not satisfactory.
"akṛta-buddhi". The "buddhi" is not able to do "kṛta" properly. The "buddhi" is
not functioning properly. "na sa paśyati durmatiḥ". Such a person is not the
seer. "durmatiḥ". "durmatiḥ" means misdirected consciousness. So, misdirected
consciousness. So, this is the thrust of Krishna's ba..., argument that do not
assume that you are the only doer. Sometimes, when the script..., you know,
scripture, Bhagavad Gita says that, you know, do not think that we are the
doers. We should not think we are the doers. What does it mean? You know. What
does it mean? It is very difficult to, for people to understand this point. What
does it mean? That, you know, okay, I am not the doer. If I was not be speaking
here, you know, then people would not be hearing what I am speaking. If I am,
say, not, If I would, some scientist has not done the invention, then the
particular, you know, gadget would not have got invented. You know. If a per...,
partiular, say, general had not read the, led the army properly, the war would
not have been won. So, how could one say that one is not the doer? So, one is
the doer. No doubt. But here, the illu..., but the illusion is to think that one
is the only doer. Because even if that general is intelligent. And general makes
the right decisions in the war. But still, there are so many other factors which
are involved. Which have to go right for the, you know, decision, you know, to
lead to success. So, therefore, to think that I am the only doer. And therefore,
the results are due only to me. That is, there is "paśyaty akṛta-buddhitvān".
Such a person's intelligence is not proper. And therefore, "na sa paśyati
durmatiḥ". That person cannot see actually. Because the person's "durmatiḥ". The
consciousness is so obsessed with ego that one cannot understand what is
happening. The thrust of the point is that actually, you know, the, one should
acknowledge, especially the role of the Supersoul as Prabhupada mentions. You
know. We have to acknowledge the role of the Supersoul in whatever is happening.
You know. You know. So, if one focuses only on the material causes, then one
does not get a proper understanding of things. And if one thinks only on oneself
at the ego level, then also, one does not get understanding of things. So, you
know:

"the final cause is the Supreme, the Personality of Godhead."

And that has to be acknowledged. And that will even say, so, now, Krishna goes
further. And takes from the, from the alternative perspective. You know. The
converse perspective. That if one has this knowledge, one will not get bound:

        yasya nāhaṅkṛto bhāvo
        buddhir yasya na lipyate
        hatvāpi sa imāḻ lokān
        na hanti na nibadhyate

So, "yasya nāhaṅkṛto bhāvo". "na". "ahaṅkṛtaḥ". When for a person, there is no
"ahaṅkṛ". And without an "ahaṅkṛ", with such a "bhāvaḥ", one acts. "buddhir
yasya na lipyate". Such a person's intelligence is not entangled. And then,
"hatvāpi sa imāḻ lokān". If that person does even an activity just as binding as
killing. You know. Murder. You know. You know. Or killing is considered to be a
very severe crime. And in one sense, what a ksatriya does is killing. So, this
is the reference to Ar..., oh, Arjuna's, you know, dilemma on the battlefield.
Should I fight or not fight? Should I kill or not kill? So, Krishna says, if one
does not have "ahaṅkṛ". If one does not think that one is the doer. Then, even
if one acts, "hatvāpi sa imāḻ lokān". You know. "hatvāpi". Even if one kills,
still "na hanti na nibadhyate". One will not become bound. And one will not, you
know, be killing also. So, is this verse a license for indiscriminate killing?
No. No. Not at all. Somebod..., can a murderer say that, you know, actually, a
murder..., or say, a murderer says I will go and, you know, drop bombs in
people. And say, I am not the doer. No. No. No. So, is, the, gree..., renouncing
doership is not just a simple verbalisation. You know. I am not the doer. Or,
the, you know, the police will say then, we will catch you. We will hang you.
And we are also not the doers. Anybody can do anything. One person slaps another
person. I am not the doer. You know. Another person slaps the person. I am also
not the doer. You know. That will, this is, we cannot have, you know, in the
name of saying that I am not the doer, we cannot, you know, you know, reject
responsibility for our actions. So, we, it is we who are the choosers. And it is
we who are the doers. So, we are responsible for our actions. But when we think
that we are the only doers, that becomes the illusion. Even terrorists know
that, they may make plans to pull off a major suicide bombing project. Or
something like that. They may want to blow up a building. Or anything like that.
When then, it is not that they can do it independently. They also need, you know,
when so many things have to go right. Otherwise, they may blow up, you know,
things before they reach the place itself. Or they may blow up at the right
place. But at the wrong time. Maybe too early. Or too late. You know. You know.
Or the blomb..., bombs may not get detonated only. So many things go, you know,
wrong from their perspective. And right from the perspective, the innocent
victims, who rather have, so, have been blown to "thereens...", you know, blown
to "smithereens", actually. So, the point is, there has, when there is, you
know, when a person has proper knowledge. And then, one acts according to duty,
you know, prior to this verse, Krishna has talked about, you know, how, you
know, you know, one has to ack..., "niyataṁ saṅga-rahitam". One has to work
according to karma. According to scripture. One has to do one's prescribed
duties. And while doing one's prescribed duties, one should do them in the mood
of detachment. So, whi..., whimsical, non-scriptural, arbitrary action, that
will cause bondage. No doubt about it. And that is not the kind of action that
the scripture recommends at all. And that is not the kind of con..., action that
came license as per this, or rationalised by this verse. What this verse is
assuming is that the action is according to scripture. And the action is done
with detachment. It is a part of one's prescribed duty. You know. And even if
the prescribed duty seems as, as heinous. As bloody as killing. That will not
involve any disaster because, you know, it is actually, you know, done
"nāhaṅkṛto bhāvo". It is done without attachment. Without the mentality of
"kṛtaḥ". Now, Krishna will go into deeper analysis of action by talking about
analysis action in different set of terms. Let us look at it. So, Prabhupada
gives the example here. You know. You know.

"When a soldier kills under the command of a superior officer, he is not subject
to be judged. But if a soldier kills on his own personal account, then he is
certainly judged by a court of law."

So, we move forward from here. So, point here is that, when one recognises that
one is acting for a higher purpose, then one will not get bound. Because one
is not having the "ahaṅkṛ" of doing, of acting. So, you know:

        jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ parijñātā
        tri-vidhā karma-codanā
        karaṇaṁ karma karteti
        tri-vidhaḥ karma-saṅgrahaḥ

So, now, this verse is a very important verse to understand, you know, the flow
of the Gita in the next twenty verses or so. So:

        jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ parijñātā
        tri-vidhā karma-codanā

"codanā" means impetus. Or inspiration. What is it that cau..., you know, what
are the, is, that is involved in action? There is "jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ parijñātā".
There is knowledge. The objective of knowledge. And the knower. We will
understand this. And:

        karaṇaṁ karma karteti
        tri-vidhaḥ karma-saṅgrahaḥ

You know. So, "karaṇaṁ" is the instruments by which action is done. "karma" is
the action. And the "kartā" is the doer. So, let us understand this succe...,
carefully. And then, we will move forward to the next concepts. You know. So,
you know, you know, you know, vi..., suppose:

        jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ parijñātā
        tri-vidhā karma-codanā

What does it refer to? You know. Suppose, that person goes for sightseeing. A
person goes to a natural vicinity. And wants to look at birds, say, you know,
one, one's, would like to look at the flowers. And the clouds. And the mountain.
And the birds. And the animals. The flower, and for an hour, one wants to see.
So, at that time, there is "jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ parijñātā". "jñeyaṁ" is the person.
"jñey...", you know, the person who is the knower. Or who wants to be the
knower. "jñānaṁ" is the process of knowledge. And "parijñātā". So, "jñānaṁ
jñeyaṁ parijñātā". You know. Krishna talks about these three. You know. You
know. Sorry. "parijñātā" is the knower. Sorry. And "jñeyaṁ" is the object of
knowledge. So, "jñānaṁ" is knowledge itself. So, now, what is the object of
knowledge? Ok. The object, so, the "jñānaṁ" would be, person will observe. Ok.
Observe the birds. Observe the animals. Observe the clouds. Observe the flowers.
Like that. Observation. And then, the, generally, the, say, the goal of
knowledge would be, maybe to get, to have satisfaction. I know so many birds. I
know so many animals. Or it may be a deepened appreciation of nature. It may be
a direc..., if we go to, at a deeper level, ultimately, whatever we do is for
happiness. So, there is knowledge. And there is objective of knowledge. You
know. When, say, students study in college, they may study engineering. Or some
other professional fields like that. You know. Often, it is not that they love
that field. They study that field because that is what will give them enjoyment.
Or which, it is what will give them employment. Rather. Not enjoyment.
Employment. And after employment, they feel we can get enjoyment. So, that
means, when they are studying, also, their goal is not just knowledge of that
study. Their objective is something else. Objective is employment. And
enjoyment. 35:47
