Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UB98gpmTcr4
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are about to begin the last chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. There are 700 verses
that are there in the Gita. Se..., the 78 verses are present in the last
chapter. So, the 18th Chapter is the longest chapter. Second longest is the
Second Chapter with 72 verses. And then, there are other chapters. Seven..., the
11th Chapter has 55 verses. Like that. So, this is by far the longest. And this
is also, as chapter that gives an overview of the whole Bhagavad Gita. And then,
it concludes in bhakti. So, this chapter is called as, you know, you know,
"Moksha Sanyasa Yoga". So, that kind of renunciation which will lead to
liberation. And Prabhupada translates it as "The Perfection of Renunciation".
So, let us look at the, you know, chapter overview before we move forward into
the contents of the chapter. You know. You know. You know. So, in this, you
know, first, you know, 12 verses talk about karma-yoga. Essentially, they talk
about how, how while doing karma-yoga, one can stay free from bondage. Then, you
know, this point is explained philosophically further in the second section.
There, it is described what keeps a, you know, what keeps a karma-yogi free from
bondage is the jnana of the karma-yogi. So, that is talked about in verses 13 to
17. Which describe the five factors of action. And they describe how whe..., you
know, when one understand these five factors of actions properly. And then, acts.
One will stay free from bondage. Then, in verses 18 to 40, the jnana for
karma-yogi, second parts are talked about. Second part is, what is the jnana?
That will, karma-yogi needs to have, this is about the modes of material nature.
So, the, in this case, this analysis of, further of, what are the elements of
action. And how those elements of action, you know, you know, like karma.
Kartha. Jnana. You know. You know. You know. Then, dhruti. And determination.
Knowledge. Doer. Action. And ultimately, happiness. How all these things, you
know, affect a person when that person is doing activities. And then,
accordingly, how, depending on which mode these are done in. There are a
prop..., appropriate result that comes about. Then, 41 to 48 talks about
karma-yoga offered to Krishna. So, after describing an overview of the previous
chapters. Which some deepen con..., the understanding, you know, karma-yoga,
now, this chapter moves onto an explanation of how karma-yoga can be offered to
Krishna. You know. You know. Then, after that, 49 to 55 talks about how
jnana-yoga, you know, with bhakti can be offered to Krishna. You know. How one
can perform jnana-yoga. And how it ultimately leads to bhakti. And then, the
last section, 56 to 78 talks about, you know, the glory of bhakti yoga. You
know. So, let us look at these chapters by the look, these verses. By starting
from the first verse.

        arjuna uvāca

        sannyāsasya mahā-bāho
        tattvam icchāmi veditum
        tyāgasya ca hṛṣīkeśa
        pṛthak keśi-niṣūdana

So, you know, you know, "sannyāsasya mahā-bāho". You know. Krishna is te..., you
know, is asking, being asked by Arjuna. You know. "tattvam icchāmi veditum". So,
I want to understand the truth of renunciation. "sannyāsasya", the truth of
renunciation. And then, gives another word. "tyāgasya ca hṛṣīkeśa". The, by the,
so, I have to, I want to understand "tyāgasya". Renunciation. And "pṛthak".
"pṛthak" means the difference. So, one understand renunciation. And I want to,
you know, understand, you know, "sa...", you know, "tatt...", "tyāgasya".
Pra..., now, Prabhupada translates this as the, you know, purpose of
renunciation and the renounced order of life. You know. You know. So, the
renounced order of life is sannyasa. And renunciation itself is "tyāgasya". So,
you know, "pṛthak keśi-niṣūdana". So, in this verse, three names of the Lord are
used over here. Which all indicate the, the Lord's capacity to destroy the demon
of doubt. So, He, the Lord is "mahā-bāho". He is very, He has very powerful
arms. You know. Then, He is "keśi-niṣūdana". He is the killer of "keśi". And
"hṛṣīkeśa". So, He is the, you know, Lord of the senses. He, and, you know,
senses are very formidable. And the senses need to be controlled. You know. You
know. You know. So, like that, you know, "pṛthak keśi-niṣūdana". Now, when we
talk about this, what exactly is the question? And how is it related with what
has been talked about earlier? You know. In this chapter. When we talk about
Krishna. And Arjuna's discussion. And the 17th Chapter ended with a mention that
Krishna is the, you know, Krishna recommends sacrifice according to scripture.
And if one is not doing sacrifice according to scripture, then gradually, by
having "oṁ tat sad". By chanting of the names of the Lord, one can, you know,
you know, scri..., spiritualise the sacrifices. So, there is no immediate, you
know, connection between Krishna's concluding verses, the 17th Chapter. And the
18th verse was, the 18th Chapter's first verse. Arjuna's question is generic.
Arjuna's question is generic in the sense that it is not related with,
specifically, to what has happened earlier. But Arjuna wants a conceptual
clarification of what should be His ultimate course of action. So, should, you
know, Arjuna has definitely got some understanding. Now, we, you know, by this
time, in fact, as we know, when he speaks at the end of Chatur Shloki Bhagavad
Gita in 10.12 and 13.

        paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma
        pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān

So, like that, when he glorifies the supreme position of the Supreme Lord. The
acharyas explained at that time, you know, you know, you know, Arjuna's illusion
is gone. You know. You know. Arjuna has understood the essential message of the
Gita. And he himself is expressing that message. But then, the subsequent
questions are, as the "Bhāgavatam" says "loka-hitaṁ nṛpa". For the, you know,
for the benefit of other people. Or the Bhagavad Gita uses word
"loka-saṅgraham". For the main..., maintenance of the world. How, how, by, you
know, said, by providing, you know, insights for, of how a person can live in a
proper way. You know. As per scriptural guidance. That is what is talked about
in the subsequent chapters based on the way Arjuna asks questions. So, Arjuna is
taking broad concepts. Broad terms. That are known in the Vedic context. But
that are not always, you know, you know, available. You know. In terms of a
holistic understanding. So, you know, you know, here, Krishna is giving Arjuna a
holistic understanding. You know. And in that connection is asking, what is
"tyāgasya"? And what is, you know, "sannyāsasya"? You know. So, now, after
describing this, that means Arjuna's essential question is, should I fight? Or
should I not fight? So, should I just renounce in spirit? Or should I renounce
in, in deed, also? So, that is the question. You know. Now, we will see how
Krishna responds to this. You know. You know. So, 18.2:

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        kāmyānāṁ karmaṇāṁ nyāsaṁ
        sannyāsaṁ kavayo viduḥ
        sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ
        prāhus tyāgaṁ vicakṣaṇāḥ

So, you kno,w "kāmyānāṁ karmaṇāṁ nyāsaṁ". So, "kāmyānāṁ karmaṇāṁ" means for
"kāmyā karma". "nyāsaṁ" means gri..., renunciation. "sannyāsaṁ kavayo viduḥ".
So, the wise declare that what is "sannyāsaṁ"? "sannyāsaṁ" means to give up
"kāmyā karma". And "sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ". And giving up all kinds of work.
That is "prāhus tyāgaṁ vicakṣaṇāḥ". "tyāgaṁ vicakṣaṇāḥ". That is actually
"tyāgaṁ". So, what doe..., what is Krishna talking about essentially in this
chapter? Let us try to understand this over here. You know. So, "tyāgaṁ" versus
"sannyāsaṁ". You know. So, there are two, you know, different times of "karma".
"karma" here refers to fruitive activity. Or rather, acti..., fruitive activity
which is according to scriptural direction. Not all scrip..., you know, fruitive
activity is, you know, is sinful. Especially, if there is, fruitive activity is
according to scriptural direction. That is good. So, in that, there is
nitya-karma. And there is kamya-karma. So, nitya-karma is standard prescribed
duty, is like sa..., sandhya-vandana. So, the brahmanas are supposed to do
"gāyatrī" every day. And that "sandhya-vandana" is a nitya-karma in the sense
that it has to be done every day. You know. And it is a, it is considered to be
a lifelong duty that a brahmana performs. On the other hand, there is
kamya-karma. Kamya-karma is that which is, you know, that kind of religious
activity. That karma which is done, you know, to fulfill a particular karma.
Like we have there dharma, artha, kama progression. So, dharma can also be
performed to per..., puff, get a particular kama. Of particular desire
fulfilled. So, here, "putra-kameshti yajna" is talked about. "putra-kama".
"putra", "eshti" is the desire. "putra-kameshti". That means when a king
performs a yajna, so that he will get a "putra". He will get a son. That is
for "putra-kameshti". "kameshti. So, now, what, you know, so, what Krishna is
telling over here is, you know, you know, If we go back to the verse now, here,
we will see:

        kāmyānāṁ karmaṇāṁ nyāsaṁ
        sannyāsaṁ kavayo viduḥ

So, among these two kinds of "karma". "kāmyā-karma". And "nitya-karma".
Sannyasis are meant to give up the, in a sannyasa ashram, one gives up the
"kāmyā-karma". So, for example, you know, you know, a sannyasi does not actually
continue with the actions of, you know, the householders. You know. The
householder may need certain, obviously, a sannyasi will not be doing a
"putra-kameshti". But there are other yajnas, also. Which is, sannyasi does not
do. Because sannyasi gives up all, you know, material desires. In the sense of
doing specifically to, doing anything to fulfill those desires. Sannyasi wants
to give up material desires, also. But at least, the fulfillment of those
desires, and striving for that fulfillment is something which one has to give in
sannyasa ashram. And:

        sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ
        prāhus tyāgaṁ vicakṣaṇāḥ

What this means is, you know, you know, what is "tyāgaṁ"?
"sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ". So, that means, "sa....", Krishna defines "tyāgaṁ"
more as not just renuncation of action. But renunciation of attachment in
action. So, when one is not attached. Then, one is not actually doing, you know,
one is actually a "tyāgi", Krishna is using the word over here. So, essentially,
Krishna says, the difference is, one is to give up a particular kind of karma.
The other is to do karma. But then, to do it without attachment. So, sannyasi is
give up "kāmyā", "karma". The, you know, those who are not sannyasis. But those
who have, who have the spirit of "tyāgaṁ". They may do "kāmyā", "karma", also.
But they do not do it for the sake of material desires. They do it for the sake
of spiritual achievement. For the sake of purification. For the sake of
realisation. For the sake, ultimately of liberation. Let us look at the next
verse. You know. You know. You know.

        tyājyaṁ doṣa-vad ity eke
        karma prāhur manīṣiṇaḥ
        yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma
        na tyājyam iti cāpare

So, now, Krishna is giving opinions of different people over here. "eke".
And "apare". "eke" means one kind of people. "apare" means another kind of
people. So, "tyājyaṁ doṣa-vad ity eke". That "doṣa-vad". O..., faulty. You know.
Some people say that, you know, "karma prāhur manīṣiṇaḥ". "kar...", so that
giving up karma is recommended. Because "karma" is "doṣa-vad". "prāhur" means
they say. Now, interestingly, Krishna uses the word "manīṣiṇaḥ". Although He is
quoting, you know, some people, He is not saying that they are foolish people
who say that you should renounce the work. He is saying, they are also
"manīṣiṇaḥ". That means "mana", "īṣa". "īṣa" is controller. "mana" is mind. So,
they are not ordinary people. They are thoughtful people. They are thinkers.
Now, Krishna is not necessarily saying that their thinker is, you know, thinking
is now, say, correct. But He is at lea..., acknowleding that, you know, you
know, you know, they are thinkers. And as we will see is, we will see, Krishna
does not side..., support their thinking. Krishna does not conclude their
thinking is correct. "doṣa-vad ity". Krishna says that it is not "doṣa". That
it, it is "doṣa-vad". Even if it is "doṣa-vat", we will see, Krishna will say
that, we should not give up "karma". That is Krishna's conclusion. So, you know,
what is significant is, that Krishna recognises that opinions that are different
from what He is going to give. They can also be held by people who are
"manīṣiṇaḥ" is a significant point here. That, you know, generally, we try to
think that, you know, you know, my opinion is right. And especially people who
are, you know, autocratic. Totalitarian. If a company boss is totalitarian, what
will happen is my way or the high way. My way or I fire you. You know. You know.
And people tend to have that sort of attitude even in religious circles. You
know. My God is the only true God. If you do not believe, then you are going to
go to hell. Not only are you going to go to hell. We will help you get there
faster, also. So, that is an intolerant attitude people can have. So, that sort
of, you know, you know, you know, recognising that there can be opinion
different from ours. And that opinion, even if it is wrong, it deserves to be
respected. That spirit is see..., is demonstrated here by Krishna. When He uses
the word "manīṣiṇaḥ". To refer to those people who, who is going to contradict,
actually. As we will see in the later verses. So, the, this, here, the Bhagavad
Gita, you know, does, ge..., gi..., may take a stand. You know. We will see,
Krishna will tell at the end of the Bhagavad Gita:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja 

So, it, Bhagavad Gita takes quite an assertive strand. Stand. That means, this
is what should, this is what you should do. But taking an assertive stand does
not mean that one has to throttle all opposing voices. Or even, throttle means,
you know, choke all the voices. Or one can, one can be respectful. And Krishna
shows that respectfulness. "manīṣiṇaḥ". Now, being respectful does not again
mean that we agree with something. You know. We ag..., ok, there is, that is,
that they, there is those people, also. They are having a different perspective
of looking at things. We appreciate those perspective. And those who holding,
are holding this perspective can also be intelligent. But just because they are
intelligent, that does not mean that their intelligence is conclusive. Or is it
correct. It is correct. It may be deficient in some ways. And we, that
deficiency has to be acknowledged. If we want to seriously pursue towards the
ultimate, ultimate truth. The conclusive truth. But just because somebody has a
diff.., opinion that is different from the conclusive scriptural opinion does
not mean that that person has to be necessarily foolish. That person can be a
serious seeker. You know. Who has not yet come to the level of understanding the
glory of scriptural wisdom. So, we have to respect, you know, you know, serious
thinking. Wherever we find it. So, Krishna was also earlier, we see the same
spirit. You know. You know. You know. In the Fifth Chapter. You know. When He is
talking about, karm..., we karm..., comparing karma yoga and jnana yoga. He says
both are good.

        niḥśreyasa-karāv ubhau

That both karma-yoga and jnana-yoga are "niḥśreyasa". Both are conducive for
liberation. But:

        tayos tu karma-sannyāsāt
        karma-yogo viśiṣyate

Then, He says, but among the two, this is bett..., which is better?
"karma-yogaḥ" is better than "karma-sannyāsāt". So, similarly, Krishna is, say,
some people in, saying, oh, some wise people, some "manīṣiṇaḥ" say that, oh, all
work should be given up. You know. And others say:

        yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma
        na tyājyam iti cāpare

Others. "apare". "apare" means some other people. They say that, "na tyājyam".
That actually, "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ". These are prescribed duties. And they are
important for one to do. And one should never give them up. So, now, Krishna
will describe, after these, describing these two competing schools of opinion,
He will describe what one should do next. You know. So, He will de..., going,
going to, He said, I will give the conclusion. You know. So, let us see how He,
after quoting di... two different opinions, what, how He, you know, continues
that discuss..., discussion, thread of thought.

        niścayaṁ śṛṇu me tatra
        tyāge bharata-sattama
        tyāgo hi puruṣa-vyāghra
        tri-vidhaḥ samprakīrtitaḥ

So, "niścayaṁ śṛṇu me tatra". "niścayaṁ śṛṇu". Hear from Me. Definitely. Or
hear, con..., the conclusive understanding from Me. "niścayaṁ" means certainty.
So, "tatra". In this subject. In this subject, where different people have
different opinions. "tyāge bharata-sattama". So, "tyāgaḥ". What is actually
"tyāgaḥ"? Or "bharata-sattama". Or "bharata-sattama" is? The best among the
"Bhārata" dynasty. "tyāgo hi puruṣa-vyāghra". You know. "puruṣa-vyāghra". This
is a very beautiful des..., describer. I will come to that. "tri-vidhaḥ
samprakīrtitaḥ". That "tyāgaḥ" is of three types. "tyāgaḥ". So, "tri", so,
"tri-vidhaḥ samprakīrtitaḥ". So, we will see again and again that Krishna, while
trying to, while doing any analysis on anything, after He has introduced the
concept of, you know, three modes in the 14th Chapter. Or rather, explained it.
He use, intro..., that has been referred to repeatedly. But He has introduced
and explained in the 14th Chapter. Then, He is coming back to that reference
point again. He has done that in 17th Chapter. And He is doing the again, again
in the 18th Chapter. So, here, He will do it for "tyāgaḥ". And later, He will do
it for some other elements, also. "to...", "tri-vidhaḥ samprakīrtitaḥ". They are
of three types. And those three types will be goodness. Passion. Ignorance. But
here, the important point, which relevant to us, is "puruṣa-vyāghra". This is
the only place, you know, you know, Arjuna is referred to by this particular
name. Now, "vyāghra" means tiger. Tiger. So, Krishna is telling Ar..., Arjuna,
you are a tiger among men. A tiger is of strong, ferocious animal. And in the
Vedic context, for a king, or a ksatriya to be compared to be a, to tiger is a
matter of great honor. Because that indicates that there, you know, ksatriya is
praiseworthy. As powerful as a tiger. As ferocious as a tiger. As fearless as a
tiger. So, "puruṣa-vyāghra". So, here, we see, another point of respectfulness
is that even when somebody is a student. Arj..., Krishna is giving instruction
to Arjuna. Arjuna is a student. But just because a student, somebody is in a
subordinate position does not mean that, we have to make that person feel small
or bad. You know. Where that person is qualified. And has abilities. They can be
recognised. And appreciated. And that is why Krishna re..., repeatedly referred
to Arjuna throughout the Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavad Gita by in..., names which are
epithets. Which are, you know, which are, you know, you know, appreciating and
glorifying the qualities of Arjuna, also. So, Krishna is glorifying Arjuna.
Arjuna is also glorifying Krishna. So, "puruṣa-vyāghra". Oh, tiger among men.
Just as a tiger cannot be overcome by small, small animals. And small, small
dangers that are there in the scri..., you know, in the jungle. Similarly, a
person is a tiger among men will not be overcome by small, small animalistic,
animali..., small, small animalistic, or animal-like misconceptions. So, Krishna
says that you "puruṣa-vyāghra". He says, you are tiger among men. You can
conquer over all misconceptions. And understand the conclusive truth that I am
going to tell you now. You know. You know. You know. So, "niścayaṁ śṛṇu me
tatra". So, what wa..., how does Krishna begin? Continue this? Let us look in
the next verse now. So, you know:

        yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma
        na tyājyaṁ kāryam eva tat
        yajño dānaṁ tapaś caiva
        pāvanāni manīṣiṇām

You know. Oh:

        yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma
        na tyājyaṁ kāryam eva tat

You know. "na tyājyaṁ kāryam". That this is not, you know, you know, work, which
is, which is to be given up. "tyājyaṁ" means that which is that, it can be
given, it, which should be given up. "na tyājyaṁ". This is not work that should
be given up. "yajño dānaṁ tapaś caiva". You know. You know. You know. You know.
That, actually, these three activities. "yajñaḥ". "dānaṁ". "tapaḥ". "pāvanāni
manīṣiṇām". So, it is interesting that the, the same word "manīṣiṇām" is used.
That those "manīṣiṇām", who think that, you know, "kār...", "kār...", that
"yajñaḥ", "dānaṁ", "tapaḥ" is "doṣa-vat", actually, which was men..., has been
referred to 2 verses earlier. In 18.3. Here, He is telling that it can purify
even them. Even the great souls can be purified. So, nobody goes beyond, you
know, you know, the power of the rituals. You know. In bhakti, also, we have
rituals. So, "yajñaḥ", "dānaṁ", "tapaḥ", at one level, can refer to specific
rituals that are performed in the Vedic context. So, one may go beyond them. In
the sense that one may not require karma-kandi rituals. But then, one practices
bhakti, also. Bhakti is not just an emotion of the heart. It is emotion of a
heart. But also has expression. You know. A..., as a heart. You know. You know.
And that, you know, is done through various ways. There are rituals. You know.
We fold our hands. We offer obeisances. We do arati. These are all rituals. So,
even advanced devotees do these. Because it can co..., always keep purifying
them. Nobody can say that, none of us as seekers can say that I am so pure. Now,
I do not need this. No. "pāvanāni manīṣiṇām". You know. Everyone can become
purified by these. "pāvanāni manīṣiṇām". And "yajño dānaṁ tapaś caiva". So,
these three, you know, are the parts of the "kāmy...". Generally, this is how
"kāmyā" karma is performed. So, person may, you know, you know, you know, you
know, a do these kind of per specific activities. Like the ekadashi vrata is
there. As devotees, we do ekadashi vrata for the sake of purification. For the
sake of going closer to Krishna. We want, we do ekadashi so that put aside our
other activities. You know. You know. We, on which see..., which we do for the
body. We minimise those activities. Like, say, eating. You know. And if
possible, sleeping. And other bodily activities. So that we can have more time
for bhakti. More time for focusing on Krishna. But there are others, also, who
do ekadashi vrata for the sake of, you know, material benefits. And in fact,
there are books like "Ekādaśī Māhātmya". Which are accepted. But not necessarily
recommended by our Vaishnava acharyas. They contain stories as "Māhātmya" of
peop..., particular ekadashi. What will happen if one does this on this
ekadashi. What will happen if one does this on this ekadashi. They are helpful.
But, you know, in the sense that they may inspire some people to do ekadashi
with, you know, seriously. But, you know, you know, generally, that is not the
primary im..., recommendation for a devotee. So, it is said that if one fasts on
this ekadashi, one will get this benefit. When fast on this ekadashi, one will
get this benefit. So, devotees do not go too much into those benefits. We focus
primarily on the supreme benefit of bhak..., of "premā pumartho mahān". Of love
for Krishna. And for the sake of "premā", we are ready to do whatever is
required. And ekadashi is also done that way. And it can purify. So, "yajñaḥ",
"dānaṁ", "tapaḥ". These. "pāvanāni manīṣiṇām". So, what is Krishna going to
say? Krishna was asked what, I will give my definite opinion. And He says that,
He begins by saying that, actually, "na tyājyaṁ". One should not give it,
activity. Because the acti..., the proper scripturally ordinary activity can
purify even the great souls. "pāvanāni manīṣiṇām". You know. You know. You know.
Now, Prabhupada gives the example. So, you know, you know, "Vivāha-yajña". You
know.

"the marriage ceremony, is meant to regulate the human mind so that it may
become peaceful for spiritual advancement."

It is a profound statement. What does it mean? That actually, the mi..., you
know, mind is, you know, often excited about, you know, you know, the pleasures
of the world. And if one has not experienced the pleasures of the world, that
one starts f..., having, one has a f..., you know, hyperactive mind. Which
fantasises about many things. So, maybe, this pleasure will be like this. This
pleasure will be like this. This pleasure will be like this. And that
hyperfantasisation keeps one restless constantly. But, you know, when one gets
some gratification. You know. Within a dharmic perspective. Within a dharmic
framework. You know. That means through marriage. Then, one starts, one gets the
experience. So, there is satisfaction of that hankering. And there is also,
along with that, the realisation that, you know, there is nothing as great as
the mind, it, made it out to be. You know. They, as great as the mind has made
it out to be. And, you know, now, if people are unfortunate, you know, then, you
know, you know, they start thinking, especially, it happens in today's society.
Where, you know, people get to compare themselves with the best in the world.
You know. You know. For example, if we see on the television, you know, a
television will, the, so, the, on, on the movies. They will show the most
good-looking men. And the most good-looking women. And then, people compare
their spouses with the models that they see in these media. And then, they
think, oh, maisa..., maybe, you know, because of this pro..., pro..., person, my
problem is coming. So, then, I am not getting satisfaction. But maybe, if I had
relationship with that person, I would get satisfaction. And then, therefore,
what happens is, the mind does not become regulated. Mind starts thinking, ok,
maybe with that person, then I will be better. Maybe better. But if a person
understands that, you know, takes this "Vivāha-yajña". You know. And there is,
there is, you know, marriage seriously. Then, rather than, you know, blaming
oneself. You know. Or blaming someone else. You know. You know. But starts
recognising. Ok. You know. I had ba..., some infatuation. I had some fantasies.
And now, from fantasy, I am coming to reality. So, things could have been much
worse, also. Things could have been better. But this is what I have. Let me
accept this. And move forward. So, this does not necessarily mean that one has
to accept abusive situations. Not at all. You know. But important point is that
one should not think that just, you know, because I did not get the pleasure
here. Let me try somewhere else. And I will get the pleasure over there. Or I
will get the pleasure over there. General, dharma, you know, the dharmic
"vivāha-yajña" helps to regulate the mind. Ok. There is nothing, there is
nothing so great that I have to become excited about it. No need to get excited.
Let me just continue on. You know. In my, you know, spiritual duties. And over a
period of time, I will get purified. And I will experience higher spiritual
happiness. So, the, you know, purpose of making the mind peaceful is also for
spiritual advancement. Why? The mind is too restless. Excited about the sense
object. And that sense object. You know. Then, the mind cannot experience, you
know, you know, the calmness that is required to focus on Krishna. Of course, by
focusing on Krishna, also, our mind becomes calm. That means, I am agitated
right now. And I chant Krishna's names. And that will also help me to become
calm. But, you know, you know, often if, you know, the mind is constantly
agitated, then, you know, that can, you know, prevents us from fix..., focusing
ourselves on Krishna. But once the excitement is exposed to be not so exciting.
Whether, there, you know, then one can become peaceful. And practice, you know,
spiritual life. So, that is what Prabhupada says. "vivāha-yajña". And
"vivāha-yajña", this one example Prabhupada gives, it should not be given up.
You know. Prabhupada was sannyasi. And he, nor..., normal, he himself would
conduct the marriage ceremonies of his disciples. You know. He has written his
book that sannyasis are not meant to do this. But who will do it? There was no
one at the time, one, at that time. Sannyasis, you know, he was the only
spiritual master. During his time. And he was the, he, he was the leader
devot..., all disciples depended on him for everything. And he, you know, did
the best that he could for them. You know. You know. That means he himself
arranged marriages for them. So, you know, now, you know, sannyasi is not meant
to of course engage in, you know, association of the opposite sex. But that does
not mean that is forbidden for everyone. There is another ashram. Grihastam
ashram. And if the disciples can make the best advancement possi..., you know,
possible for that particular, those particular disciples. In the grihasta
ashram. Then, that is what is recommended for them. So, now, after describing
this, let us see what happens in the next verse. Yeah. You know.

        etāny api tu karmāṇi
        saṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalāni ca
        kartavyānīti me pārtha
        niścitaṁ matam uttamam

"etāny api tu karmāṇi". So, cer..., "api tu", certainly, you know, of all these
activities, certainly, "saṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalāni ca". That means one gi..., gives
up one's attachment. And one does these activities. "kartavyānīti me pārtha".
"kartavyānīti" means when understand, this is my "karta". Wheth..., this is what
I should be doing. You know. "niścitaṁ matam uttamam". You know. You know. This
is my definite "matam", Krishna says. Krishna is giving quite a conclusive
understanding. Oh, understand. This is what I want you to do. "niścitaṁ matam
uttamam". The definite opinion is that do what is required as per, you know,
understanding it to be one's duty. And Krishna had earlier used the word
"niścayaṁ śṛṇu me tatra". So, when, Krishna is now give..., you know, gives,
saying here, "niścitaṁ matam uttamam". This is My conclusive understanding. That
work with detachment. Do not get entangled. Now, Prabhupada writes:

"Everything that leads to Kṛṣṇa consciousness must be encouraged."

Through the activities. Without attachment. And now, Krishna will give analysis
of, you know, "tyāgaḥ" in terms of the three modes. You know. You know. So,
18.7:

        niyatasya tu sannyāsaḥ
        karmaṇo nopapadyate
        mohāt tasya parityāgas
        tāmasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ

So, "niyatasya tu sannyāsaḥ". You know. Now, Kra..., you know, Krishna has
earlier told that one should not give up one, "tyājyam". "karya...", not, it
should not be given up. But if somebody gives it up. "nity...", "niyatasya tu
sannyāsaḥ". "niyata" mean "nitya karma". What? Which is prescribed, one gives
that up. "karmaṇo nopapadyate". That activity which one, is not deserved to be
given up. That which is not worthy of being given up. "mohāt tasya parityāgas".
"mohāt tasya parityāgas" means that such "tyāgaḥ" is out of illusion. And
"tāmasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ". That is declared to be, you know, in the mode of
ignorance. You know. You know. "tāmasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ". "parikīrtitaḥ". It is
known to be. You know. Now, what does it mean? You know. This kind of
renunciation? So, you know, you know, know, we generally, we would think of
renunciation as something good. You know. Renunc..., renunciation, renounced
order or glorified quite a bit in the Vedic scriptures. And we see how even
the great kings respect the saintly people. You know. But then, you know, the
Bhagavad Gita is quite, you know, penetrating going beyond superficials
and analysis. Where it describes that, you know, one should, you know, you know,
recognise that even renunciation can mean the three modes. And if renunciation
in the mode of ignorance, then that does not lead to elevation. So, renunciation
is ultimately meant to help, to facilitate devotion. To facilitate liberation.
So, you know, Srila Prabhupada would sometimes say that, you know, now, even the
hippies, they had done "sarva-dharmān parityajya". But that did not ma..., make
them followers of the Bhagavad Gita. They had to do the second part. That is
"mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". Then, they became followers of the Bhagavad Gita. So,
to do "sarva-dharmān parityajya" alone, you know, they had given up their duty
to their nation. They had given up to the family. To their, even the religion.
To their sci..., education. To their, you know, you know, to their culture,
also, to some extent. Whatever culture was there at that time. So, this is
terrible. You know. That is tamasic. And most of the hippies were living in
terrible conditions. The way, where Srila Prabhupada went in, first in the
"Lower East Side". And therein, in New York. And then, the Haight–Ashbury in San
Francisco. Both places, you know, they have, they had become places of great
degredation. So, they had given up their duties. There might have in some
spa..., f..., sparks of spiritual hankering, initially in these people. But over
a period of time, when they got into drugs. They went so deep, and deep, and
deep into drugs that they lost the opportunity to raise further. And all that
happened was, there was no ti..., there was very little spirituality. And there
was just mostly drugs, only. You know. And along with that, there was of course
free sex. Which involved, you know, you know, you know, as we have discussed,
the only regulative principle was to break all the regulative principles. So, it
became quite degraded. So, just giving up one's activity is not renunciation. Or
that is not the renunciation that is the glorified renunciation in the Vedic
literature. It is tamasic renunciation. So, you know, Krishna condemns this.
"mohāt tasya parityāgas". This is out of illusion. That is, not have got, so,
generally, they say, this "mohāt" is, word important. Because "mohāt" was used
earlier, also. You know. To characterise the mode of ignorance.

        prakāśaṁ ca pravṛttiṁ ca
        moham eva ca pāṇḍava

So, when Krishna uses one word to characterise each of the modes, He gives us
"prakāśaṁ". Illumination for goodness. "pravṛttiṁ". Action for passion. And
"moham". Ill..., delusion. Or illusion for ign..., ignorance. So, the, Krishna
is using the same word "mohāt" over here. And it indi..., now, generally
speaking, most people think, you know, most peop..., thin..., people who are in
a pious culture, they think that, you know, you know, if a person has become
renounced. Then, what is the reason for the renunciation? Oh, this person has
got some great wisdom. Maybe, this person had become enlightened. Maybe, this
person has got some extraordinary knowledge. And that, because of that
illumination within, that person has become, you know, renounced. But Krishna is
underscoring that renunciation is not, is not always because of illumination. It
can be of, because of illusion, also. So, that means, illusion means, one has to
do some duties. But one rejects those duties out of irresponsibility. Then, that
is, you know, tamasic. And Krishna does not at all recommend that. Let us look
at the next verse now. After talking about renunciation in the mode of, you
know, ignorance. Now, He will talk about renunciation in the mode of passion.

        duḥkham ity eva yat karma
        kāya-kleśa-bhayāt tyajet
        sa kṛtvā rājasaṁ tyāgaṁ
        naiva tyāga-phalaṁ labhet

So, "duḥkham ity eva yat karma". That somebody thinks, oh, this work is very
troublesome. You know. You know. "kāya-kleśa-bhayāt tyajet". And one thinks, oh,
this involves too much "kāya-kleśa". "kāya-kleśa" means this much, this involves
too much trouble for the body. And because there is so much trouble for the
body, so I will not do this activity. And that kind of an..., attitude is "sa
kṛtvā rājasaṁ tyāgaṁ". This is, you know, this is, you know, "tyāga" in the mode
of ignoran..., in the mode of passion. And "naiva tyāga-phalaṁ labhet". So, you
know, this will not lead to the fruit of renunciation. The fruit of renunciation
refers to, you know, renunciation itself is not the goal. Renunciation lead to
some, should lead to some other goal. That is liberation. So, if one is, you
know, doing, giving up activities because of irresponsibility. Or in terms of,
not just illusion. But evasion. You know. You know. Evasion means one does not
want to do hard work. One wants to do evade. Ok. I meant to do this. But I will
not do this. One wants to be evasive. Evasive means not doing what one is
expected to do. Evade responsibility as we say. So, this is "kāya-kleśa-bhayāt
tyajet". This is very troublesome. You know. Sometimes, some people feel that,
you know, say, it sometimes happens that some people, they are having some, they
are trying to have some love affair with some, say, some boy is trying to have a
love affair with some girl. And then, that love affair does not work. And the
boy thinks that, ok, now, I will become a monk. Now, I will become a brahmacari.
So, you know, brahmacari is not just, you know, frustration, you know, is not
enough for renunciation. You know. Frustration may lead, you know, to an initial
spark towards renunciation. But that mean, that is not going to last. Somebody
may think, oh, you know, somebody is working in a very demanding job. 12 hours.
14 hours. 16 hours. The job takes. And then, the person thinks, you know, why
should I work like this? I just go to the temple. And chant. And dance. And
sing. And I will be happy. Why do I have to work so hard? So, this kind of
evasion, if it is there, you know, one wants to, you know, one finds material
life too troublesome. And because of the troublesomeness of material life, one
decides to, you know, take up renunciation. Krishna says this is "rājasaṁ". Now,
we may wonder, why is it "rājasaṁ"? I do not, aren't we meant to understand how
this world is "duḥkhālayam"? And then, turn from this world to the spiritual
world? Towards this, you know, take up spiritual life? So, you know, you know,
that is true, definitely. Philosophically, we have to understand this world is
mode of igno..., mode is, a place of suffering. And then, one has to turn
towards the spiritual world. That is definitely required. But that philosophical
understanding of this world is a place of misery comes, you know, you know, when
one is in the mode of goodness. Or when is, one is cultivating goodness. When
one wants sense gratification. And when one gets frustrated in sense
gratification. You know. Both of these, the craving for sense gratification and
the frustration in sense gratification, both of these are, you know,
characteristic of the mode of passion. So, the infatuation in sense
gratification is itself characteristic of the mode of passion. As Krishna says
in the Third Chapter, 37th verse that:

        kāma eṣa krodha eṣa
        rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ

So, "kāma" and "krodha", how do they, you know, come about?
"rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ". Wherever there is the mode of passion, that is where
they emerge. "rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ". So, the point which I am making here is
that, you know, "kāma" and "krodha", you know, you know, they emerge from the
mode of passion. So, you know, sen..., "kāma" is the desire for sense
gratification. And "krodha" is the fr..., fr..., anger. The frustration when
des..., when the desires for sense gratification are not fulfilled. So, both are
in the mode of passion. When "krodha" can go down to ignorance, also. Of course.
But the point is that this whole frustration which comes, when one finds
material, the pursuit of material enjoyment too troublesome. And because of
that, one gives, wants to give it up. If one's overall consciousness and
lifestyle is in the mode of passion, then that frustration is not going to last.
Because what happens is, that simply one is thinking that, ok, this particular
enjoymen..., opportunity for enjoyment did not work out. But maybe some other
opportunity will work out. This did. But someone else will. Or maybe, it is not
working for me. But for others, it is working. So, the, so, we are not, you
know, we are not really, when a person in the mode of passion, the person is not
consi..., convinced that this world is "duḥkhālayam". That person is simply
thinking, my world is "duḥkhālayam". So, my world, oh, there is "duḥkhā" in my
world. But only if my world would become something different. You know. That
means, ok, I am living in a small city. If I can go to a big city. Oh. I am
living in India. If I can go to America. So, the, then my world is
"duḥkhālayam". But outside, if I go somewhere else, there, it will be
"sukhalaya". I will experience "sukha" over there. So, this is actually, you
know, the mode of illu..., the mode of passion. As we say, the grass is always
greener on the other side. That things always look better, you know, you know,
at other places apart from where we are. If this is, when a horse is grazing,
the horse is gra..., eating some grass. The horse is, a river, on the other side
of the river, the horse, oh, there is the grass looks so green. So, like that,
we always think, such a, other situations are always better. But that is not
true, necessarily. That does not mean that, never situations can be
better. Definitely. Certain situations may be preferable. Certain situations
might be preferable. But that has to be decided based on calm deliberation. Not
impulsive, impulsive, you know, illusion. You know. That means, you know, when
we talk about realising this world as "duḥkhālayam", that is based on
philosophical introspection. That is based on deep understanding of the
philosophy. And then, observation and realisation of that scriptural teaching,
based on our own, our own experiences in the world. So, that is, that requires a
healthy amount of goodness. Whereas when one is in frustratio..., when in the
mode of passion, that frustration does not last. You know. That, when maya is
also so cunning. That she will never make us hopelessly frustrated. Maya will
keep us hopefully frustrated. That means, you know, you know, we will get some,
one suffering. Second suffering. Third suffering. Fourth suffering. And we are
thinking, oh, this world is very suffering, only. I will get out of this world.
At that time, maya will give some pleasure. Oh, I can get happiness, also, over
here. I can get pleasure over here. And then, I think, oh, and then, just when
my hopes, you know, rise up. I will get happiness. Then, again, suffering.
Suffering. Suffering. Suffering. That is how maya works. So, we cannot really
get out of these clutches of maya very easily. So, maya is so expert. She will
never make us hopelessly frustrated. You know. So, some time, the question is
asked. Is there happiness in this world? Or there is no happiness in this world?
46:06
