Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XS8VpQrn6w4
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the 18th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. Let us look at what is happening
in this chapter. And after that overview, we will go into the verses. You know.
So, here, you know, you know, you know, we are discussing the section on the
"jñānaṁ" of the karma-yogi. How the karma-yogi can situate oneself in
detachment, you know, in, withou..., you know, without detachment while doi...,
while doing action by understanding the three modes of material nature with
respect to their core relation with the various elements of action. You know.
So, you know, for, between the "jñānaṁ karma ca kartā ca". You know. That was
what was mentioned in verse 19. And that is what is discussed, you know, in the
subsequent nine verses. 20 to twen..., you know, 22. 28 talk about "jñā...",
first "jñānaṁ". Then "karma". And then "kartā". You know. Now, 29th verse will
be another transition verse. Where, you know, the further elements of action
will be mentioned. And those elements will be analysed in the subsequent verses.
That is 30 onwards. Until 39. So, there will be analysis of "buddhiḥ". "dhṛtiḥ".
And "sukhaṁ". So, let us look at these verses. So, 18.29.

        buddher bhedaṁ dhṛteś caiva
        guṇatas tri-vidhaṁ śṛṇu
        procyamānam aśeṣeṇa
        pṛthaktvena dhanañ-jaya

"buddher bhedaṁ dhṛteś caiva". So, "buddher bhedaṁ dhṛteś". So, "bhedam" means
to differentiation. Analysis. Categorisation. So, "bhedaṁ". "guṇatas
tri-vidhaṁ". In terms of the three modes. You know. The "bhedaṁ" of what.
"buddher". And "dhṛteḥ". "śṛṇu". Arjuna, please hear. "procyamānam aśeṣeṇa". So,
I am going to speak it to you in detail. So, the "aśeṣeṇa" can mean, you know,
in one sense, it means, you know, that with nothing left. Exhaustively.
"aśeṣeṇa" can also mean in detail. You know. So, "pṛthaktvena dhanañ-jaya". In
terms of their difference. So, basically, Krishna is telling, now, I have, I
will describe "buddheḥ". And "dhṛteḥ". So, there will be another transition
verse where He will talk about, you know, of, you know, of, of, about "sukhaṁ".
We will come to that "sukhaṁ" when we, you know, that will be the, He will mark
it in the 18.36 verse. So, now, why specifically "buddheḥ" and "dhṛteḥ" are
being singled out for discussion? You know. Earlier, Krishna has been talking
about action in different terms. So, first, He talked in terms of "jñānaṁ".
"karma". And "kartā". These are the elements of action with respect to, you
know, you know, you know, you know, you know, what all we perceive in the world
when we have to act. First of all, we perceive, what is happening in the world?
After we perceive what is happening in the world, then we try t..., we decide
how we want to act. That is karma. And then, while we are doing a particular
action, then there is the person who is doing that action. That person is
affected by the modes in different ways. Now, apart from that, when we are
acting. You know. Then, there is "buddheḥ". And "dhṛteḥ" which is also involved.
"buddheḥ" is more in terms o..., is i..., is case, translated as intelligence.
The difference between knowledge and intelligence, Prabhupada explains, in the
10th, in a 10th Chapter purport as well as in his, you know, other pur...,
references. In his other talks. That, you know, intelligence, knowledge is often
theoretical. Whereas intelligence means to see things in their proper
perspective. Intelligence means to see things in their perspective. That means
when I am supposed to act, how should I act? What should I do? What should I not
do? You know. And we will see that differentiation. We will com..., we will
compare "jñānaṁ" and "buddheḥ". You know. We will compare "jñānaṁ" and
"buddheḥ". And we will understand that "jñānaṁ" is more in terms of perception.
"buddheḥ" is more in terms of action. And then, there is "dhṛteḥ". You know.
"dhṛteḥ" means, it is determination. So, once I understand, ok, this is how I
should be acting. Then, I not only should have the intelligence to be able to
perceive how I should be acting. But afterwards, I have to have the consistency.
The persistence. So, you know, without that, we will not be able to, you know,
go on. So, you know, for successful action in this world. We node, we need both
determination. And, you know, we need intelligence. And determination. So, let
us look at both of these. Intelligence. And determination. So, you know, first
is intelligence. You know. You know. Krishna will talk about the intelligence in
the three modes. From the next verse onwards. You know. You know. You know.

        pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
        kāryākārye bhayābhaye
        bandhaṁ mokṣaṁ ca yā vetti
        buddhiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī

So, "pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca". that there is "pravṛttiṁ". And there is
"nivṛttiṁ". You know. That means there are actions to be done. And there are
actions not to be done. Actions to be avoided. This "pravṛttiṁ" and "nivṛttiṁ"
has been talked about several times. In 16th Chapter, also, Krishna talks about,
you know:

        pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
        janā na vidur āsurāḥ

So, there, in 16.7, He mentions that, those who are demoniac, they do not know
what is to be done. And what is not to be done. So:

        pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
        kāryākārye bhayābhaye

"kārya". "akārye". In 7..., so, now, "pravṛttiṁ" and "nivṛttiṁ" is more in terms
of, you know, inclinations. "kārya" and "akārye" is more in terms of actions.
You know. That means these are things specifically, I should do. I should not
do. And, you know, you know, "pravṛttiṁ". "nivṛttiṁ" had more in terms of
generic inclinations. "kārya", "akārye" is more specific. And "bhayābhaye". Now,
"bhaya". "abhaye". That means what should be feared. And what should not be
feared.

        bandhaṁ mokṣaṁ ca yā vetti
        buddhiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī

One understands what is, what is the cause of bondage. And what is the cause of
liberation. You know. You know. So, you know, here comes, Krishna,
interestingly, Krishna uses the word "bhayābhaye". That which is to be feared.
And that which is not to be feared. That which causes, that which is, now, in
one sense, what does it mean? That which is to be feared. And that which is not
to be feared. Actually, there is, you know, healthy fear. And there is
unnecessary fear. So, healthy fear means, a child has to have some fear of, say,
fire. Or knife. Or live electric, you know, wire. You know. If it, if the child
does not have that fear, then the child may wound, you know, one. You know. You
know. Himself. Or herself. So, if that is not to, if that is to be avoided, a
healthy fear has to be cultivated. On the other hand, we may have fear of
certain things. And that fear may be undesirable. You know. A child, when it is
growing, a child may have fear about going to school. No. But that is a, it is a
common part of growing up. That a person has to learn to go there. And a person,
many persons start, you know, going to college. One has to go and stay away from
the parents. That also, there is fear. But, you know, as a part of normal
growing up, that fear is to be overcome. Similarly, some people may have fear
about practicing spiritual life. You know. If, I do not know what is out there
in spiritual world. In the spiritual reality. There are so many people. So many
paths. You know. So, one has to use one's intelligence. Understand what is the
right thing. But eventually, one has to, you know, take a leap of faith. So,
being unduly fearful, or, or being unduly reckless. Both are undesirable. You
know. You know. You know. Why? Because, you know, one should, one needs to be
fearful about certain things. And one needs not be fearful about certain things.
So, if one is fearless. Where one should be fearful. And one is fearful. Where
one should be fearless. Then, you know, one will lose out on gro...,
opportunities for growth in life. For example, as it is said:

        "fools rush in where angels fear to tread"

What does that mean? That means there are certain things where angels also,
angels means people who are, you know, very saintly. Who are wise. Who are close
to God. Those people also fear to go. Because they know, it is a dangerous
place. So, "fools rush in where angels fear to tread". You know. For, so, for
example, you know, sinful activities, you know, people who are for godly 
disposition. They understand getting involved in these activities can be so
complex. Entangling. That it can destroy a person completely. So, one should not
get into these activities. So, "fools rush in where angels fear to tread". But,
you know, but people think that these are very enjoyable activities. And they
rush into those activities. You know. And that, you know, that sort of, you
know, rushing in the sinful activities, you know, that is, that may seem to be
like, you know, the movie..., in the movies. Where there are, you know, scenes
where, you know, you know, the, you know, protagonist, the hero, heroine,
especially, the heroine is scantily dressed. Then, that, they, they colonise,
people call it as bold scenes. That is not, that is not boldness, actually. That
is blindness. Why i..., why is it blindness? Because one is blind to the purpose
of life. One is blind to the value of life. And therefore, you know, you know,
one does not understand what other consequences of whatever one is doing.
"bandhaṁ mokṣaṁ ca yā vetti". As this last verse states. That discrimination
may, seems to understand, ok, this particular action may feel good. But what is
its goal, long-term consequence going to be? If that long-term consequence is
going to be counterproductive. Then, my getting involved in this activity is
undesirable. I should not get involved in this activity. So, "bandhaṁ mokṣaṁ ca
yā vetti". So, in this way, Krishna talks ab..., "pravṛttiṁ". "nivṛttiṁ". Then,
"kāryākārye". "bhayā". "bhay...", "bhayābhaye". And "bandhaṁ mokṣaṁ". You know.
So, when one understands this difference properly, that is "buddhiḥ" in the mode
of goodness. "buddh...". "buddhiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī". Now, to a large extent,
the "sāttvikī", "buddhiḥ" comes by the study of scripture. You know. Not just
study of scripture in terms of theoretical study. But study in terms of
transformational study. That means we study the scripture in the association of
devotees. You know. Whose values have been transformed by the study of
scripture. By the study o..., by that study, be..., we become, our, our own, you
know, consciousness raises from the lower modes towards goodness. And then,
ultimately, beyond goodness towards transcendence. So, you know, you know, you
know, here, you know, when, when there is goodness, Krishna has also talked
about the, goodness in 14.11.

        sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin
        prakāśa upajāyate

So, you know, "sarva-dvāreṣu". The "dvāre" refers to the senses. So, there are
certain things which we should do with our senses. Certain things which we
should not do. You know. If a door is clo..., locked. Or a door is darker. Not
locked. It is dark. Then, you know, outside the door, you know, there are, I
might be expecting, there is just continuation. And there might be stairs with
steep steps. I just put my foot down. And tuck. I will just fall down. You know.
So, if I do not see if the doorway is not illumined. Generally, the doorway
indicates some sort of change. Ok. One, once, this, maybe there is a roo...,
house here. And there is the porch to the house there. It may be, you know, you
know, so, when there is, the doorway indicates some kind of transition. And
that, the point of transition is spilled, especially, illumination is needed.
Illumination because, you know, certain change is going to happen. There is a
door. Then, after the door, maybe the floor is for different kind. Maybe the,
you know, frequency of people traveling is of different, you know, kind. Maybe,
there are vehicles outside. And they do not, obviously, they do not, vehicles
inside the house. So, most of the time. You know. So, therefore, you know, a
doorway indicates some kind of transition. Some kind of change. And when change
happens, actually, illumination is required. So, similarly:

        sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin

Krishna talks about that, you know, the senses are like the doorways. The
doorways that connect the outer world with the inner world. So, we, as the soul,
perceive the world. You know. Through the senses. So, the senses f..., comprise
the doorway between the inner world. And the outer world. And if this doorway is
not illumined. Then, you know, there is, you know, distraction that results
because of that. So, because it is not illumined, then we make a wrong choices.
We take wrong turns. We take self-destructive decisions. And the end result of
this is that we, you know, torment ourselves. We ruin ourselves. In many ways.
So, you know, you know, the, so, that what Krishna says is a characteristic of
goodness. "prakāśa".

        sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin
        prakāśa upajāyate

That illumination, Krishna has talked about further over here. In this verse as,
you know, the capacity to discriminate. To discern. Now, if we go back. And look
at 16..., 18.20. When Krishna has talked about knowledge. So, we are trying to
now understand the difference between know..., how, "buddh...", "jñānaṁ". And
"buddhiḥ". So, if we look at what Krishna calls as "jñānaṁ" in "sāttva", "sāttva
guna", you know, you know, you know, you know, so, there, He describes that:

        sarva-bhūteṣu yenaikaṁ
        bhāvam avyayam īkṣate
        avibhaktaṁ vibhakteṣu

So, "avibhaktaṁ vibhakteṣu". One sees beyond that, one sees that, the externals,
there are forms that are differentiated. Just male. Female. You know. Ind...,
Indian. Pakistani. Or American. European. Whatever. We see these. You know. You
know. Differentiation. But beyond these differentiation. We see that there is
unity. "avibhaktaṁ vibhakteṣu". So, what is this "avibh...", "avibhaktaṁ" that
non-differentiated reality? Rea..., reality? "sarva-bhūteṣu dehe ’smin".
"sar...", "sar...", sorry.

        sarva-bhūteṣu yenaikaṁ
        bhāvam avyayam īkṣate

"sarva-dvā...", "sarva-bhūte". You know. "ṣu dehe ’smin". "bhāvam avyayam
īkṣate". "bhāvam avyayam". There is the imperishable nature. So, that means,
to seeing beyond matter to spirit is, you know, knowledge in the mode of
goodness. But here, you know, intelligence in the mode of goodness is talked
about as referring to, by understanding what should be done. And what should not
be done. So, that is why we see knowledge Kri..., the way Krishna analyses it
is more in terms of perception. And "buddh...", "buddhiḥ" is in, more in terms
of action. So, let us look at the next verse now. You know. You know. Next will
come knowledge in the mode of passion. You know. You know.

        yayā dharmam adharmaṁ ca
        kāryaṁ cākāryam eva ca
        ayathāvat prajānāti
        buddhiḥ sā pārtha rājasī

So, "yayā dharmam adharmaṁ ca". So, there is, you know, so, what is "dharmam"?
And what is "adharmaṁ"? "kāryaṁ cākāryam eva ca". So, Krishna uses the same two
words as earlier. "kāryam". "akāryam". You know. So, what should be done. And
what should not be done. Now, what does "dharmam" and "adharmaṁ" mean? So,
"dharmam". What will be a difference between the two? It, "dharmam" refers to
more again general. In principles. You know. You know. You know. "kāryaṁ" and
"kāryam" refers to what we should do. What we should not do. "ayathāvat
prajānāti". So, "ayathāvat". You know. So, "yathāvat" means actu..., correctly.
You know. So, like the Prabhupada's "Bhagavad-gītā As It Is". In Hindi is called
as Bha..., you know, "Bhagavad Gita: Yatharoop". "Yatharoop" means as it is. So,
"yathāvat" means as it is. Correctly. "ayathāvat" means not properly. So,
"prajānāti". So, when one knows, you know, you know, when one does not
understand clearly what is "dharmam". And what is "adharmaṁ". Then, that kind of
incorrect understanding, that is knowledge in the, is, is intelligence in the
mode of passion. So, for example, say, in the, if we, if we consider the
Ramayana. Many people consider "Vibhīṣaṇa" to be a bratha dohi. They consider
"Vibhīṣaṇa" has, having betray..., is a betrayer of his brother. "Rāvaṇa". Now,
actually, it is not that "Vibhīṣaṇa" is a betrayer of "Rāvaṇa". It is that
"Rāvaṇa" is a betrayer of "dharm...", err..., truth. Of dharmam. Of virtue. And
ultimately of all living beings. Of God. So, we have to have a proper ref...,
frame of reference to understand who is a traitor. And who is not a traitor. You
know. So, "Vibhīṣaṇa" is definitely not a traitor. Because ultimately, all of us
are meant to be loyal to the Supreme Lord. So, we, only when we are loyal to the
Supreme Lord can we actually return back to the Supreme Lord. So, you know, you
know, being loyal to the Supreme Lord means that we try, you know, you know, you
know, adjust and harmonise all our other loyalties in, you know, the light of
our loyal to the Supreme Lord. You know. That does not mean that we have to give
up the loyalties of this world. But we have to have our priorities clear.
Krish..., so, Krishna also makes it very clear.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

Give up all varieties of religion. And surrender unto me. So, you know,
"ayathāvat prajānāti". When one does not know what is "dharmam". What is
"adhar...", not dharma, then, that is knowledge in the mode of passion. So, of
course, "Rāvaṇa", as a "rākṣasa", was in the mode of passion. And ignorance. You
know. And there are people who are followers of, you know, "Rāvaṇa". And they
consider, you know, "Rāvaṇa" to be, you know, "Rāvaṇa" to be a good person. And
they consider "Vibhīṣaṇa" to be a bad person. Because "Vibhīṣaṇa" betrayed
"Rāvaṇa". So, this is quite a perversity of the values. Of the scripture. So,
"ayathāvat prajānāti". When one does not understand properly what is scripture.
What is to be, what is "kāryaṁ cākāryam". You know. What is, you know, you know,
to be done. And what is not to be done. When one does not understand properly,
that is in the mode of passion. So, there is knowledge. But that knowledge is
contaminated. You know. You know. You know. So, because of this contamination of
knowledge, one thinks that, phew, the long-term, for example, becoming liberated
from material existence is not as important as short-term. What is short-term?
You know. Short-term is either pleasure in this world. Or whatever means is
possible. Or it is, say, pleasure by going to heavens. So, for examp..., so, so,
so, to consider karma-kanda, that is "dharma". "artha". And "kama". To consider
karma-kanda to be more important than bhakti. That is, you know, that is
mistake. And that mistake is because people do not recognise what is the
ultimate reality. And the ultimately reality is that we are all meant to return
back to Krishna. To be with him forever. And that is the only way to real
happiness. And this, all our actions have to be chosen according to that
ultimate t..., priority. So, when the "ayathāvat". There is incomplete
knowledge. Then, because of the incomplete knowledge, sometimes, that which is a
lower principle is made into a higher principle. And that which is a higher
principle is neglected as a lower principle. So, this kind of thing happens when
there is mode of passion. So, because what, in the mode of passion, one thinks
of matter and material things to be extremely important. So, we discussed in
mode of passion when there is knowledge, also, what happens is, in the pode of,
mode of passion, "nānā-bhāvān pṛthag-vidhān". That, as Krishna mentions in
18.21 that "nānā-bhāvān". You know. That one sees the different pro..., you
know, bodies. And when one sees different bodies, one thinks there is different,
this is, represent different inner natures. This represent different inner
souls. So, that idea, you know, in the mode of passion, there is a too much
emphasis on externals. And because of this emphasis on externals, one was not
able to see internals. And what are the internals? These internals can be seen.
The internal is ultimately the soul. The soul's relat..., soul's awareness of
spiritual reality. And ultimately, soul's relationship with Krishna. So, all
this is not adequate. It is incorrect to many, in many ways. "ayathāvat
prajānāti". In the mode of passion. Now, let us look at the, you know, knowledge
in the mode of, sorry, intelligence in the mode of ignorance. "ayathāvat
prajānāti". "buddhiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī"

        adharmaṁ dharmam iti yā
        manyate tamasāvṛtā
        sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca
        buddhiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī

"adharmaṁ dharmam iti yā". You know. You know. So, to consider "adharmaṁ" to be
"dharmam". "manyate tamasāvṛtā". "tamasāvṛtā". You know. You know. You know. One
who is covered by ignorance, you know, you know, such a person, who, "āvṛtā"
means covered. When the person is "sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca". Such a person, you
know, is on "ān","viparīt". "viparīt" means opposite. So, "sarvārthān viparītāṁś
ca". Such a person goes towards things opposite to what they actually are. That
means, you know, you know, the person considers, you know, that which is
"dharmam" to be "adharmaṁ". And the person considers "adharmaṁ" to be "dharmam".
So, for example, you know, one striking example of this "viparītāṁś ca".
"sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca". Of going complete opposite of reality. That, we,
common example, we see in, you know, the way people consider God to be an
ordinary person. And they consider an ordinary person to be God. So, you know,
when Krishna Himself descends to this world, people consider that, oh, Krishna
is not God. Actually, you know, Krishna is just an ordinary person. Or maybe,
you know, you know, somewhat person who had some extraordinary power. Some
magical powers. Or whatever. Just skilled diplomat. That is what people try to
reduce Krishna's glory down to the material level. And in contrast, people try
to raise, you know, you know, therein, glory, their own glory to a higher level.
Higher level means, now, either their own glory. Or the glory of their pet guru.
Who are, they think, oh, this is my favorite guru. So, just like some people
have pets. You know. Pat the pets. So, like that, some people have gurus. And,
you know, who, my pet guru, I make it in, make him into a God. So, Prabhupada
would call this as, you know, you know, you know, in..., divalent sanity. That
is. One insanity is for someone to claim to be God. And greater insanity is for
other people to accept that person as God. So, it is, this is an example of
"sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca". That which is reality, one cannot understand that to
be the reality. So, this is "buddhiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī". You know. This is
"tāmasī". Now, it is not that, you know, you know, you know, you know, people
who are in tama-guna, tama, tama, "tāmasī" intelligence, necessarily need to
have, you know, you know, tamasic lifestyles. So, there may be some people who
are in goodness. But, who, who are in goodness means, that there are other, it,
remaining lifestyle, if we see, that lifestyle is largely, you know, you know,
pure lifestyle. Those people, for, if it, there are many people in this world.
Who follow to a large extent, you know, the, you know, you know, you know, in
some ways, the regulative principles of life. Which are given in the scriptures.
So, no meat-eating. No intoxi..., no gambling. No illicit sex. They follow these
regulative principles. And while following these principles, they also do other
things. The other things means, they also may have some conception of religion.
And follow some sort of religion. So, this kind of people, who have, you know,
you know, you know, some sense of regulation, even if that sense of regulation
may not be tamasic. You know. It may not be a break, transcendental sense of
regulation. But they are some sense of regulation. They are relatively in
goodness. And people who are completely unregulated. Say, a person is drinking.
And smoking. And maybe doing all sorts of terrible things. That person may be,
it, lifestyle may be in ignorance. Overall, if you see. But at the same time, it
may well be that so, people who are in, you know, who are in, having a lifestyle
in ignorance overall, may have some characteristics. Which may resemble the
characteristic of those who are in, you know, goodness. That means some people
may have intellectual brilliance. You know. Normally, we would character..., we
would associate me..., intellectual bre..., brilliance with goodness.
Wherea..., and normally, we are associate, say, drinking or smoking with
ignorance. Yet, we will see that, there are, sometimes, there may be some, some
researchers who, which chain-smoker. So, it is, person, a chain-smoker. But is a
champion researcher. So, you know, you know, how do we understand this? We have
to understand that the influence of the mode is complex. And one aspect of the
modes may be influenced. Or may be influencing one aspect of a person. But
another aspect of that person may not be influenced by the same mode. So, a
person may have a drinking habit. And that drinking habit or that drinking
adde..., addiction is very dangerous. And in general, that will not only put a
person in ignorance at that time. When a person is drunk. But the effect of that
ignorance will spread further and further. To other people, also. You know. You
know. So, if one does not want this to happen, then one should be able to
practice spiritual life in a serious way. By which one can avoid the influence
of the lower modes. Come to goodness. And ultimately, transcend. So, here, when
Krishna talks about the:

        sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca

So, actually, some people may have a lifestyle in goodness. In terms of overall,
they have some regulated habit. They have cleanliness. They have some level of
relig..., religious culture. And practice in their lives. They, they are
definitely not transcendental. But, you know, they are practicing spiritual life
in their own way. And while they are trying to practice spiritual life, at that
time, according to their level, in their situation, whatever they do, that is,
you know, you know, to be appreciated. But at the same time, if a person has
intellectual tendencies. But has a tamasic lifestyle. Or a person has a
"sāttvik" lifestyle. But has one "tāmasic" habit within that. So, we should not,
we do not have to whitewash people for, you know, you know, whatever they are.
We cannot say that, just because somebody is, you know, you know, you know, you
know, you know, somebody is a devotee. That means, automatically, that person is
freed from the influence of the modes. No. Not all. We have, you know, by our
devotion, you know, we want to, you know, free ourselves from the influence of
the modes. It is not that we are automatically freed. You know. You know. You
know. We will become freed by steady practice. So, this is in the ignorance.
That "sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca". In all ways, one is, you know, you know, yeah,
you know, "sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca". You know. You know. You know. You know.
You know. You know. You know. So, we discussed this "sarvārthā...", "sarvārthān
viparītāṁś ca". These three levels we have discussed earlier in our
"Īśopaniṣad"class. To be in ignorance is bad. To, you know, so, for example, to
know, not, not know that God exists, that is a form of ignorance. To be
ignoran..., in ignornace and to claim to be in knowledge is worse. Worse means
that, you know, here, somebody, you know, influe..., claims that, you know,
consciousness comes from matter. Or that matter is all that exists. And
everything else is epiphenomena. Consciousness is just something which has
emerged from matter. So, this is not proven. But one claims that this is the
scientific reality. This is the intellectually respectable notion. You know.
That, that is ignorance. And to claim to be in knowledge. And worse is, to be in
ignorance. To claim to be in knowledge. And to claim that knowledge is ignorance
is worse. You know. You know. So, for example, religion is the opium of the
masses. Or God is a crutch for the weak-minded. So, all this is, you know,
ignorance. Knowledge in ignorance. And we know, you know, you know, phew, you
know, you know, you know, you know, in the Fourth Canto of the
"Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". There is the description of Vena. You know. Vena was such a
sinful king. That which, you know, was a, you know, what we could say in today's
language, you know, you know, a terrorist ruler. You know. Suppose, a terrible
terrorist becomes a ruler. And the terrorist goes on. And plunders others. So,
like that, you know, Vena was plun..., plundering everyone during, you know,
in his king..., you know, his kingdom. And so much so that he, you know,
actually, he stopped the worship of the Supreme Lord. And instead, told the
brahmanas that all of you have to worship me. Because I am the representative of
the Supreme Lord. And I am the Supreme Lord for all practical purposes. And he,
in this way, he:

        sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca

The idea of Naradeva, you know, there is the, there is the concept of Naradeva.
Naradeva means the king is considered to be God in human form. Nara, deva, when
the king is considered to be God in human form. That means that the king is God.
You know. Is the king God? You know. The idea is that we need representatives
who will remind us of God. And who will guide us to worship God properly. A king
is meant to be someone, such representative. You know. The king is meant to be,
when, you know, a king is not meant to be a replacement for God. But the king is
meant to be a route to God. So, route means, you know, 'R'. 'O'. 'U'. 'T'. 'E'.
Route is the pathway. The king is meant to be the route to God. The king is not
meant to be, you know, you know, consider one's, consider to be a replacement to
God. Not at all. If that, that means, the guru, the guru cannot think, say, that
I am God. And you just worship me. There is no need to worship God. That is a
completely wrong understanding. So, Vena had that understanding. And he tried to
chastise the brahmanas, also, saying that you are being unchaste while not
worshipping me. The brahmanas just "hmm". The brahmanas just said one omkar. And
Vena was reduced to ashes. There is actually similar story in the Mahabharata,
also, after "Yudhiṣṭhira" was coronated. So, at that time, there was a
"rākṣasa", "Cārvāka" who came in the dress of a brahman. And he said, oh,
"Yudhiṣṭhira", I have been elected to speak on behalf of all the brahmans over
here. And they have decided that because of your greed for the kingdom, so many
thousands, and thousands, and thousands of people have been killed. So many
women have become widowed. So many children have become like orphans. And for
all this bloodshed. And, you know, destruction. And death. It is your greed that
is responsible. Therefore, because you are so greedy, you do not deserve to be
the king. Get out. And go to the forest. So, at that time, "Yudhiṣṭhira"
Maharaja was so shocked to hear these words. And those words coming from a
venerable brahmana. So, he just, you know, fold his hands. And this is, oh,
venerable brahmana, I will do as you have to say. And immediately, the other
brahmanas started making uproar. He says, no. Who has? We have not selected him
as a brahmana. We have not selected him as a representative of our, our group.
And we do not believe that this is to be opposed at all. What you have done is
to oppress, uphold brahminical culture. And as these brahmanas looked at this
partiular make do brahmin, this, you know, you know, "rākṣasa". Who had
impersonated as a brahmin. Then, he, they just looked upon him. And just by the
power of, you know, you know, that glance. And the "hmm" that they did. This
person fall, this offender fall, fell in. So, here, what we see is that, you
know, you know, the brahmans had the capacity to, you know, restore things to
order. If things went too much out of order. They gave freedom to the king. To
rule in a responsible way. But the, when the king started using the powers. And
privileges. Not to glorify the Supreme Lord. But to direct, whatever worship was
meant towards the Supreme Lord, to himself. And to make himself a replacement
object of worship as the compared to devatas. That is disastrous. And that has
to be corrected. And the way, sometimes, when nothing else works, then the way
to correct it is by shock treatment. So, the brahmanas, when they cursed, they
are not cruel. They, to whoever, they are cursing, they are also desiring the
ultimate welfare of that person. And for understanding, what is their ultimate
welfare. And how their ultimate welfare is to be achieved. What one requires is
to recognise that, there is, you know, a correct pathway to be followed. Whereas
tama..., so, when there is proper understanding, then even from ignorance, one
can go to transcendence. But when does not have pro..., one does not have proper
understanding.

        sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca

Then, one may be situated in a particular mode. But one will go downward.
Downwards. Ultimately, to destruction. So, let us move forward. So, after
discussing "buddhiḥ", now, Krishna goes to, you know, you know, you know, yeah.
You know. You know. You know. You know. "dhṛtiḥ". So, let us look at "dhṛtiḥ":

        dhṛtyā yayā dhārayate
        manaḥ-prāṇendriya-kriyāḥ
        yogenāvyabhicāriṇyā
        dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī

So, "dhṛtyā yayā dhārayate". So, "dhṛtiḥ". That "dhṛtiḥ" by which "dhārayate".
You know. One accepts. Or one sustains. You know. One perseveres in one's
acceptance. You know. So:

        manaḥ-prāṇendriya-kriyāḥ
        yogenāvyabhicāriṇyā


So, by which, one keeps of the "kriyāḥ". The action. Actions. You know. "manaḥ".
"manaḥ-prāṇendriya". You know. So, the senses. The life air. You know. You know.
You know. The mind. And the activities. One keeps them situated in yoga. And
what kind of yoga? "āvyabhicā...", "āvyabhicāriṇyā". You know. Unbreakable yoga.
You know. You know. That is "dhṛtiḥ" in the mode of goodness. So, "dhṛtiḥ" in
the mode of goodness essentially means, you know, that one recognises oneself to
be, you know, situated properly. And, you know, one recognises that one has to
persevere to get the results. So, either significant words in this as
"yogenāvyabhicāriṇyā". You know. You know. So, you know, Krishna has used the
word "yogenāvyabhicāriṇyā" earlier, also. He has used it while talking about how
to transcend the modes in 14.26. "māṁ ca yo...":

        māṁ ca yo ’vyabhicāreṇa
        bhakti-yogena sevate

So, "’vyabhicāreṇa". "bhakti-yogena". So, when one practices unbreakable
devotional service, then one transcends the modes. That is talking about, you
know, how to transcend the modes using the process of bhakti. Or now, of course,
the process of bhakti is not just meant to be used to attain transcendence. But
at the process of bhakti is meant to be taking shelter of. So that even in
transcendence, one keep practicing bhakti. And that is indicated in 18.54. Where
Krishna says, once one comes to the brahman platform:

        brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā
        na śocati na kāṅkṣati
        samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu
        mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

So, Krishna, in 14.26, is saying that, by practicing unbreakable bhakti, one
will come to transcendence. "brahma-bhūyāya kalpate". And then, Krishna says
this "brahma", "brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā". When one is situated in
"brahma-bhūtaḥ". Then, Krishna says "mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām". One will get
"parām", "bhaktiṁ". So, that means, "āvyabhicāri" bhakti may not necessarily
always be "parām" bhakti. "parām" means transcendental. Or pure. Or spiritual
devotion. So, "āvyabhicāriṇyā" means unbreak..., un..., uninterrupted, un...,
not fai.., you know, you know, not unfaithful. Means faithfu..., faithful. Or
rather than, not faithle..., you know, faithless. So, faithful devotion when one
keeps practicing steadily. Then, by that faithful practice, you know, you know,
one can become elevated. So, "yogenāvyabhicāriṇyā". So, Krishna is saying that,
you know, many people can say I chant Hare Krishna. So, to chant Hare Krishna by
one or two days. One or two round, that is not very difficult. But to chant
sixteen rounds every day year after year for, for a, maybe several decades, that
is not easy. So, to practice yoga, yoga, as we know, means to connect ourselves
with the spiritual reality. "āvyabhicāriṇyā". In a way that is not easy to
shake. That is required, good, you know, that is good, requires a challenge. And
that challenge has to be effect..., accepted. And that "dhṛtiḥ", the
determination that enables us to accept such a challenge, that determination is
in the mode of goodness. Let us look at determination in the mode of passion
now. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know.

        yayā tu dharma-kāmārthān
        dhṛtyā dhārayate ’rjuna
        prasaṅgena phalākāṅkṣī
        dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha rājasī

You know. "yayā tu dharma-kāmārthān". You know. That means, for the sake of
"dharma". "arthān". "kāma" As we have discussed earlier, that among these four
"puruṣārtha", dharma, artha, kama, moksha. Most people pursue dharma, artha,
kama. You know. Of course, in modern times, people, people fo..., pursue simple
"artha" and  "kama". And do not bother much about dharma. But, you know, most
people who have some dharmic inclination, their inclination is not so much
towards "moksha". What they want is not liberation. But what they want is, you
know, you know, material prosperity. At the same time, they do not want to
become adharmic while pursuing material prosperity. So:

        yayā tu dharma-kāmārthān
        dhṛtyā dhārayate ’rjuna

You know.

        prasaṅgena phalākāṅkṣī

So, when one practices dharma, artha, "dharma-kāmārthān". You know. You know.
That means, you know, you know, one practices spiritual life. Or rather, one
practices whatever, you know, whatever one is doing, one perseveres in that. For
the sake of dharma, artha, kama, basically. Then, that is determination in the
mode of passion. So, Krishna has talked about determination which leads to yoga.
Now, yoga in which, yoga is, refers to connecting with the transcendental
reality. Whereas, here, Krishna is talking about passion, also. Not in terms of
si..., sinful activities. Although, sometimes, passion may involve sinful
activities. But it is not that everything passionate has to necessarily be
sinful. No. If that pass..., if those passionate activities are done within the
framework of dharma, then they are not considered to be sinful. So, dharma,
artha, kama, moksha. These are the "puruṣārtha"s. So:

        yayā tu dharma-kāmārthān
        dhṛtyā dhārayate ’rjuna

"dhṛtyā dhārayate". That when one's accepts for this particular se..., you know,
what, what, for, so, purpose. "prasaṅgena phalākāṅkṣī". "prasaṅgena".
"prasaṅgena" means strong attachment. "phalākāṅkṣī". One is very, you know, very
obsessed with getting the result. "dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha rājasī". This is "rājasī".
This is in the mode of passion. You know. So, here, you know, we will see that,
there are many people who do particular "vrata"s. You know. You know. Say,
sravana vrat..., vrata, some people do. But it is "dharma-kāmārthān". They think
I will do this vrata. And by which, I will get some kind of sense gratification.
Which I have not got earlier. And that is not considered a very, very elevated
form of religion. That is, you know, that is considered to be "dhṛtiḥ",
determination in the mode of passion. Now, let us look at determination in the
mode of ignorance. You know. You know.

        yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ
        viṣādaṁ madam eva ca
        na vimuñcati durmedhā
        dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī

"yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ". So, Krishna is giving various characteristics over
here. You know. So, what are the characteristics? "yayā svapnaṁ". "svapnaṁ" is
lamenting. Or it is, sorry, it is, it, dreaming. You know. You know. You know. So,
"yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ". So, actually, here, what does "svapnaṁ" represent?
"svapnaṁ" refer, refers to, you know, excessive sleeping. You know. You know.
You know. You know. There are different kinds of sleep, also. And in general,
the idea is that, you know, if one is extremely lazy, then, you know, one, that
indicates that officially leads to, even to a person sleeping more than
necessary. And then, that person sleeps more than necessary. That also has its
consequences. In terms of further affect of the mode of ignorance. And
naturally, if one sleeps more, sleeps more, it is quite likely that person will
get dreams, also, more. Although, there may be, you know, some people who sleep
a lot. And do not get any dreams. Or rather, it, or at least, do not remember
any dreams if they have got any, also. And there may be some people who sleep
less. And as soon as they sleep, they get dreams. So, here, the emphasis is on,
if "svapnaṁ" refers to a state, or the emphasis, one using the word "svapnaṁ",
is more of a mentality in whi..., in which is indicative of disconnection from
reality. You know. You know. You know. You know. Disconnection from reality
means just as when a person is in dream, that person is, will largely
disconnected from reality. So, similarly, when a person is excessively lazy.
Sleepy. That also means that the person is disconnected from reality. So, "yayā
svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ". "svapnaṁ bhayaṁ". So, fear is, although Krishna has
earl..., earlier in the same section, while talking in 18.30, He was talking
"bhayaṁ cābhayam eva ca". That there are certain things which should be feared.
And certain things which should not be feared. But here, you know, so, so, things
which have to be feared, they are talked about, you know, rarely. And the, you
know, when "bhayaṁ" is used in a positive sense. You know. It can be easily made
out from the context, itself. So, when Krishna says:

        mad-bhayād vāti vāto ’yaṁ

You know. You know. You know. That because of fear of Me, the wind moves. You
know. That fear is not like the terror conduced by terrorists. That fear is more
of a, you know, you know, harmonisation stimulated by respect. So, you know, you
know, Indra. Chandra. Vayu. Agni. Surya. They all understand that the Supreme
Lord is our greatest well-wisher. And He has a plan for the whole universe. And
we are meant to play our plan in this cosmic master plan. We are meant to play
our part. And I should play my part. The fact that I have been given a part
itself indicates that there is some basic level of trust. And then, I can either
live up to that trust. Or I can betray that trust. So, "bhayaṁ" means when there
is excessive, so, there is, this "bhayaṁ" is healthy "bhayaṁ". Where that
"bhayaṁ" which protects one from doing those things which are undesirable. But
in contrast to that, there is baseless fear. As they use the word fear. 'F'.
'E'. A'. 'R'. False. Evidence. Appearing. Real. False evidence appearing real.
That is 'F'. 'E'. 'A'. 'R'. "fear". So, the idea is that, sometimes, mo..., if
we look at our life, you know, most of the anxieties that we have, most of the
fears that we go through right now. Actually, they do not, will not matter after
a short while. Now, why they do not matter? Because they are not so
consequential. They matter for a short time. Afterwards, they do not mind,
matter so much. You know. So, similarly, when we practice spiritual life,
everything does not matter all the time. You know. You know. Sorry. Sorry. In
our day to day lives, you know, if we, when is constantly fearful of things,
when the stress, anxiety, hypotension, these are such serious problems in life.
And these problems exist because people worry about things which even not need
worry about. So, too much fear, "bhayaṁ" is a sign of "tāma-guna". You know. As
devotees, we should be warriors. Not worriers. You know. Warriors. Warriors
means by taking Krishna's assistance, we fight. Ok. When problems come, we deal
with the problems. Worrier means, just sit. And think. Think. Think. Think. And
actually, we are not even thinking productively. We are thinking aimlessly. And,
so, we have to be, we should be warriors. Not, we should not be worriers. We
should be warriors. So, be, so, here, it is "viṣā...", "yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ
śokaṁ. So, you know, "svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ". These, actually, Krishna is talking
about largely, you know, the things which waste away our mental energy. So, when
one indulges in these things, then that "dhṛtiḥ", you know, is in the mode of
ignorance. Now, this is interesting that why would one, now, if somebody is,
say, fearfl. Now, we may wonder, is there any determination that is required to
be fearful? We say determination is required to be courageous. What
determination is required to be fearful? Actually, everything retry..., requires
determination. You know. The fear itself is not a comforting emotion. Fear is a
disconcerting. Distressing. You know. Even devastating emotion. You know. But,
you know, somehow, we just hold unto that fear for a long, long time
unnecessarily. Inordinately. And that is because of, you know, you know, you
know, not understanding what should be our priority in life. So, if we do not
have a proper understanding of what I should, you know, what, who I am. And what
I should be pursuing in life. Then, small, small things become too important.
And when those small, small things appear threatened, or, you know, appear to be
endangered. You know. Then, we feel as if, as a great danger has come upon me
only.

        yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ

So, "śokaṁ". We have discussed about "śokaṁ" in, earlier, also. When to, Krishna
was talking about "kartā". So, "viṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī ca". So, there, we have
discussed "śokaṁ". You know. You know. Lamentation. Krishna uses the word "mā
śucaḥ". In 18.66. And He has earlier also used it in a few other places. Do not
lament. So, "śokaṁ" is indicating of a mentality of a shudra. "socati iti
shudra", it is sometimes said that "socati". One who laments is a shudra. "yayā
svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ". Why "śokaṁ"? It is considered to be an undesirable
emotion. Tamasic. Because, actually, even "śo...", to indulge in "śokaṁ",
sometimes, you know, when a person passes away. Say, at that time, that person,
some, say, the relatives and loved ones may just stay in a daze at the laws of
that person, loss of that person. At that loss may go for, you know, weeks.
Months. Years. Sometimes decades. And one stays in, you know, oh, why did I lose
that? Why did I lose that person? Why did I lose that person? You know. Why did
I lose that person? Now, yes, if I had lost somebody. You know. Maybe a loved
one. Or close per...., you know, close relative. A family member. That is a very
painful loss. No doubt about it. But, you know, you know, to keep living in
pain is more painful than is necessary. Yes. We had pain. And when there is,
where there is love, there is naturally, grief is there. And that grief, there
is a difference between grieving. And there is lamenting. Lamenting may largely
means one never comes out of world. One never tries to learn from it. One never
tries to grow from it. So, grieving is not bad. But lamenting is undesirable.
You know. And, you know, that is, you know, characteristic of the mode of
ignorance. It is determination in the mode of ignorance. Because, although
everybody is telling, come out of this. You know. Do not got, get caught up in
this gloomy mindset. Come out. Grow up. Yes. Life has to go on. Sometimes, we
just get a ra..., raw, life gives us a raw deal. What can we do at that time?
Just accept the deal. And move forward. With whatever next, you know, life may
bring on. "viṣādaṁ madam eva ca". "viṣādaṁ" and "madam". You know. So, "viṣādaṁ"
refers to moroseness. So, we discussed earlier about "viṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī ca".
"madam". "madam" means intoxication. Or illusion. So, "madam eva ca". "viṣādaṁ",
the, you know:

        viṣādaṁ madam eva ca
        na vimuñcati durmedhā

"durmedhā". So, Krishna has earlier used the word "sumedha". You know. Good
intelligence.  So, "durmedhā" is bad intelligence.

        na vimuñcati durmedhā
        dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī

So, one, that intelligence, which does not give up these things, although one
should, they should, they are not worth holding at all. You know. But one keeps
holding onto them. Imagining them to be a great treasure. So, that
determination, you know, is in the mode of ignorance.

        na vimuñcati durmedhā
        dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī

So, you know, sometimes, some people sleep instead of, Prabhupada would say, six
hours sleep is enough. Some people may need more. A little bit. But sometimes,
some people sleep for twelwe hours. Fiften hours. And when they sleep, you know,
everybody will, come on. Get up. Do not waste time. Do not waste your life like
this sleeping. You know. Do not disturb. You know. Actually, you know, it is
quite mortifying when others consider us to be lazy. Or irresponsible. Or, you
know, you know, or they look down upon us in any way. You know. Especially, when
we are, actually, the guilty party. And we have false in ourselves. So, at that
time, when others look down upon us, you know, so, you know, it is quite
mortifying. And to persevere is not easy. Because sometimes, some people are
lazy. And they continue to be lazy no matter how many disincentives are given
for them. Incentive is given to make a person do something. Disincentive is
given to make a per..., prevent a person from doing something. So, but, still,
they continue to be lazy. So, that is actually indicative of determination. But
it is a perverse determination. Where one wants to hold onto the thing, the very
thing which is causing one trouble. And bringing one, bringing derision in the
eyes of others. So, for example, there is addiction. So, when a person gets
addicted to something. Nobody starts out desiring to be an addict. Nobody, when
they start smoking for the first time. Or drinking for the first time. At that
time, nobody thinks that, I am goin..., I am an addict. Or I am going to be an
addict. No. That person starts off just thinking a little bit, I will enjoy. But
from that little bit enjoyment, what happens is, you know, one gets caught more.
More. More. More. And then, that addiction becomes like, ah, you know, something
which just catches a person with the nose. And when the person is caught with
the nose like that, it is very difficult to get out. So, the person just feels,
that I, that I am just possessed. And pursued. Possessed means internally, there
is a craving. A demoniac craving. I want to drink more. I want to drink more. I
want to drink more. More. More. More. And externally, it feels one is being
pursued. Pursued means, wherever one goes, one just sees that, ok, here, there
is a restaurant. Here, there is this. Here, there is this. Here, there is this.
And in this way, people's li..., minds are ablaze in flame. And tormented by
unfulfilled desires. And that causes them so much trouble. So, all this, you
know, you know, is actually, you know, in, in determination in the mode of
ignorance. So, in such determination of the mode of ignorance, basically, you
know, you know, "svapnaṁ".

        yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ
        viṣādaṁ madam eva ca

So, Krishna lists five characteristic over there. "na vimuñcati durmedhā". So,
these are all negative qualities. And normally, we do not associate negative
qualities with determination. But, you know, you know, when one continues in
these negative qualities. Even when one should be giving them up, you know,
because they are undesirable. You know. Then, that is called as determination in
the mode of ignorance. So, we could use, as we have discussed in our earlier
class, we could use, if we want to bring out the, you know, negativity that is
latent in the concept of determi..., determination in ignorance, we can, you
know, use other words which bring out that negativity. So:

        yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ
        viṣādaṁ madam eva ca
        na vimuñcati durmedhā

"durmedhā". Krishna is very strong in using the word over here. Their
intelligence is completely misdirected. It is this, so, this determination is
actually obstinacy. It is stubbornness. It is insolence. Where one is guided,
told, encouraged to do the right thing. And yet, one does the wrong thing. And
it is not just, the things do not just refer to external actions that we do. Or
external thi..., possessions that we acquire. Here, things refers to the kind of
mindsets that we cultivate, also. So, mindset is too dreamy. Or mindset is too
gloomy. This sort of mindsets are indicative of the mode of ignorance. And
there, intelligence that is there in such a person is also in the mode of
ignorance. And it is very difficult to overcome such an intelligence. You know.
Unless one cultivate..., you know, cultivates the mode of, you know, you know,
cult..., cultivates pure devotional service. And rises to Krishna Consciousness
by going through the lower modes. So, at this stage, if, say, if some of us may
find that we do have characteristics of intelligence in the mode of ignorance,
then what do we do? We use our intelligence, also. Ok, now, I am acting
impulsively. I am acting as if in "tāma-guna" now. We can try to do
introspection like that. But more importantly, we focus on trying to cultivate
devotion. And trying to please Krishna. You know. You know. And to the extent we
try to ply..., please Krishna, our conten..., curr..., current intelligence may
be in "sāttva". Or just "tāmas". But if we try to please Krishna, then Krishna
assures in 10.10:

        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ
        yena mām upayānti te

I will give you the intelligence by which you can come back to Me. So, in our
next class, we will discuss about "sukhaṁ" in the three modes. And then, we will
move on, move onto how varnashram system, you know, enables a person to rise
from karma-yoga to jnana-yoga. To bhakti-yoga.

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
