Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DokmURlaJ6Y
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now coming to the last session on the Bhagavad Gita. The concluding part. From
verses 72 to 78. You know. So, here, you know, Krishna has spoken the charam
shloka. Charam is the pinnacle. The climax. The charam shloka is what, is the
word used by, you know, you know, you know, by "Rāmā...", you know,
"Rāmānujācārya" to refer to 18.66. So, that is the climax. Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura says that, you know, the Bhagavad Gita is like a jewel box.
And is like a treasury chest, rather. And he says, in the treasure chest, there
is a strong upper covering. And a strong lower covering. And within that, there
is a s..., treasure. So, like that, he says the upper Six Cha..., the upp...,
first Six Chapters. And the last Six Chapters. They are like the covering of the
treasury chest. So, first Six Chapters talk about how karma leads to bhakti. The
last Six Chapters talk about "jñā...",  how "jñāna" leads to bhakti. And
in-between, you know, are the, you know, middle Six Chapters. 7 to 12, which
talk about bhakti directly. And they are the treasure. So, this is how, his, you
know, you know, we, under..., his revelation of how the Bhagavad Gita is
structured. But then, he says that in order, you know, inspire people to open
the chest. And discover the treasure therein, as an incentive, two shining
jewels are kept on the cover of the chest. So, when people see, oh, there is
such a, such jewels are there on the outer covering of the chest. There must be
something wonderful. So, those two jewels, which are kept on the outer cover of
the chest, they are, you know, 18.65 and 66. "man-manā bhava mad-bhakto". And
"sarva-dharmān parityajya". These are, you know, shlokas, whi..., these are
verses which reveal the love of Krishna's heart. And they invite us. Call us. To
offer love back. So, in that sense, they are reflective in very powerful way of
the essential treasure of the Gita's message. So, like this, the Gita is
structured. And after describing in 18.65 and 66. "man-manā bhava".
"sarva-dharmān parityajya". Then, Krishna starts giving a "phalashruti". First,
He cautions about whom all we can give this knowledge. In 67. And 68-69, He
talks about the glory of sharing this wisdom with others. 70 talks about
studying it.  And 71 talks about hearing it. You know. You know. So, they, here,
Krishna completes. The "phalashruti", also. Now, the Bhagavad Gita is not just
an abstract, theoretical analysis. Krishna is hearing. You know. Krishna is
speaking this. Arjuna is hearing it. And like a, you know, serious
teacher-student discussing, Krishna is concerned. Has Arjuna understood it?
Understood the message or not? So, in 18.72, Krishna asks Arjuna. This question.
So, until now, in the Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna has been questioning. And Krishna
has been answering. But now, Krishna questions. To check Arjuna's understanding.
Whether Arjuna has understood or not. Let us look at the verse. So, 18.72. You
know:

        kaccid etac chrutaṁ pārtha
        tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā
        kaccid ajñāna-sammohaḥ
        praṇaṣṭas te dhanañ-jaya

So, you know, Kri..., Arjuna is asked, being asked, "kaccid". Whether is it?
"etac chrutaṁ pārtha". Oh, "Pṛthā". Oh, Arjuna. Have you heard this? "etac
chrutaṁ". And "tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā". By you, with "aikāgreṇa cetasā". With
one-pointed attention. With one-pointed attention, have you heard this? And if
you have heard it, "kaccid ajñāna-sammohaḥ". Has the, you know, ignorance and
the illusion, "ajñāna-sammohaḥ", "praṇaṣṭas", dispelled? "te dhanañ-jaya". Oh,
"dhanañ-jaya". Oh, Arjuna. Has your ignorance been dispelled? Has your illusion
been dispelled? So, Krishna is inquiring from over here. From Arjuna. You know.
Two things. First is, have you hea..., heard attentively? And second is, have
you understood it clearly? So, you know, the first question is, you know, you
know, related in some ways to the battlefield contex..., battlefield setting.
You know. In a, when a turbulent and violent battle is about to take place, it
is possible that, you know, the student may not be very attentive. You know.
Imagine if we have to have a philos..., if we are having this Bhakti Shastri
class in a noisy marketplace. There will be so much disturbance. That naturally,
you know, often, when a class is there. And if, say, we are on a Yatra,
especially. And then, the sound system has to be arranged. And everything. That
time, we ask. You know. The speaker often asks. You know. Am I audible to you?
Are you able to hear me? So, that is to inquire whether the facilities for
hearing are adequate. So, similarly, you know, now, Krishna and Arjuna, there
is, in-between, that direction, the conversation, there is an inquiry. Now, of
course, they are close to each other. So, audability is not a problem. But the,
you know, ability to concentrate in such a situation can be a problem. So, it
is, of course, Krishna's expertise that by His presence. And by His
presentation, He transforms a battlefield into a classroom. And therein, He
reveals knowledge. The like of which has never been refu..., revea..., has
rev..., has, you know, practically never been revealed before. And never will be
revealed afterwards. Extraordinary knowledge, He reveals. So, He takes, you
know, you know, you know, a con..., student who is in a battlefield. Converts
that battlefield into a classroom. And raises the student's thoughts and
understanding to one of the climaxes in, you know, the wisdom all over the
world. So, it is, so still, Krishna, as a concerned teacher, is inquiring.
Arjuna, were you able to hear? Kri..., "tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā". "eka-agreṇa". You
know. "ekāgratā". So, actually, you know, in the stages of "samādhi", you know,
you know, "ekāgratā" is the penultimate stage. So, there are stage..., we have
discussed these different stages in, you know, you know, you know, over Sixth
Chapter, Dhyana yoga. So, you know, "ekāgratā" is a concentrated. Is the second
last stage. So, that, so, that, that also, that can refer to a yogic stage of
immense, you know, concentration. Or it can, in general, refer to attention.
Concentra..., concentrated, you know, hearing. So, con..., were you atten...,
could you here attentively, Arjuna? You know. And then, of course, we may say
that, attentively, I have heard. But that is, alone is not enough. Has Arjuna
been able to understand? "kaccid ajñāna-sammohaḥ". So, illu..., ignorance. And
illusion. Krishna is using two words over here.

So, ignorance means to not know. And illusion means to s..., understand wrong.
So, both are problems. You know. There is, the problem of, you know, not
knowing. If I do not know. For example, if I am sick. And if I do not know how
to take a treatment, I will stay sick. On the other, similar, you know, what,
similarly, or even worse. If I am sick. And I do not know what is the treatment.
And I take some other medicine. That may lead to some further complication. So,
actually, both are problems for us. To not know the right thing. And to think of
the wrong thing as the right. So, both of these have, both of these are,
misconceptions have to be removed. Because, so Krishna is asking Arjuna, "kaccid
ajñāna-sammohaḥ". "praṇaṣṭas te". "praṇaṣṭas". Destroyed. "dhanañ-jaya". Oh,
Arjuna, you are the conqueror of great wealth. So, have you, you know, conquered
this particular wealth? Have you been able to, you know, understa..., conquer
over ignorance? And, you know, illusion? And have you attained the wealth of
wisdom? So, the acharyas describe over here, you know, the implication of
Krishna's question is that Ar..., Krishna, as a compassionate teacher, is
asking. Have you understood? And if you have not understood, the implication is,
Krishna is ready to speak, whatever Arjuna has not understood, again. And if
Krishna, if Arjuna wants, Krishna is ready to speak the whole Bhagavad Gita,
also, again. So, whole Bhagavad Gita again. That is the extent of Krishna's
concern. So, generally, nowadays, if we have colleges in schools. Where there
are teachers. And the teachers explain something in school. And often, they
explain in such a way that the students cannot understand. And so, student goes
to teacher. And says, teacher, can you please explain? Teacher says, I will
explain. Come to my private couching classes. You know. Pay extra fees. Then, I
will explain to you. So, for them, teaching is often a business. But for
Krishna, it is not a, it is not a commercial enterprise. It is a compassionate
enterprise. You know. He is not concerned with, you know, you know, you know,
you know, our, anything that He will get. He is concerned with our well-being.
So, that is why He is sa..., saying, has, h..., oh, Arjuna, have you understood?
Has your ignorance and illusion been destroyed? If not, I am ready to speak the
whole thing again. And in this way, Krishna expresses His loving concern. So,
here, Arjuna replies. So, Arjuna has spoken. The last time, in, he spoke was in
18.1. When he asked the, the "tattvam" of "sannyāsa". And "tyāga". And then,
now, he is going to speak in 18.73. And these are the last verse that are
spoken in this conversation between Krishna and Arjuna. So, let us look at, you
know, that, you know, you know, question over here. In 18.73. So:

        arjuna uvāca

        naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā
        tvat-prasādān mayācyuta
        sthito ’smi gata-sandehaḥ
        kariṣye vacanaṁ tava

So, "naṣṭo mohaḥ". "naṣṭo". "naṣṭo" means destroyed. Arjuna was asked by
"praṇaṣṭas te". So, Krishna is, you know, Arjuna is confirming. "naṣṭo mohaḥ".
Yes, "naṣṭaḥ". "mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā". Actually, my "mohaḥ" has been destroyed.
And my "smṛtir", my memory has been restored. So, what memory? Memory that I am
the atma. Memory that I am primarily a devotee. And I am primarily meant to
serve Krishna. "naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā". And how has all this happened?
"tvat-prasādān mayācyuta". So, the word "prasād" is coming the third time in
this 18th Chapter. The mercy. Because ultimately, bhakti is a path of mercy. So,
"tvat-prasādān mayācyuta". The word "prasād" has come earlier in 18.58. You
know. Then:

        mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi
        mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi

And then, again, it has come in, you know, 18.62. You know:

        tam eva śaraṇaṁ gaccha
        sarva-bhāvena bhārata
        tat-prasādāt parāṁ śāntiṁ
        sthānaṁ prāpsyasi śāśvatam

"prasādāt". So, "prasād". This mercy. So, the Bhagavad Gita gives a lot of
analysis. But in its conclusion, it is a path, it describe itself as a path of
grace. As a path of mercy. And as a path of mercy, it is revealing such
extraordinary levels of knowledge. So, by Krishna's grace, that which we cannot
understand very easily. We can understand. You know. You know. By His mercy. So,
what is difficult for us to do, it becomes easy by Krishna's mercy. And Krishna
is, Arjuna is saying, yes, it is by Your mercy, oh, Krishna, that I have
understood. It, "tvat-prasādān mayācyuta". "acyuta". Is significant that the
first and the last references, by Krishna to Arjuna, are with "acyuta". You
know, you know, the Bhagavad Gita begins in the First Chapter where? Krishna
tells Arjuna.

        senayor ubhayor madhye
        rathaṁ sthāpaya me ’cyuta

"rathaṁ sthāpaya me ’cyuta". Oh, Arju..., "acyuta". Oh, Ar..., oh, Lord, please
place me between the o..., two armies. And now, also, he is using same word
"acyuta". Why "acyuta"? "cyuta" means that which fall..., one who falls.
"acyuta" means one who never falls. So, Krishna never falls. Krishna never fails
His devotees. So, Krishna always remains transcendental. And Krishna unfailingly
helps His devotees. You know. So, in the beginning of the Bhagavad Gita,
Krishna, you know, was serving Arjuna. And as a serva..., as a charioteer in
that, you know, service role, He followed Krishna's, you know, you know, Ar...,
Arjuna's request. And took the chariot in-between. You know. Even when Krishna
is asking as a spiritual master, that is a borned of love. And in love, you
know, the devotee wants to serve the Lord. And the Lord wants to serve the
devotee. So, the Lord took on the role of a spiritual master. And Krishna is
telling that, oh, Kri..., Arjuna is saying that You are "acyuta", still. You
know. When You are acting, when You are the spiritual master, as a spiritual
master, also, You are perfect. You know. You do not fail. You do not fall. So,
you know, I asked You for enlightenment. And You have given me en..., you know,
enlightenment. By Your mercy. And then, "sthito ’smi". Now, I have become
properly situated. Earlier, Arjuna was shaken. You know. He was, physically,
also, trembling. And internally, also, he was shaking. But now, "sthito ’smi".
And then, "gata-sandehaḥ". "sandehaḥ" means doubt. You know. "gata" means to go
away. You know. You know. Arjuna's doubts have gone away. "gata-sandehaḥ". And
then, all my doubts have gone away. You know. How? By "sth...", "tvat-prasādān".
And now, after doubts have gone away, then what happens? "kariṣye vacanaṁ tava".
I will do Your will. "kariṣye vacanaṁ tava". So, actually, the end of the
Bhagavad Gita is what? It is not simply, you know, you know, call, you know, it
is not simply a, ab..., just an abstract intellectual exercise. Or a, you know,
elocution performance. No. It is a call for transformation. It is a call for
redirection. It is a call for practical change. Just as a doctor, when the
doctor gives a prescription to the studen..., you know, to the, the patient, it
is a call for change. Change means, the patient, ok, you should do these, these
things. And you should avoid these, these, these things. So, then what does the
patient do? If a doctor ackn..., doctor tells, ok, this is your disease. Doctor
may shortage, show some x-rays. Explain some things. And at the end of that,
what will doctor say? Ok. Now, you have to take these, these medicines. And what
should the patient say at that time? Doct..., patient is going to say, oh,
doctor, very good doct..., you are very good speaker. And that is, that is not
the point over there. It is not a how good a speaker you are. The point is,
thank. I will do what you say. The patient has to cooperate with the doctor's
prescription. And do what the doctor is saying. So, similarly, Krish..., Arjuna
is telling "kariṣye vacanaṁ tava". So, when we hear from the spiritual master.
When we hear from Krishna. And Srila Prabhupada. And the, the devotees.
Actually, after hearing, we may say, as a matter of appreciation. That yes, it
was a good class. If we like the class. But the, you know, real appeciation, you
know, is shown not in appreciation. But in action. Real appreciation is shown in
implementation.

Yes, we do not just speak that, oh, it is a very good class. Real appreciation
is shown through implementation. I imp..., I do the action of implementing what
has been taught. And when we do that, you know, then there is true benefit. You
know. The, you know, that way, Krishna i..., is telling Arjuna. You know.
Krishna is giving a call for action to Arjuna. And Arjuna accepting that call.
"kariṣye vacanaṁ tava". We discussed earlier about how this section of the Gita,
yeah, you know, in this 18.73, reflects the pinnacle of surrender. In the Bible,
there is a famous statement. "Let thy will be done, not my will". So, you know,
you know, "Let thy will be done, not my will" in, so, refers to, you know, the,
at the, just before the crucifixion on the previous night. Jesus, by His
foresight, was able to know that tomorrow, there is going to be great danger.
And at that time, he, he requested, you know, oh, God, let, "let the cup pass".
"Let the cup pass" means, at that time, one way, people were killed, were, you
know, if people were punished. And they had to die, they had to be given a cup
of poison. Like Socrates was given a cup of hemlock. Cu..., cup of poison,
basically. So, the, it, Jesus was referring to that. Let the cup pass. That
means, you know, let the calamity, that is about to come, let it not come. He
made a request like that. It was a prayer. But then, after that, he said, "Let
thy will be done, not mine". "Let thy will be done". So, you know, oh, God, you
know, you know, I, you know, that, now, he is, he, this is also surrender. That
Krishn..., oh, Krishna, oh, God, oh, Krishna, what is Your will? I will accept
it. But here, Krishna is going for, Arjuna is going forward. And not only saying
that, let Your will be done. It is like Krishna is Himself, through various
agents, doing His will. And we accept it. But here, Arjuna is saying, I will go
further. And say, I will do Your will. So, it is not just, it is my
responsibility not just to accept Your will. But my responsibility is to
implement Your will. So, he is implementing the will. And generally, when we
talk about surrender, you know, it is important that we ask, you know, not why
this. But how now? Even things start going wrong, you know, we can ask, start,
we can protest. And resent. By saying why this? Why this? Why is this happening
like this? Why is that happening like that? Why is that happening like that? But
instead of that, if you ask the question, how now? "how now" means, ok, if this
has had happened, how can I act now? How can I best serve Krishna? If I act in
that way, then I will find a way to move forward in my life. And becoming an
enjoyer is disempowering. Because it leaves us at the mercy of the conditions
necessary for that enjoyment. When we ask, "why this" means I had a particular
enjoyment. And now, I am not able to enjoy. So, I am asking, why this? But when
we decide to become enjoyer, it is a, it is disempowering. Because we become so
many de..., so much dependent on so many circumstances. Which are not in our
control. In contrast, if we become a servant, that is empowering. Because we
have freedom. In all situations, we can serve Krishna. Maybe, not in the same
specific way. But we can always keep serving Krishna. In some way or the other.
Even when we are sick on our death bed, at that time, we can definitely not
enjoy our senses anyway. But there, also, we can serve Krishna by remembering
Him. By speaking about Him. By glorifying Him. And in that way, we can move
closer to Krishna.  So, becoming a servant is empowering. And that is why
surrender is not passive.  Surren..., surrender is not a weakning. Surrender is
strengthening. Surrender is not empower..., disempowering. It is empowering. So,
now, let us move to the next verse. So, Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport
that, "mohaḥ", Prabhupada writes "naṣṭo mohaḥ". So, as I mentioned:

"Moha refers to that which is opposed to knowledge."

"opposed to knowledge" means that, living entity is the servant, living ent..,
as I said, living entity is the servant. But the living entity, entity thinks he
is not a servant. But is a master. That is "mohaḥ". And then, Prabhupada
explains, a se..., Krishna, Prabhupada is giving a simple explanation.

"Kṛṣṇa consciousness is acting according to Kṛṣṇa’s order.".

So, this is an important definition because Krishna Con..., Prabhupada is
explaining, Krishna Consciousness is not just Consciou..., matter of
consciousness. Yes, it is a matter of consciousness. But then, that
consciousness has to be expressed through action. You know. We think about
Krishna. We think about Krishna means, we think about how we can serve Krishna.
And when we serve Krishna, we move forward in our spiritual life. By moving
closer to Krishna through that service. You know. So, "kariṣye vacanaṁ tava".
You know. You know. That is, he is ready to follow Krishna's instructions. Now,
the conversation moves back. And "Sañjaya" speaks.

        sañjaya uvāca

        ity ahaṁ vāsudevasya
        pārthasya ca mahātmanaḥ
        saṁvādam imam aśrauṣam
        adbhutaṁ roma-harṣaṇam

So, he is telling over here, "sañ...", "ity ahaṁ vāsudevasya". You know. So,
"vā...", between "vāsudeva". "pārthasya ca mahātmanaḥ". Between "vāsudeva" and
"pārtha". You know. This conversation has happened. So, there are le..., levels
of conversations. You know. The Bhagavad Gita is, you know, you know, it, coming
a part of the Mahabharata. So, the Mahabharata is, at outer level, is what?  It
is a, this Mahabharata is narrated by "Vaiśampāyana" Rsi to, you know,
"Janamejaya". To the, who is the son of "Parikṣit" Maharaja. The great grandson
of Arjuna. So, that is outer level conversation. That there are various levels
of nesting in the Mahabharata. That different conversations are happening. But
then, within the narration o..., of the events of the Mahabharata, there is, you
know, you know, you know, there is Maha..., there is, you know, "Sañjaya"
narrating to "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". You know. At the events on the "Kurukṣetra"
battlefield. And within that narration, in the "Bhishma Parva", there is, you
know, the conversation between Krishna. And Arjuna. So, there is outer level.
"Vaiśampāyana". And, and "Janamejaya". Then, there is the "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". And
"Sañj...", "Sañjaya". And "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". And that is Krishna. And Arjuna. So,
now, the, Krishna and Arjuna conversation has been the, going on until now. So,
now, the, so, the camera focus moves backwards. It moves to "Sañjaya". And
"Dhṛtarāṣṭra". So, in one sense, the conversation of the Bhagavad Gita is also a
conversation between "Sañjaya". And Arjuna. Is that, so "Dhṛta...", you know,
sorr..., sorry, "Sañjaya". And "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". The Bhagavad Gita conversation
starts with "Dhṛtarāṣṭra"'s original question. That "dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca" is,
first verse, he says, "kim akurvata sañjaya". Oh, what did they do on the
battlefield? So, he is describing what, what, what happened thereafter. And now,
"Sañjaya" is concluding that. And he is saying, what happened, the first thing
that happened was this, this beautiful conversation took place. So, as this
conversation took place:

        ity ahaṁ vāsudevasya
        pārthasya ca mahātmanaḥ

"mahā...", it is significant, "mahātmanaḥ". Now, Krishna has, this word
"mahātma" has been used by "Sañjaya". To refer to both the devotee. And the
Lord. You know. The:

        mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha
        daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

I am, not by "Sañjaya", I am sorry. Krishna has used this word to refer to His
devotees. "mahātmā". You know. For, for example, in 10.13. And, you know,
similarly, He says:

        sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ

In 7.19. So, the word "mahātma" is used to the Lord, the, it referred to
devotees in the Bhagavad Gita in Krishna's words. Now, in the Eleventh Chapter,,
you know, the word "mahātma" is also used to refer to Krishna. When in:

        mahā-yogeśvaro hariḥ

So, there, the word "mahātmā" is also used to refer to Krishna. So, here,
"Sañjaya" is, in one verse, saying, both of them are "mahātma"s. Krishna is
"mahātma". Arjuna is "mahātma". Now, Krishna is, of course, He is the, the word,
"mahātma" literally refers to "mahā-ātma". The great soul. So, Krishna is the
Supersoul. He is the Paramatma. He is present everywhere. So, He is definitely
the great soul. But what about Arjuna? How is he the great soul? He is the great
soul because he is, you know, you know, the, he is surrendered to Krishna. He
has understood the message of devotion. And he has surrendered to the will of
the Lord. So, the small soul, when the small soul surrenders to the will of the
big soul, the small soul also becomes big. How the small soul becomes big in
influence. There is such a soul. Soul has become big, is called as "mahātma".
So, sou..., so, "pārthasya ca mahātmanaḥ". And then, "saṁvādam imam aśrauṣam".
"aśrauṣam". "aśrauṣam" means to hear. "śravaṇ" is to hear. So, "saṁvādam imam
aśrauṣam". I have heard this "saṁvādam". This conversation, I have heard. And
what is the nature of this conversation? "adbhutaṁ roma-harṣaṇam". It is giving
two descriptions of it. "adbhutaṁ". It is wonderful. It is extraordinary. It is
amazing. And as a result of this amazement, what is happening? "roma-harṣaṇam".
The hair on my body are standing up. Standing up. So, it is thrilling. It is
astonishing. And thrilling. And actually, if we think in, see, that the start of
the Bhagavad Gita, you know, when Arjuna, you know, you know, you know, wa...,
was contemplating, the prospect of fighting with his rel..., relatives, so, at
that time:

        roma-harṣaś ca jāyate
        gāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt
        tvak caiva paridahyate

So, at that time, also, he was discovering "roma-harṣaḥ". So, "roma-harṣaḥ", the
standing of the hair, it can happen in two situations. One is, in a state of
great fear. And second is, in a state of great ecstasy. So, Arjuna was very
fearful. You know. Not just fearful of losing his own life. But fearful of, you
know, being a part, or even a cause of a great disaster. A disaster that would
involve, you know, the death of so many people. You know. So, that time, that,
there was, the, the "roma-harṣaḥ" was because of fear. This "roma-harṣa" is
because of ecstasy. As will be seen in the next verses. You know. So, here, he
is saying, you know, I have heard this conversation. And the result of hearing
is, it is a wonderful conversation. And my hair are standing on end.
"roma-harṣaś ca jāyate". You know. You know. So, now, he will describe, ok, how
was I? "aśrauṣam". I have, I have heard this conversation. Now, how has he
heard? That he will describe in the, this ver..., 18.75.

        vyāsa-prasādāc chrutavān
        etad guhyam ahaṁ param
        yogaṁ yogeśvarāt kṛṣṇāt
        sākṣāt kathayataḥ svayam

So, "vyāsa-prasādāc chrutavān". By the mercy of "vyāsa", we have heard.
"śrutavān". "śrutavān". "vyāsa-prasādāc chrutavān". So, how is that, that by
"vyāsa-prasādāc chrutavān"? We have discussed it at the start of the Bhagavad
Gita, itself. You know. Actually, you know, "vyāsa-prasādāc", that means, you
know, at the start of the Bhagavad Gita, or at the start, just before the
"Kurukṣetra" war, "Vyāsadeva" came. And, you know, he was, he trie..., he had,
tried to give, he gave good council to Duryodhana. But Duryodhana was
incorrigible. Not ready to hear anything. And then, he, "Vyā...", spoke,
"Vyāsadeva" spoke with "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". And he said, if you want to see the
battle, I can give you eyes, also. "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" said that what is the use of
eyes? You know. Throughout, I, I did not see the life of my sons. What, what is
the use of seeing their death? He knew in his heart that, actually, they are all
going to die. So, therefore, he said that what is the use? You know. You know.
So, you know, but still, I want to hear what happens. And then, "Vyāsadeva"
said that, I will give him special eyes to "Sañjaya". Who is your secretary. So,
"Sañjaya", and, you know, you know, "Vyā...", and "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" had a special
relationship. Although, "Sañjaya" was, now, Vidura and Vidu..., "Dhṛtarāṣṭra",
they were brothers. Although, Vidura was lower because of in, born, born in a
"śūdra" family. So, you know, he was, you know, you know, not, he did not, never
became a king. But "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" respected him for his wisdom. And the, Vidura
would often give advice to "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". But Vid..., when Vidura left, at that
time, "Sañjaya", who had been clearly subordinate to him, as a secretary, you
know, but "Sañjaya" also would sometimes give counsel. Sometimes, try to give
good advice to "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". So, "Sañ...", you know, that is why, because
"Sañjaya" also had an intimate relationship. You know. You know. "Vyāsadeva"
said, ok, I will give special vision to "Sañjaya". Then, what happened by that
vision? "vyāsa-prasādāc chrutavān". By his mercy, actually, Kri..., you know,
although he was far away from the battlefields, you know, "Kurukṣetra" and
Hastinapur are not, you know, not neighboring cities, also. They are quite far
away. But although, they are far away. There was a mystic television. By which,
Kri..., Arjuna was able to see. Sorry. By which, "Sañjaya" was able to see. And
"etad guhyam ahaṁ param". So, actually, it is not just a matter of seeing. The,
even if "Sañjaya" had been right next to, you know, Arjuna. When Krishna was
speaking. That alone would not have been able to understand. So,
"vyāsa-prasādāc" refers, not just to, you know, the special vision. And
audability that was provided. But it also refers to the special comprehension
that was provided. So, that is, you know, by mercy, we do not just get vision.
But we get comprehension. So, what happened is, you know, you know, he was not
able to, only able to hear or see what was happening on the battlefield. But
along with that, he was also able to understand it. And that is why he is
saying, actually, this "guhyaṁ", "parāṁ". So, he is using the same words which
Krishna has used earlier in 18.64. He says, you know, "sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhū...",
see:

        sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ
        śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ

So, it is said like that. You know. Most confidential knowledge. "paramaṁ
vacaḥ". Supreme instruction. So, he is using the same words over here. "etad
guhyam ahaṁ param". And what is the speciality of this knowledge? It is
"guhyam", "param":

        yogaṁ yogeśvarāt kṛṣṇāt
        sākṣāt kathayataḥ svayam

"kathayataḥ svayam". For, He has spoken himself. Who has spoken it? "yogaṁ
yogeśvarāt kṛṣṇāt". You know. That Lord Krishna who is "yogeśvarāt". Who is a
Lord of all mystical powers. He has Himself spoken. You know. How wonderful it
is. You know. If we, you know, you know, the, throughout history, there have
been greatly, you know, they di..., great elocutionsts. And, you know,
sometimes, even, decades or centuries later, if some speeches some people have
given, then, you know, the, later on, people hear those speeches. So, there may
be some, you know, you know, some heads of state. Before a historic wars, they
gave some speech. You know. Short speech which inspired the soldiers to fight
all. And to go forward. And beat a victory. Then, afterwards, history, you know,
historians and other people, who study history, they say, oh, that was such a
great speech. And then, somebody may say, actually, I was there at that time.
When that speech was given. I heard that speech alive. So, "sākṣāt", I heard it.
So, "Sañjaya" is telling "sākṣāt kathayataḥ svayam". So, Krishna Himself spoke
it. And Krishna is no ordinary person. If we look at the history of the universe
in terms of the cosmic timescales that are described. Within those mat...,
mat..., vast timescales, actually, what Krishna speaks is so rare. You know.
When, when Krishna appears, it is so rare. Krishna Himself does not appear,
although He appears, you know, repeatedly. "yuge yuge". But still, in terms of
the vastness of the universal time, Krishna's appearance timespan is relatively
small. And within that, also, it is not that all the time, Krishna is speaking
systematic philosophical instructions. No, mostly, Krishna is performing "līlā".
And occasionally, He may speak some instructions. We said, only, do not see Lord
"Rāma" speaking, you know, anything comparable with the Bhagavad Gita directly.
He gives instructions at various places. But nothing directly comparable to the
Bhagavad Gita. So, "sākṣāt kathayataḥ svayam". So, it is very rare for the Lord
to appear. And it is very rare for the Lord to "sva...", when on His appearance,
speak philosophy so systematically. And succinctly. And then, it is even rarer
for a devotee to be present at that, you know, for a devotee, to be actually
able to hear that. So, although, "Sañjaya" is not directly present. But still,
it is as good as direct. Because he is able to hear. "sākṣāt kathayataḥ svayam".
So, through this verse, we see "Sañjaya"'s grat..., gratitude. And appreciation.
He is saying that, you know, you know, I am, he is exp..., he is not just saying
to Krishna, thank you. Thank you for giving this message. Actually, the tha...,
thanks is implicit. But there is much more than thanks over here. He is saying,
oh, how fortunate I am. Sometimes, we may speak, you know, you know, speak the
words of thanks without valuing what we have been given earlier. What, you know,
what we have, you know, without volui..., valuing what has been given. And for
which we are externally using the word thanks for it. But here, Krishna, you
know, when Krishna is speaking, Arjuna is appr..., you know, "Sañjaya" is
appreciating. And he is saying, how fortunate I am that I was able to hear this
conversation. And it was all by the mercy of "Vyāsadeva". So, by his mercy, I
had vision. And by his mercy, I had comprehension. So, Srila Prabhupada explains
that, just as we have got this message. Just as "Sañjaya" has got this message,
we can also get the message. You know. So, one who, you know, so, Prabhupada
explains that:

"If one does not come to the disciplic succession, he cannot hear Kṛṣṇa;
therefore his knowledge is always imperfect,"

You know. So, therefore, what he is saying is that, actually, we have to come in
parampara. And hear it. So, just as, you know, by his, by, by "Vyā...", by
"Sañjaya"'s spiritual master, "Vyāsa", "Vyāsadeva"'s mercy, "Sañjaya" was able
to understand. Similarly, we can understand by the mercy of our spiritual
master. You know. And without that mercy, we will not be able to understand
properly. So, as devotees, we are grateful to Srila Prabhupada. And to our
spiritual master. And to the vaishnavas who have given us understanding. Now,
further, you know, "Sañjaya" will describe. What happens now? He says, you know:

        rājan saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya
        saṁvādam imam adbhutam
        keśavārjunayoḥ puṇyaṁ
        hṛṣyāmi ca muhur muhuḥ

You know. "rājan", you know, "saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya". Oh, king. Hear. You know.
Remembering again and again. Again and again. "saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya". "saṁvādam
imam adbhutam". "adbhutam". So, he is saying, using the word "adbhutam" second
time. Earlier, he has used the word "adbhutam" in, you know, just two verses
ago. You know, and, you know, "keśavārjunayoḥ puṇyaṁ". So, this is, you know,
"puṇyaṁ". It is a purifying, auspicious, sacred conversation. And what is
happening? I am rebe..., remembering again. And again. And "hṛṣyāmi ca muhur
muhuḥ". I am in thrill. "hṛṣyāmi". I am taking pleasure in this conversation.
Again. And again. Again. And again. You know. So, "hṛṣyāmi", so, Prabhupada
writes that, you know:

"The result of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is that one becomes increasingly enlightened,
and he enjoys life with a thrill, not only for some time, but at every moment."

"muhur muhuḥ". "hṛṣyāmi ca muhur muhuḥ". So, we will just discuss about this
"hṛṣyāmi". You know. Because the same senti..., the, you know, f..., sentiment
is repeated by "Sañjaya" in the next verse. You know. So, we will recite that
verse. And then, we will discuss. You know.

        tac ca saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya
        rūpam aty-adbhutaṁ hareḥ
        vismayo me mahān rājan
        hṛṣyāmi ca punaḥ punaḥ

So, "tac ca saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya". "saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya". Hearing. "rūpam
aty-adbhutaṁ hareḥ". "aty-adbhutaṁ hareḥ". You know. You know. This form is
extraordinary. "aty-adbhutaṁ". And then, after seeing this ext..., you know,
now, he is referring, "aty-adbhutaṁ hareḥ" refers to, you know, the
"viśva-rūpa". Which he has seen. "tac ca saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya". So, I am see...,
he is remembering the extraordinary "viśva-rūpa" that "Sañ...", Krishna had
shown. And he is saying "vismayo me mahān rājan". I am imm..., immensely
astonished. I am, I am wonderstruck. Hugely wonderstruck. And "hṛṣyāmi ca punaḥ
punaḥ". So, there are similarities in this, you know, 76 and 77 verses. That
"saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya" is there in both, in the first line of both. There, it was
"rājan saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya". Here, it, "tac ca saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya". You know.
So, the first line has similarities. And last line also has similarities. There,
it was "hṛṣyāmi ca muhur muhuḥ". Here, it is "hṛṣyāmi ca punaḥ punaḥ". You know.
"hṛṣyāmi ca punaḥ punaḥ". "muhur muhuḥ". So, essentially, the meaning is same.
"hṛṣyāmi". To delight. To rejoice. To be jubilant. You know. Actually, when we
hear Krishna's message, the result of hearing Krishna's message is that we
become deeply, you know, you know, thrilled. Enlivened in an extraordinary way.
You know. It is described that when Narada Muni had the darshan, Narada boy, in
his earlier life, had the darshan of Krishna, what was the result of that
darshan? You know. That dar..., you know, of the Supreme Lord, when he had
darshan. Actually, that darshan thrilled him completely. It thrilled him so much
that, you know, he was just, you know, his, he, as if, each and every one of his
senses was independently enlivened. It was an extraordinary experience for him.
To have his senses enlivened like that. Amazing, it was. So, that is how he
became extraordinary enlivened. And "hṛṣyāmi ca punaḥ punaḥ". So, similarly,
what effect we can get by the darshan of Krishna, we can get that affect, even
by, you know, His remembrance. And especially, along with the remembrance of the
message, when there is a remembrance of the form, also. So, the thrill is
enormous. You know. You know. When this world, people want new pleasures. And
most people think that to do, get new pleasures, I have to do new activities.
New activities. That is why what, what they try to do. They try to go to, you
know, travel to new places. Or maybe, they buy new gadgets. Or they, you know,
you know, try to develop relation, new relationships. In order to find out new
houses. Sometimes, new spouses. All these things, they try to do. New, new
things. So, people want newness in their life. Freshness in their life. Thrill
in their life. And they try to do it by, get, doing new, new activities.
However, no matter, how new the activities that we do, ultimately, the pleasure
available in all new acitiviti..., in all act..., material activities boils down
to eating. Sleeping. Mating. And defending. So, ultimately, there is no new
pleasure available at the bodily level. At the mat..., in material existence.
There may be some superficially new covering. But ultimately, this pleasures
down, boil down to eating. Sleeping. Mating. Defending. You know. So, if we want
to raise above eating. Sleeping. Mating. Defending. Then, we need to turn
towards Krishna. We need to, you know, love Krishna. Now, in bhakti, it seems as
if we are doing the same activities constantly. We are always, you know, just,
you know, you know, you know, say, chan..., we chanting the same holy names.
Taking darshan of more or less the same deities. You know. And then, we are
doing more or less the same activities, it seems.

So, the, although, we are doing the same activities, then how is it that we get
so much thrill? That thrill comes, we, we get freshness. We get joy. Because
that is way, you know, that is not, you know, because of the newness of the
activities. But bec..., newness of the person with whom we are connecting.
Krishna is ever-fresh. Krishna is supremely attractive. And He keeps revealing
His attractiveness more. And more. And more. You know. To all living beings. And
as His revelation becomes more and more. Then, our att..., then He, we start
relishing His beauty more. And more. And that is why, even if a devotee had to
have darshan of Krishna, the devotee can just relish the darshan of Krishna for
all of eternity. There is nothing else required for that devotee. Just that
darshan can be relished for all of eternity. That is the sweetness. That is the
glory of Krishna. So, you know, "hṛṣyāmi ca", "puhur...", "muhur muhuḥ". "punaḥ
punaḥ". So, it is the same way, if we remember the Bhagavad Gita, the Bhagavad
Gita can give us thrill, also. You know. See, actually, the Bhagavad Gita is a
conversation at multiple levels. You know. At a multiple level means, yes, it is
a conversation between, you know, Krishna and Arjuna, of course. But along with
that, it is also a conversation between "Sañ...", "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". And "Sañjaya".
So, now, we see that the same message is spoken by Krishna to Arjuna. And same
message is repeated by "Sañjaya" to "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". So, Arjuna was under
illusion. And Arjuna came out of illusion. "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" heard, you know, spoke
the, heard the same message that was spoken by "Sañjaya". Or rather, repeated by
"Sañjaya". But "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" was not changed. You know. "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" kept
hoping even after that, the Pandavas will somehow Kau..., will somehow lose. And
Kauravas will win. Of course, that hope proved to be futile. But he kept hoping.
And hoping like that. So, you know, what was the speciality? So, what, what,
whi..., by which, Arjuna was able to understand. And have a change of heart that
"Dhṛtarāṣṭra" did not have. That is, Arjuna was submissive. "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" was,
might have been inquisitive. But he was attached. He was biased. So, you know,
you know, submissiveness alone is not enough. You know. So, sorry,
inquisitiveness alone is not enough. Along with "inquisitiveness",
submissiveness also is required. That is why we see, "paripraśnena". And
"praṇipātena" is also there. 4.34 while describing how we should go to the
spiritual master. Both are described. "paripraśnena". Inquisitiveness. But along
with that, submissiveness is also required. So, "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" was, you know, you
know, submi..., "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" was inq..., he was inquisitive. "kim akurvata
sañjaya". But he was not submissive. And that is why his heart did not change.
And why was he not submissive? Because he was attached. He was very strongly
attached to whom? To his son, Duryodhana. And he was attached to the hope of
being, of continuing on as the king. And because of that hope, he was blinded.
In fact, earlier, also, the hope before the whole "Kurukṣetra", you know, war
took place. And before the, you know, conflict between the Pandavas and Kauravas
became severe, Krishna had send "Akrūra" to Vrinda... from, to Hastinapur. To
observe what is happening. And to, you know, warn, you know, "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" of
the consequences of mis..., misdeeds. You know. You know.

But "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" said, oh, Vidura, what you have speaken..., is true, oh, he
has told, not Vidura. Oh, "Akrūra", what you have spoken is true. It is like,
the, your words are nectar. But unfortunately, I cannot accept them. He says
that just as, your words are like lightening in the sky. At, in a dark night.
Lightening illumines. It illumin..., illumines for a few moments. But after
that, again, there is darkness. So, like that, when we are too attached, that
when we hear the words of wisdom, there is temporary illumination. But
afterwards, again, there is darkness. You know. So, you know, as long as we are
attached, then it is difficult for us to exp..., you know, to realise the wisdom
of the Gita. Of course, you know, even if we are attached, we can start applying
the Bhagavad Gita. Step by step. By step. What, even little. Little. Little.
Whatever within our the, our attachments, we, bind us. But they do not
completely freeze us. They give us some freedom. And within that freedom, we can
try to apply the Gita. And by that, the bondage, that is there, that will
decrease. And eventually, we will become free to, you know, you know, ga...,
free of the attachment completely. And free to serve Krishna. But of course, my,
the point of my discussion is, here is not "Dhṛtarāṣṭra"'s mentality. But it is
"Sañjaya"'s mentality. You know. "Sañjaya", in one sense, in, he was, we may say
that he was a failure. That he tried to explain the message of the Gita to
"Dhṛtarāṣṭra". But "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" did not accept it. So, when "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" did
not accept it, what, what does it mean? That means that, you know, "Sañjaya" was
unsuccessful. It is like, you know, a student, a teacher is explaining to a
student. And the student, you know, does not understand. You know. Then, what is
happening? We may say the teacher has failed. So, has "Sañjaya" failed?
Actually, "Sañjaya" is not, "Sañjaya" is not dejected. "Sañjaya" is elated. He
is jubilant. He is thrilled. He is "hṛṣyāmi". So, why is that? Because "Sañjaya"
is receptively receiving. And transmitting the message of the Gita. And just by
that contact with Krishna, he is thrilled. So, actually, similarly, when we try
to share Krishna's message. If we are Krishna Consciousness, then we will relish
Krishna's message even when, even if people are not hearing. And you know.
Changing themselves. You know. According through, to, you know, to harmonise
with that message. So, that is the glory of Krishna Consciousness. That e...,
even when, even if we speak. And people do not understand. People do not
appreciate. People do not change their hearts. It does not matter. Because, by
speaking about Krishna, we become purified. We come in contact with Krishna. And
we become thrilled by that contact. So, therefore, actually, there is no failure
in Krishna Consciousness. At a material level, sometimes, there may be failures.
You know. That means, it is, that means, when we try to serve Krishna, it is not
that the service will be successful. You know. We see in the Mahabharata,
Abhimanyu, at a material level, failed. He, you know, penetre..., he fought
against the Kauravas. Then, he lost his life. But actually, he laid down his
life in the service of the Lord. And by that, he crossed over illusion. He
crossed over temptation. And "Vyāsadeva" comes to console "Yudhiṣṭhira" at that
time. And he says, all of us, we are still in the world of temptation. But
Abhimanyu, though, so young, has gone beyond the reach of temptation. And he has
attained the eternal world.

You know. So, rather than lamenting for one who has attained such a glorious
destination, we should lament for all of us who are still in this world of
temptation. So, actually speaking, you know, you know, what Krishna is telling,
what is, "Vyāsadeva" is telling Arjuna, is that, you know, "Yudhiṣṭhira" is that
there is no failure. There is ultimately success. For a devotee. So, actually,
when we are trying to serve Krishna, we, we need to remember that the pri...,
our primary purpose, in service, is not, you know, productivity. Or popularity.
It is purity. You know. We are serving Krishna. Not so that, oh, I have done
this much service. This service. This service. This service. Or it is not even
popularity. Oh. You know. So many people, you know, so many people hear my
lectures. So many people follow my instructions. You know. Our sadh..., our goal
is not popularity. Or even productivity. Our goal is purity. And if we serve
Krishna with that attitude, yes, Krishna, I want to become purified. I want to
remember You. I want to speak about You. By that, I will come in contact with
You. And that contact will purify me. So, "Sañjaya" is, although, he is not, he
is, he, is it, his transmission of Krishna's message has not transformed
"Dhṛtarāṣṭra"'s heart. Still, he is relishing. And we see, Srila Prabhupada, for
almost thirty years of his preaching, the, almo..., more than thirty, actually.
Prabhupada, you know, started associ..., assisting His godbrothers, in the
preaching, right from 1932 onwards. When 1932-33, when he became initiated. And,
you know, you know, from that time until almost 1965. Or even 66. When he went
to America. So, for more than thirty years. 33 years. He got practically no
success in preaching. But even during those times, when, whoever met Srila
Prabhupada, they found him to be very cheerful. Very jolly. You know. And very
satisfied. And in fact, he was, he was having nothing. And he, see, was so
happy. That was his, what attracted people to him. You know. What it, the swami
got? He has nothing. But he is still so, he has everything. He has, actually,
has nothing. But he has something much more than what I have. I want to know
that. I want to, you know, have that. I want to share that. You know. So, that
is how people became attracted to Krishna. So, as devotees, when we do service,
we have to have this clear mindset. Even when there is preaching, or in our
service, that I am doing this primarily to keep myself connected with Krishna.
Keep myself engaged in Krishna. And whatever, you know, benefit, it happens to
others, that will happen. That is Krishna's grace coming, going through me. And
I am grateful that, you know, there is some contribution to the world, also,
happening. But if you focus too much on the external results of service, then
that may dishearten us so much. Oh, the external results are coming, not coming.
And because of that, disheart..., becoming disheartened, we may not even be
available when Krishna wants to give us the inner results. You know. We may not
get any external result of our service. But still, we may become purified. And
that will be a glorious result when we become purified. So, we should be
focusing on the inner result. And that inner result is, the more we become
purified, the more our contact with Krishna becomes richer. And sweeter. And
then, we will also experience this "hṛṣyāmi ca muhur muhuḥ". You know. And then,
after this, comes the last verse of the Gita.

        yatra yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇo
        yatra pārtho dhanur-dharaḥ
        tatra śrīr vijayo bhūtir
        dhruvā nītir matir mama

So, "yatra yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇo". So, here, Krishna is saying that, wherever there
is that Krishna, who is "yogeśvaraḥ", He is the master of all mystic power.
"yoga-īśvaraḥ". So, "yog...", "yog...", on the path of "yoga", people get many
mystic powers. And when they get those mystic powers, they can do wonderful
things. When all these mystic powers come from Krishna. So, Krishna is
"yogeśvaraḥ". And "yatra pārtho dhanur-dharaḥ". So, the significant verse here
is, "dhanur-dharaḥ". Arjuna has raised his bow. So, you know, at the start, at
the end of the First Chapter. In 1.46, what did, what had happened, was:

        visṛjya sa-śaraṁ cāpaṁ
        śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ

Because of the mind filled with "śoka". What, what had Arjuna done? "śa...",
"visṛjya sa-śaraṁ cāpaṁ". He had put aside his bow. And arrow. But, you know,
Kri..., "Sañjaya" is describing, now, after hearing the Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna
has picked up his bow. And arrow. So, that means, Arjuna has become ready to,
you know, follow Krishna's instructions. Ready to do Krishna's will. So, the
specific of the bow and arrow is not important. In the sense that, for Arjuna,
his, you know, his duty was, a ksatriya, was to fight. For us, our bow and arrow
may be different. You know. You know. For us, our bow and arrow may be, if we
are devotees, we are doing book distribution. Then, we may put aside the books.
Oh, it is, nobody takes books. But we may pick up the books. And say, I will
distribute the books. For us, our bow and arrow may be quite different. But the
point is, you know, the bow and arrow, it is definitely, you know, it, it is
historical real. In the sense that, Krishna had, Arjuna had a bow. And arrow. He
had a "Gāṇḍīva" bow. Famous bow. But it also represents something. Actually, you
know, you know, you know, Krish..., Arjuna's "Gāṇḍīva" bow represents the living
entity's determination to serve Krishna. The determination to serve Krishna. So,
actually, what happened, at the start of the Bhagavad Gita, is that Arjuna, you
know, wanted to see. He says, you know. I want to see. You know. "akṣa". There
are several places where he was, he says, I want to see. You know. What is the
strength. You know. You know. You know. Of the people who are fighting against
me. I want to see. So that, by that seeing, he did "pratyakṣa". And then, he
did, he started co..., speculating. Started doing, you know, you know, his own
sort of an..., analysis of the mind. And that let to "anumana". And the
"pratyakṣa" and "anumana", the result was his determination to Lord, serve
Krishna got lost. But then, when he, you know, you know, you know, you know,
served Krishna. Or rather, how? By hearing Krishna's message. Then, he has
picked up his bow again. That means, his determination became restored. So,
similarly, in this world, by "pratyakṣa" and "anumana", our determination to
serve Krishna can go away very easily. By "pratyakṣa", say, oh, there are so
many people who are enjoying in this world. There are so many enjoyment
available. And, you know, I am following these regulative principles. The
chanting Hare Krishna. What am I doing over here? And, "anumana", we do,
actually, those, person is happy. I am not happy. If I become like that person,
I also become happy. And anyway, this bhakti, who has seen Krishna? Who has seen
the spiritual world? When will I become? Again, the spiritual world, I do not
know whether it exists, also, or not. You know. All sorts of nonsensical
reasoning like that. And what will happen? Will, "visṛjya sa-śaraṁ cāpaṁ". Will
lose our determination to serve Krishna. But then, when we associate with
devotees, when we hear Krishna's message, we start thinking, oh, people look
happy. But actually, it is just a facade. People pretend to be happy. But there
are so many miseries in life. There is, oh, inevitably, old age. Disease. Death.
There is "adhyātmika". "adhibhautika". "adhi...", "kleśa". "adhidaivika".
"tapaḥ". There are so many miseries everyhere. So, how can there be any lasting
happiness? You know. If there is lasting happiness, so, then there must be at a
different place. And what is that spiritual level of reality? Where lasting
happiness exists? That is revealed in the Bhagavad Gita.

So, the purpose of life is not to try to find lasting happiness in this place
where there can never be lasting happiness. But it is to re..., direct our
consciousness to go to a place where there will be lasting happiness. That is
real intelligence. So, this is what we understand from the Bhagavad Gita. And
then, our determination gets restored. So, just as our, you know, determination
can be lost by "pratyakṣa" and "anumana". Our determination can be restored by
"śabdaḥ". Esta..., is, it happened for "Sañja...", Ar..., Arjuna. The same can
happen for us. And that is why regular hearing is so important for us. We will
see, in general, in our spiritual life that if our hearing becomes irregular,
you know, you know, then our, you know, if our, whenever our hearing becomes
irregular, then our whole devotional life will start becoming like a burden. You
know. Chanting will become a big burden. Doing any services, we will just be
battling internally with the mind so much. So much of our energy will go in the
internal battle with the mind itself. That we will not be able to do much. And
what we do, will also not, not be very enthusiastic in it. So, therefore, why
does this happen? Because, you know, we are not nourishing ourselves by
hearing. So, just as we get physical energy by eating food, similarly, by
hearing, we get spiritual energy. The spiritual energy is not something
mystical. You know. It is not some current of electricit..., current of light
that passes through the head. Or something like that. It is, spiritual energy
means the desire and the determination to serve Krishna. That comes when we
hear. And we understand how much Krishna loves us. And how it is, it is so, you
know, wonderful for us, if, to have the opportunity to love Krishna in return.
When that, they are, determination gets restored. You know. So, that is how we
will also become "dhanur-dharaḥ". And then, further, he is saying, "tatra śrīr
vijayo bhūtir". You know. So, he is describing "dhruvā nītir matir mama". This
is "matir mama". Now, "Sañjaya" has himself become enlightened. As he is
revealing by the fact that he has become attracted to Krishna. He is thrilled in
remembrance of Krishna. So, he is telling that, you know, "matir mama". What is
my opinion? That wherever there is Krishna. And wherever there is Arjuna. That
means wherever there is the Lord. Where there is the miracle-working Lord. And
the determined devotee. So, what is happen..., what will happen? The combination
of that? "tatra śrīr". That there will be opulence. "vijayaḥ". "vijayaḥ" is
victory. "bhūtiḥ" is extraordinary power. "vibhūtim" was a word which was used
in the Tenth Chapter. We described Krishna's extraordinary power. So, "bhūtiḥ",
"vibhūtim" are similar. And "dhruvā nītir matir mama". "nītir" meaning morality,
also. So, actually, this is an answer to "Sañjaya". Another answer to
"Sañjaya"'s questio..., you know, you know, "Dhṛtarāṣṭra"'s question. You know.
"kim akurvata". So, he says, what happened? Immediately, what happened was that
the whole Bhagavad Gita  was spoken. And that was narrated by "Sañjaya" to
Krishna. "Sañjaya" to "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". But, you know, the implication of the
"Dhṛtarāṣṭra"'s question was, what happened means, who won? That was his
concern. So, "Sañjaya" is making a prophecy. He is telling that, actually, you
know, that where there is, you know, Krishna. And where there is Arjuna. There,
there will be victory. "tatra". There, there will be victory. And that means, he
is saying, there is no hope for your sons. They are going to lose. It is the
Pandavas who are going to win. "tatra śrīr". There, there will be opulence. You
know. "śrīḥ" can also refer to the goddess of fortune. "śrīḥ" devi.

So, actually, this is what, you know, both Bhishma and "Droṇa" tell Duryodhana
when, you know, they face, you know, when the, when they are commanders. You
know. Still, they, the Kaurava army faces severe reversals. And at that time,
you know, Duryodhana just almost chasti..., although his commanders are far
more, you know, senior to him in age. But still, he almost chastises them. And
he says to "Droṇā". There, he says, you have said, you promised me that you, you
know, that, that you will get Dur..., "Yudhiṣṭhira" arrested. That was what, you
know, they had discussed. So, "Droṇā" says that, you know, you know, you know,
you, we can only endeavor. The result ultimately depends on destiny. And the
Lord of destiny is on the chariot of Arjuna. So, what can I do? You know. So,
the Lord of char..., you know, destiny. So, like that, "tatra śrīr". So,
actually, the Lord, the, the goddess of fortune will be there on the side of the
Pandavas. Because the h..., Lord is also there. "tatra". So, bec..., opulence
will be there. "śrīr". And by their opulence, there victory. Now, "Sañja...",
you know, "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" may think, no. But, you know, actually, there is, there
are such formidable warriors. You know. On my side. There is Bhishma. There is
"Droṇa". There is "Kṛpa". There is Shal..., "Shalya". There is "Karṇa". There is
"Aśvatthāmā". And my own sons are very powerful, also. So, how can there not be
victory for my side? He says no. Actually, there is "bhūtiḥ". There will be
extraordinary power. You know. You know. All the power of all these warriors
cannot compare with the supreme power of Krishna. And they will be overpowered
by that supreme power. And then, you know, some, you know, now, actually, so,
according to some people say that, you know, Kri..., the, you know, Krishna used
immorality. The Kaur..., Pandavas used immorality to kill the "Mahāratā"s, like
"Bhishma". Who was caugh..., fou..., who was shot arrows by Arjuna from behind
"Śikhaṇḍī". Duryodhana who was killed by "Dhṛṣṭadyumna" while "Droṇā" was in
meditating. "Karṇa", when his, were, when he was trying to take a, you know,
chariot. You know. Chariot wheel out of the ground, Arjuna shot him. So, some
people may say like that, that actually, you know, they were killed unfairly.
You know. There was no unfairness. Because they had all participated in far, or
they consented to far greater unfairness. And "satho satyam". For the cunning,
with the cunning, one can be cunning. You know. So, there is actually the idea
that whatever happened was the supreme morality. The supreme morality is, what
is the will of the Lord.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

So that the Pandavas were ready to do these things. Where the, they could have
won without using any of these, you know, strategies, also. But the fact that
they referred to these stra..., used these strategies, and they won thereafter,
indicates that they were ready to sacrifice morality for spirituality. They were
ready to sacrifice morality for devotion. And that commitment to pure devotion
is the supreme morality. So, therefore, "nītir". So, there, where there is the
ma..., magic, miracle-working Lord, and where there is the determined devotee,
there, there is going to be the supreme morality. There, there will be victory.
So, this is the prophecy by "Sañjaya" at the end of the Bhagavad Gita. And Srila
Prabhupada gives a classic purport to this verse. You know. And, you know, we
will discuss, just a couple of sentences from the ver..., you know, few point,
you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada says, Prabhupada says that the Bhagavad
Gita is the la...:

"the last instruction of the Gītā is the last word in all morality and
religion:"

So, "nītir". In all morality, and moral religion, this is the supreme
instruction. You know. And then, Prabhupada talks about how the supreme truth is
realised in three aspect. "Brahman". "Paramātmā". And "Bhagavan". And then, he
is, talks about how the most confidential instruction is surrender to Krishna.
You know. And then, Prabhupada gives a summary of, you know, the five tattvas.
That are talked. And he, you know, you know, concludes over here.

"By proper use of that independence he"

refers to the living entity:

"comes under the direct order of Kṛṣṇa."

And "Thus he attains his normal condition in the pleasure-giving potency."

And that is the whole purpose of Bhagavad Gita. That is the whole purpose of
Srila Prabhupada starting ISKCON. In ISKCON, that is. To restore us in our
normal position, the pleasure-giving potency. At the, under shelter of
Radharani. Wherein we will get the supreme pleasure. In loving service to
Krishna. So, this is the mercy of Krishna. That is manifested through the
Bhagavad Gita. So, the Bhagavad Gita starts with Krishna's question to Ar...,
Arjuna's question to Krishna about what should I do? Please tell me what is
"dharma". That was in 2.7. You know.

        pṛcchāmi tvāṁ dharma-sammūḍha-cetāḥ

And first, in the first Five Chapters, Krishna talks about half, you know, or,
or rather, Fir..., Second to Sixth Chapters, Krishna talks about how, you know,
you should not renounce action. You should do action. But do action in spirit of
detachment. That is the dialectic that happens in Third and Fifth Chapter. Then,
Sixth Chapter, He talks about, ok, when you are sufficiently mature, then you
can renounce. And go to the forest. And do yoga. But at the end of the Sixth
Chapter, He says, but the topmost yogis are those who are bhaktas. And then, He
says, you know, so, therefore, you also become a bhakta.

        mayy āsakta-manāḥ

He says in 7.1. And how to practice bhakti? That is described, you know, from
the Seven..., in Se..., in the Seventh Chapter, itself. The four kind of people
who surrender to Krishna. The glory of Krishna's position. And Krishna's dev...,
devotion to Krishna is talked about. Then, you know, say, Eighth Chapter
compares ashtanga yoga and bhakti yoga. You know. And, you know, establish
supremacy of bhakti yoga. Then, Ninth Chapter talks about bhakti yoga even
further. And it re..., starts revealing the heart of Krishna in a very
intimate way.

        kaunteya pratijānīhi
        na me bhaktaḥ praṇa...

My devotee will never perish. "na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati". So, bhak..., it is,
Ninth Chapter talks about bhakti very sweetly. And then, you know, bhakti
centers on remembering Krishna. So, in the Eighth, Tenth Chapter, "Chatur
Shloki" Bhagavad Gita also gives a concentrated essence of bhakti. How Krishna,
the devotees love Krishna. And Krishna loves His devotees. And then, after that,
you know, how can we remember Krishna in the material world? The "vibhūti"s are
talked about. And to help us understand the divinity, supremacy of Krishna's
position, the "viśva-rūpa" is revealed. And then, you know, it is conclusively
established in the Twelfth Chapter that the personal form, per..., you know,
meditating on the personal form is far better than meditate..., med...,
contemplating on the impersonal manifestation. So, in this way, the, you know,
you know, form, middle Six Chapters talk about bhakti very beautifully. And
then, the last Six Chapter talk about how "jñāna" leads to bhakti. So, Krishna
talks about the various concepts. "puruṣaṁ". "prakṛtiṁ". "kṣetraṁ".
"kṣetra-jñam". And "jñānaṁ". And "jñeyaṁ". And He talks about how all these, you
know, that:

        mad-bhakta etad vijñāya

All this can be understood by My devotee. And right in the middle of the "jñāna"
section, also, He talks about My:

        mad-bhakta etad vijñāya

My bhakta can understand it. 13.19. And then, and then, He goes into the 14th
Chapter. Further analyse it, 14.22 is the, is the, you know, is the "Bija Vakya".

        puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi
        bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān

That the living entity gets lodged in matter because of the desire to enjoy. And
then, the tree of material existence expands. So, the tree of the material
existence, the, you know, you know, you know, the, you know, you know, it is
nourished by the wat..., water of the modes. So, those modes are talked about in
14th Chapter. "guṇa-saṅgo ’sya". That was mentioned three point, 13.22. So, what
is this "guṇa"? That is talked about in four..., thir..., 14th Chapter. And that,
also, again, it says that if you want to go beyond the modes. "bhakti-yogena
sevate".

        māṁ ca yo ’vyabhicāreṇa
        bhakti-yogena sevate

14.26. And again, 14.27 is:

        brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham

That I am the support of Brahman. So, again, you know, even in this "jñāna"
section, bhakti and Bhagavan are, you know, very systematically established as
supreme. Then, after that, the tree of material existence is bas..., questioned
in 15th Chapter. And is established how Krishna is "puruṣottamaḥ". He is the
supreme person. Whom, to whom, we should surrender. If we want to get out of
this tree. Then, the upper and lower extremes of this tree, the divine and the
demoniac natures that are talked about in the 16th Chapter. You know. You know.
And then, the inter..., intermediate parts of the tree. Those who have faith,
but not in scripture, are talked about in the 17th Chapter. And then, in the
18th Chapter, is again like a summary of the Bhagavad Gita's content. So, first,
Krishna talks about how it is better to do action with detachment. Then, rather
than just giving up action. And then, He analyses the five factors of action.
And then, He analyses "jñānaṁ karma ca kartā ca". And "dhṛtiḥ". "buddhiḥ". And
"sukhaṁ". And all this analysis is meant to establish how, a karma-yogi, if has,
you know, the, having proper knowledge can stay without bondage. And that is
talked about further in the system of varnashram. Where people act according to
their prescribed duties. For the sake of the Supreme Lord. For:

        sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya

Worship Him with your work. And then, from there, Krishna talks about, from 49th
verse onwards, to 54th verse, He talks about "jñāna" yoga. And then, you know,
from 54th, 55th onwards, He talks about, start talking bhakti yoga. And
then, this is the gradual ascending process of karma yoga to "jñāna" yoga. To
bhakti yoga. But from 56th, 57th, Krishna says that:

        sarva-karmāṇy api sadā
        kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ

Wherever you are, you just practice bhakti. And then, He talks about, you know,
bhakti very, you know, sweetly, talks about how, you know, you know, you
know, you know, we are controlled by our "svabhāva". And the way to go, go
beyond "svabhāva" is, by surrendering to the Lord of the "svabhāva". Then,
Krishna says that, I will give you the most confidential knowledge. And then, He
speaks those "man-manā bhava". And "sarva-dharmān parityajya". You know. And
then, there is the "phala-shruti". And then, there is "Sañjaya"'s ecstatic
declaration of the glory of the Gita. So, in this way, there is a journey which
culminates very clearly in the, you know, you know, in the supremacy of Krishna
as the, glo..., most glorious sadhya. And, you know, para, kevala bhakti. Pure
devotion. As the most glorious sadhana. And that is the essential message of the
Gita. That is the essential message that Srila Prabhupada has given us by his
mercy. In his "Bhagavad-gītā As It Is". So, as it is. What does it mean? The
conclusions are made crystal clear. Not just in the conclusion. But throughout
the flow of the Gita. That, you know, there is no other real..., supreme reality
apart from Krishna.

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat

And there is no process, you know, as glorious as the process of bhakti. That
this message has been given to us, you know, by Krishna. And it has been, you
know, Kri..., repeated so, you know, forcefully and vividly by Srila Prabhupada.
For the benefit of all of humanity.

So, thank you very much. Srimad Bhagavad Gita ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya.
Gaura bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande Hari haribol.

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
