Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M-VkI_3EJbs Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya totra vetraika panaye jnana mudraya krishnaya gitamrita
duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the, you know, Chapt..., you know, 18th Chapter. Concluding part. We
discussed 18.66 yesterday. Let us discuss this little, in our previous class.
Let us discuss it little bit more. And then, we will move forward. So, look at
18.66.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo
mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

So, "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". So, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura explains in his
commentary that "mām ekaṁ". That Me alone, means that. It means two things
basically. So, "mām". "ekaṁ" can refer to "mām". And it can refer to "śaraṇaṁ",
also. "ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ". So, that means, it refers to that, we accept Krishna,
only, as the object of worship. And we accept surrender to Krishna, only, as the
means of worship. Or as the means of spiritual elevation. So, in spiritual life,
there is sadhana. And there is sadhya. You know. So:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ ...

If we take it that way, that means, give up all other sadhyas. Sorry. Give up
all other sadhana. Sadhana is the means. And sadhya is the goal. So, give up all
other sadhanas. And accept the only sadhana of bhakti. That is of "śaraṇaṁ".
"prapadye". You know. And then, "mām ekaṁ". When we take it that way. Then, give
up all other sadhyas. Give up moksha. Give up deva..., devata upasana. Give up
Paramatma. Puja. And every other forms of, you know, sadhya. Whatever may be.
Give them all up. And make sa..., accept Me as the only sadhya. So, this verse
conclusively establishes Krishna as the supreme sadhya. And sa..., bhakti,
bhakti is expressed as the surrender. Surrender to Him as the only sadhana. You
know. In this way, this verse brings the, the whole previous discussion of the
Bhagavad Gita to a conclusion. You know. The Bhagavad Gita talks about various
sadhyas. And various sadhanas. And this is a part of the Vedic culture's
multilevel form of worship. That means, in the Vedic culture, you know, you
know, there are, you know, different sadhyas. And different sadhanas talked
according to the level of different people. But ultimately, all the sadhyas and
all the sadhanas are meant to help people come to the supreme level, come to the
level of, you know, pure devotion to the Supreme Lord. Unalloyed devotion to the
one Supreme Lord. So, "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". Now, you know, you know, you
know, you know, is this sort of statement exclusivist? Exclusivist means that,
you know, there are certain religions which say this is the only way. And all
other ways are false. In fact, they say that, I did, by this way alone, you can
go back to God. And by no other way one can go back to God. No, this is not
exclusivist because Krishna is consti..., Kri..., using the word for other
paths, also, as dharman. So, He is not rejecting all other paths as false. He is
not rejecting all other paths as, you know, wrong paths. You know. But they are
lower paths. So, dharman indicates that they are also, you know, you know, they
are also religions. That they are also paths involving virtue. And they lead to
elevation. But they do not lead to the fastest or the highest elevation. It is
bhakti to Krishna that leads to the fast, leads to the fastest and the highest
elevation. So, that is why Krishna is not being exclusivist. In fact, Krishna
has Himself delineated different paths. And He has acknowledged that different
paths lead to destinations. So, for example, 9.25 says:

        yānti deva-vratā devān
        pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

So, He is telling this path leads to this destination. And going to the devata,
abode of the devatas is also not, you know, small thing. Attaining svarga is
also a very big thing. You know. And from the point of view of material
existence, you know, then we can attain how, you know, consider how attaining
Goloka is such a great thing. So, therefore, it is, this is not in any way
exclusivist. Exclu..., you know, it is, you know, you know, the Vedic culture
and the Bhagavad Gita are inclusivist. But inclusivist does not mean that there,
everything is accepted equally. No. Not all paths elevate to the same highest
destination. So, Krishna is telling that, this is the best path for you. Other
paths are also u..., potent. In their own way. You know. But they are not as
potent as bhakti. Now is, you know:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

also indicates something very important. This, far from being exclusivist, is a
universalist descri..., you know, declaration. Why? Because dharma can refer to
religious formularies. Religious formularies means religious, you know,
externals. Externals, really said, religi..., you know, associated with
religion. So, you know, you know, Krishna is telling that one should not get
caught up in external, in religious, in, external, associated with religion.
But rather, should focus on the essence. The inner core of the religion. So,
that means dharma can refer here to the externals. And, you know, "mām ekaṁ
śaraṇaṁ" refers to the internal. So, you know, we see this:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

demonstrated in several places in the Bhagavatam. For example, you know, you
know, we see that, you know, the "yagnik brahman patnis", you know, they are
having husbands who are brahmanas. And they are, in their own way, virtuous 
brahmanas. So, Ved..., in the Vedic culture, the dharma of the patni, of the
wife is to serve, assist the husband. And the, if the husband is virtuous. Then,
all the more so. So, the husbands are doing dharma. They are doing in, they are
engaging in yagna. And the wives are meant to assist their husband. If the
husband is doing yagna. Which is dharma. Then, why should the hus..., wives not
assist? But then, if this dharma is not leading to "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja".
When Krishna's associates come. And say that Krishna wants food. Please give us
some food. And the brahmanas neglect them. Then, they go to Krishna's. That they
go to the "yagnik brahman"s' wives. And what do the wives do? They demonstrate.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

Give up all varieties of religion. And just surrender to Me. So, the, you know,
you know, the wives give up both their, you know, dharma as a, you know, wife
towards the husband. And the wives give up the dharma, also, of doing, doing
yagna. Which is to be done by the husband and wife together. So, in general,
wife should be obedient to the dhar..., wha..., husband. And in, and speci...,
in specific, when the husband is doing a religious ritual which requires the
presence of both the husband and the wife, then it is all the more important.
But "sarva-dharmān parityajya". So, we see this repeatedly in the Bhagavatam.
You know. You know. Where, for example, Bali Maharaja rejects the instruction of
his spi..., of his teacher. Who is like a spiritual master for him. You know.
That is "Shukracharya". So, you know, the gopis demonstrate this in the highest
degree. Where now, at least, the "yagnik brahman patnis", they went in the
daytime. Now, for a woman to go to some other man at night, you know, is
considered to be scandalous. Even according today's standards. And for a woman,
especially in traditional culture, her chastity is considered to be the most
valuable, you know, you know, asset. You know. And, or the, it is a treasure for
a woman. A chastity. And, you know, you know, you know, when a woman considers
this to be so valuable, so, at that time, you know, actually, the, for a woman
to lose her, her chastity, or even to lo..., lose the good name in society. That
means even if the percep..., even if the woman does not lose her chastity. Or
does not lo..., but still, people start to perceiving her as unchaste. That, it
can be a very great disaster for a woman. But the gopis are ready to cord that.
Accept that willingly. And they go, go against everything else for the sake of
Krishna. When Krishna plays His flute and calls the gopis, at that time, go...:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

The gopis give up everything else. They give up the three dharma. They give up
the, even their duty towards their children. Now, normally, for a woman, they
can care of, the, the child is considered very important duty. Yes, it is
important. Extremely important. And nobody can ta..., you know, take the role of
a, you know, chi..., mother for a child apart from the mother, actually. But
still, when the call of Krishna comes, everything else should be given up. So,
that is what the gopis demonstrate. So, it is not, it may seem immoral for a
woman to go out to meet some other man. But the, but in the case of the
"rāsa-līlā", the woman is not an ordinary woman. And the man is not an ordinary
man. The women are the exa..., most exalted devotees. The gopis. And the man is
the Supreme Lord. So, therefore, this is enig..., this is not adharma. That
means there is "apara-dharmaḥ". There is "adharmaḥ". And there is
"para-dharmaḥ". So, you know, you know, an ordinary woman going towards a man,
would be, going from "apara-dharmaḥ" to "adharmaḥ". That is to be condemned. But
the gopis going towards Krishna is right. Is that they giving up "apara-dharmaḥ"
for "para-dharmaḥ". This is:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

Me, alone. And this way, what the Bhagavatam demonst..., what the Bhagavad Gita,
through this verse, is, demonstrates is, for the sake of Krishna, we should be
ready to give up, not only the bad of this world. But also, the good of this
world. The bad of this world means. We give up, we, sinful activities we have to
give up. So, you know, you know, that is definitely required. But, you know, for
the sake of Krishna, even the pious activities of the world, we can, we, you
know, if it is required, we have, should be ready to give them up. So, good and
bad. Because good and bad, both are at the material level. There is, Krishna is
at the transcendental level. You know. You know. So, in this way, you know, what
this demonstrated is that Kri..., surrender to Krishna is the supreme virtue.
And there is no virtue as compared to that. So, all the, you know, for...,
religious for..., formularies that are, that are there. That means externals
that are there. They are important. But they, what is their importance? Their
importance is that it enables us to surrender to Krishna. So, same way, we see
this point made in the "Viṣṇu Purāṇa", in the famous verse.

        smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇur
        vismartavyo na jātucit
        sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur
        etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ

So, the purpose of all rules and regulations, "sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur" is
what? To remember Krishna. To always remember Krishna. And to never forget
Krishna. That is the purpose of all rules and regulations. When one understands
this, then one can make, you know, steady spiritual advancement. So, that same
point that "sarva-dharmān parityajya". Give up the externals. And focus on the
essence. Now, at the, this does not mean the externals are im..., unimportant.
We canot say that, ok, I will not chant. I will just focus on the essence. No.
The externals do help us in the essence. No doubt about it. But here, when the
word "dharmān" is being used, it is being more used in sen..., in terms of
material religiosity. Then, the material religiosity is like, say, doing yagnas.
Or doing other such activities. They are important. But their importance is that
they enable us to take shelter of Krishna. And if they do not, then we should be
ready to give them up. "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". The gopis demonstrate this
when, also, when, you know, when they are searching for Krishna in the
"rāsa-līlā". And Krishna assumes the form of Vishnu. So, when the gopis see
Vishnu, they are disappointed. And they offer obeisances. And they say, oh, Lord
Vishnu, please tell us where is Krishna. This is "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja".
Surrender to Me, alone. To nobody else. So, Srila Prabhupada writes in the
purport that we should become attracted to the beautiful form of Krishna. And
this attraction to the beautiful form of Krishna is the supreme perfection of
life. So, actually, when we become attracted thus to Krishna, you know, you
know, you know, Prabhupada says, one should be attracted by the beautiful vision
of Krishna. The beautiful vision of Krishna. So, Krishna says, now, there,
Krishna, and He is all-attractive. So, you know, you know, Prabhupada concludes
by, so, here, he is saying, he is establishing how Krishna is the supreme
sadhya. And the, they say there are different kinds of sadhyas, they are all of,
you know, they, here, Prabhupada mentions:

"There are different kinds of transcendentalists"

And they are attracted to different things. But those who are attracted to
Krishna, are the topmost transcendentalists. And then, Prabhupada talks about
different sadhanas, also.

"Karma-yogīs, empiric philosophers, mystics and devotees are all called
transcendentalists, but one who is a pure devotee is the best of all."

So, here, Krishna is, Prabhupada is mentioning that the supreme sadhya and the
supreme sadhana, you know, are Krishna and pure devotion to Krishna. And now,
this may involve, you know, extraordinary amount of sacrifice. You know. So, "mā
śucaḥ". You know. You know. You know. "mā śucaḥ" means do not fear. Do not
hesitate. So, in this world, we may have to, you know, when, whenever, whatever
we have in this world, that gives us some sense of security. And shelter. So, it
may be our material status. Our job. Our relationships. In fact, even for, if a
person is doing something very bad. Suppose, somebody is drinking. You know.
Now, that, that drinking is causing, alcohol drinking, alcohol is causing a lot
of suffering to the alcoholic. But even within that alcoholism, the alcoholist
gets some sense of security. It is a pseudo security. Pseudo security means that
what one is getting there, you know, you know, is not, you know, you know,
supreme happiness. It is, it, it is, it is not, it is not even a stable
happiness. Leave alone supreme happiness. But still, when a person drinks,
because one has done the drinking repeatedly. And there is a routine. There is
some familiarity involved in it. That, ok, I am doing something, you know, which
I have done again. And again. And there may be little pleasure. After be, there
is a lot of trouble. But one gets some security over there. So, you know, even
in the bad things that we do, sometimes, some security comes over there. Because
we are just rou..., re..., we are repeating some familiar routine that we have
done. Again. And again. And that, you know, you know, is nothing perfection.
Purpose of life. You know. That sort of pseudo, that is pseudo security. So,
Krishna is telling us "mā śucaḥ". That means, give up pseudo security. And
accept the real security. The real security is the security that comes by
surrender to Krishna. Because, you know, you know, Krishna is the supreme
protector. You know. He is, you know, He can offer us a protection which nobody
else can offer us in the world. Because He is supreme. And He is supremely
loving. You know. Generally, if you want protection, if the person is very
strong, then that person can protect us. But then, that person may be strong.
But the person may be unconcerned about us. Krishna is strong. Supremely strong.
And He is supremely caring. He is supremely loving. Therefore, "mā śucaḥ". So,
we get, we get, feel fear because surrender involves giving up some things. But
actually, what we are giving up is, our sources of pseudo security. In this
world, there may be very sou..., many sources of security. But they are all,
from the ultimate point of view, you know, they are pseudo security.

        dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv
        ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api
        teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ
        paśyann api na paśyati

So, the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam", in the Second Canto, "Śukadeva Gosvāmī" begins his
instructions by telling that, you know, you know, actually, he says that, you
know, people have various sources of security in this world.
"dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv". That we have the "deha". Our own body, he says. You
know. Whatever happens. Some people have very strong muscles. They say, I will
beat up people. Or even if they do not have strong muscles, people learn
self-defense. They may learn karate. Or judo. Or something like that. And think,
ok, by this, I will be able to fight with thus. So, "dehāpatya-kalatrā",
"dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv". So, wife is there. You know. The relatives are there.
The spouse is there. And then, with, through all this, we get some securi...,
security. "ātma-sainyeṣv". One think, these are my protectors. These are my
sena. So, I am a warrior. And this is my sena. And with this sena, I am going to
protect myself. "asatsv api". But all of them are temporary. None of them can
give us permanent protection. "teṣāṁ pramatto". "pram...":

        teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ
        paśyann api na paśyati

When one is prevent..., one sees the destruction of all this. One sees the
futility of all this ultimately. But still, one holds unto this. This is
"paśyann api na paśyati". This is seeing, but not seeing. You know. So, Krishna
does not want us to stay in illusion like this. He does not want us to suffer in
this kind of pseudo security. You know. When pseudo security actually causes
uncertainty. Because we feel that this is going to be secure, be, provide me
some safety. But we are not sure. Whether it will provide me some safety. Or
not. So, Krishna is telling us, do not fear. You know. Do not think that when
you take shelter of Me, I will not protect you. I will definitely protect you.
"mā śucaḥ". So, you know, Kri..., when we are giving up pseudo sec..., the
material things for Krishna's sake, we have to understand that what we are
giving up is far, far tiny. As compared to what we are going to get. You know.
There might be a pseudo security that is like a drop of water in a desert. But
what Krishna is, the security, that Krishna is going to offer us, is like an
ocean. It is immense. It is completely satisfying. So, that is what we should
aspire for in our life. And, you know, how do we take shelter of Krishna?
Primary, discussed earlier, primarily by:

        ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ

And:

        prātikūlyasya varjanam

Surr..., it is, surrender is not passive. Ok. Krishna, I will surrender to You.
Yes, that is one way of surrender. We, when the, we cannot do anything, then we
depend on Krishna. But Krishna has also given us intelligence. And He wants us
to use the intelligence in His service. So, we use our intelligence to think
about, ok, what is favorable for my bhakti. What should I do in this situation?
What should I not do in this situation? So, Srila Prabhupada was always
surrendered to Krishna. But at the same time, Srila Prabhupada was always
dynamic trying to find out what is the best way I can serve Krishna. So, should
I, you know, you know, so, Prabhupada was thinking, should I write books? Should
I write magazines? Should I start a, start an insitution? Should I go to
America? So, Prabhupada was devising new, new strategies for serving Krishna.
And that is the mood of a devotee. That let me always serve Krishna. And, you
know, the, you know, "śaraṇaṁ vraja". "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja" is not passive.
It is active. In fact, it is dynamic. Ok. How? In this situation, how can I
surrender to Krishna? So, sometimes, it may mean taking up a new project. Doing
a new service. And sometimes, it may mean, you know, persevering in the same
service. No matter how many difficulties come up. So, how do we decide that?
That will be our sincerity. When we are sincerely serving Krishna.

        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

When we are sincerely serving Krishna. When we show Him that Krishna, I want to
serve You. Please guide me. Then, He will give us the guidance about how to act.
And then, of course, we can consult senior devotees, you know, you know, you
know, and then, you know, take the guidance, also, about how we should act. But
this is, you know, you know, "mā śucaḥ". So, now, I, the, with this, more or
less, Krishna has completed the Bhagavad Gita. And then, He starts giving us the
"phala-shruti". You know. In the Vedic literature, in general, you know, at the
end of a particular book, the "phala-shruti" is given. "shrut...", that means,
you know, after hearing this, what will be the benefit that has come, going to
come. Or rather, what are the, you know, you know, you know, or rather, what is
the glory of this book in terms of hearing? In terms of speaking it. So, Krishna
will talk about the glory in three terms now. First is, He will, 67, you know,
He, we will talk about these glories one by one. You know. Let us look, first,
Krishna will fi..., talks about His glory by talking about this, the
confidentiality of this knowledge. How this knowledge is very rare and precious.
So, let us look at that. So:

        idaṁ te nātapaskāya
        nābhaktāya kadācana
        na cāśuśrūṣave vācyaṁ
        na ca māṁ yo ’bhyasūyati

So, "idaṁ te nātapaskāya". So, Krishna is telling, oh, Kri..., oh Arjuna, do not
tell this knowledge to these categories of people. "nātapaskāya". "tapa",
"kāya" is body. "tapaskāya" is, "tapas" is austerity. So, those who do not
perform austerities. Those, those who are unaustere. And "nābhaktāya kadācana".
And do not speak it to "abhaktāya". Do not speak to the devotees. "na
cāśuśrūṣave vācyaṁ". "aśuśrūṣave". That means, those who are not engaged in
services. So, "śuśrūṣave" especially refers to service. "tata", "bhaktāya"
refers to the attitude of devotion, whereas, you know, the "śuśrūṣave" refers
to the activity of service. "na ca māṁ yo ’bhyasūyati". And certainly, do not
speak it to "abhyasūyati". Those who are envious. So, what is the reason for
this kind of verse? Now, we may think that, ok, do not speak to those who are
envi..., those who are non-austere. Those, those who are not devoted. Those who
do not do service. Do not, who, those who are non-envious. We may see, then who
is left? There is no one left. We all, most people, practically, all people
have, you know, all have some envy towards Krishna. How many people in this
world are engaged in service to Krishna? You know. So, how many people are
actually doing austerities? So, it is who, what is the meaning of this verse?
So, actually, there are multiple understandings of this. First and foremost, we
understand that, you know, Krishna is referring here to the most confidential
knowledge that he has given. See, in general, people can understand according to
their adhika..., adhikar. So, Krishna has told over here a few verses earlier.
In 63. And 64. He has, 64, especially says, I am now giving the most
confidential glories. You know. You know. "sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ". Most
confidential knowledge. So, you know, a parent, you know, father may have a very
precious treasury. Some very rare and precious jewels. With the, father keeps
deep inside the treasury. And does not tell anyone about that. Now, when the
children, so, children are there. The children are going to get inheritance from
the father. Par..., father, and they know, ok, this, this is the inheritance.
But there may some very special treasure. That the father does not tell to the
children at all. Why? Because the father, that treasure is so precious. That the
father wants the children to grow up. When the children grow up, then, when they
get a treasure, they will not squander it away. They will use it properly. You
know. So, you know, they will use it properly. So, he wants the children to grow
up. And then, he will tell them about that treasure. So, similarly, when the
souls, who are not grown up. They are tiny. They are not, they do not understand
the glory of Krishna. And His love. They are caught up in petty things. And they
think, then they have envy towards Krishna. So, they have these attributes. They
are not serving Krishna. They are not austere. Because they are caught up in
petty, trivial, worldly things. Just like children, the father has got a
multimillion dollar business. And the children are caught up in playing marbles,
see. So, why is this? Come on. Grow up now. Grow up. You can inherit this whole
business. That, I have got it all for you. You know. So, the father does not
want to hide the business. But if the children are just caught in playful,
trivial things. And are not growing up. And if they take, you know, big, big
amount of money. And just squander it away carelessly. You know. Then, it is a
great tragedy. Sometimes, when parents work very hard. And make inheritance. And
sometimes, the parents have to, you know, even when they want to hand over the
inheritance to the children. Sometimes, they make laws. By which, they say, you
know, this inheritance, it is my, my children's only.

But they will not get it immediately. Every year, they will get only this much
amount. And each year, this much amount. And they cannot withdraw more than this
much amount from the inheritance. Because they tru..., can, they cannot trust
the responsibility of their, of how much responsibility, the children have
inculcated. So, similarly, Krishna, here, wants to give the supreme treasure.
You know. Krishna's greatest blessing is Krishna Himself. You know. All the
other blessings can give us some temporary happiness. But when Krishna gives
Himself to us, that means, He reveals us all-attractiveness. And we become
attracted by Him. And choose to love Him. Therein that, there is supreme
happiness. So, this is the greatest blessing that Krishna wants to give us. But
when we are caught up with wordly things. Which are like toys, then, with when,
we are, infatuation with worldly things, Kri..., does not allow us to value
Krishna. And pure devotion to Krishna. So, that is why the parent wants the
child to grow up. And when the children grow up, you know, then the parent
reveals the supreme treasure. So, like that, Krishna wants the souls to grow up.
And therefore, those who are envious, those who are, you know, you know, those
who are sin..., you know, those who are non-austere. Those who are non-devotee,
non-devotees. Krishna does not want to reveal this to them. But then, He has
spoken the Bhagavad Gita. And Prabhupada writes in the start of the Bhagavad
Gita, itself that Bhagavad Gita is spoken public. That means, the idea is
everybody can hear it. So, if Krishna wants something to be kept confidential,
then why has He spoken in it public? You know. In the battlefield, where there
are soldiers on both sides, so, they are all there observing. So, what does it
mean? Actually, it essentially means that Krishna wants this knowledge to be
given to everyone. But still, He wants them to grow up and understand it. So,
you know, when the father is having, is feeling great love for the children. And
at that time, say, some, one of the children, child has pleased the father very
much. And the father takes the child to the inner treasury. And opens the
treasure. And shows this precious jewels. This is this what I meant for you.
This is what I want to give you. And then, when the father starts thinking, you
know, do not tell the, all this to your other brothers. To your other brothers
and sisters. You know. That does not meant that that treasure is not meant for
the other brothers and sisters. It is also meant for them. But right now, they
are not mature enough. Similarly, Krishna is telling, Arjuna, I have told you
this. I am "sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ". Most confidential knowledge, I have given
you. That that does not, you know, but do not tell this to others.  That means,
do not, you know, le..., as it is said in the Biblical tradition, do not throw
pearls before a swine. A swine is a pig. A pig is interested only in stool. So,
if pearls are stone..., thrown before a swine, then, cannot understand, what is
pearl? No value. So, like that, Krishna's love, it can give us, grant us eternal
happiness. It is the supreme pearl. Supreme jewel. But those people who are not
spiritually evolved enough, they cannot understand its value. And they will
devaluate. They will reject it. They will not care for it. And they will commit
offenses to Krishna because of that. That is why, these, the purpose is not to
hide. When Krishna is telling, do not tell it to all these people. Pers...,
pur..., purpose is to encourage people to grow up. And then, to give them when
they have grown up. So, you know, this knowledge, "idaṁ te nā". "idaṁ" refers
not to the whole message of the Bhagavad Gita. The Bhagavad Gita has karma-yoga.
It has jnana-yoga. Yes, these knowledges can be told to everyone. Atma jnana can
also be told to everyone. But the knowledge of Krishna's love, intimate
knowledge, and especially the knowledge of:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

You know. This. The envious people may think that, Krishna is, what is He
demanding? You know. He ask..., surrender only to Me. Do not do anything else.
This may seem like, you know, Krishna is arrogant. But actually, Krishna is not
arrogant. Krishna is supremely sweet. You know. He is transcendent. And He is
transcendent. And as being transcendent, His love is beyond our perception. Our
normal worldly perceptions. And conceptions. So, if we drag our mora..., normal
worldly conceptions. And perceptions. Then, we will think that Krishna is
arrogant. So, because we have to grow up spiritually to understand Krishna. And
understand the pure and exalted nature of His love for all of us, so, there is a
restriction. Do not speak this to everyone. But as the soul grows up. As a
person grows up, then Krishna wants to reveal everyone at, to everyone, also.
So, the idea of, you know, restriction and revelation is not deprivation. But it
is, you know, it is growth. It is evolution. It is not to, you know, increa...,
it is not to cause deprivation. But it is to stimulate evolution. Let the
sou..., persons grow up. And when they grow up, they can learn truly. So, just
like a parent does not want to hide the treasure. But wants the children to grow
up. Then, they can gain the treasure. Similarly, Krishna wants the souls to grow
up. And then, they will learn the treasure. And then, you know, you know,
Prabhupada, that is why Prabhupada explains in the previous verse that, in this
verse itself, yeah, Prabhupada last, Prabhupada writes:

"Without understanding Kṛṣṇa from the authority of a pure devotee, one should
not try to comment upon Bhagavad-gītā."

So, one cannot, you know, Krishna is telling, do not even speak this to others.
Non..., you know, non-devotees. So, what to speak of non-devotees commenting on
the Gita? That is not at all appropriate. Now, now, Krishna in the next verse
says, will talk about how He wants this knowledge to be shared. But through
proper channels.

        ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ
        mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati
        bhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ kṛtvā
        mām evaiṣyaty asaṁśayaḥ

So, "ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ". This "paramaṁ guhyaṁ". This supremely confidential
knowledge. The supreme confidential knowledge. You know. "mad-bhakteṣv
abhidhāsyati". Speak it to my devotees. And if you do this, "bhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ
kṛtvā". You know. "bhak...", you will be able to perform "parāṁ", "bhaktiṁ". A
transcendental devotion to Me. And by that, what will happen? "mām evaiṣyaty
asaṁśayaḥ". You will definitely come back to Me. "mām evaiṣyaty asaṁśayaḥ". You
will definitely come back to Me. You know. "asaṁśayaḥ". So, now, there are many
significant words. You know. Here, He is saying, "bhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ kṛtvā". So,
"parāṁ kṛtvā". "parāṁ" is transcendental. Now, Krishna has used "parāṁ",
"bhaktiṁ", this phrase once more in a very significant place, in 18.54. In
18.54, Krishna talks about:

        brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā
        na śocati na kāṅkṣati
        samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu
        mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

So, "mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām". Krishna has said that, that means, Krishna is
telling, when does one get "parāṁ", "bhaktiṁ"? After one comes to the Brahman
platform. After one becomes completely equipoised towards everything material.
Then, one gets "parāṁ", "bhaktiṁ". But Krishna is telling, if we just share this
message. Share this knowledge of co..., you know, bhakti with everyone. Then,
what will happen? We will get "parāṁ", "bhaktiṁ". Krishna is guaranteeing that.

        bhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ kṛtvā

You will be attaining "parāṁ". You will be performing "par...", pure devotional
service to Me. And at the end:

        mām evaiṣyaty asaṁśayaḥ

Without any doubt, you will come back to Me. So, we will do the supreme good to
others. That is, we will be giving them the knowledge of pure devotion. And at
the end, we will come back to Me. So, you know, you know, the way, Srila
Prabhupada has thought us in Bha..., for us, preaching is not just, you know,
you know, preaching is a part of our sadhana. You know. We are not pure devotees
right now. We are sadhakas who are trying to go to, go towards devotion. But
even while we are going towards that, still, we can share Krishna Consciousness
with others. So, for us, preaching is a part of our outreach. That means,
preaching is a part of our, you know, you know, you know, sadha..., sorry, it is
not our, that is a part of outrea..., outreach is a part of our sadhana, also.
So, by preaching, we will become purified. That means, you know, when we
spea..., when we speak about Krishna, it pleases Krishna. And Krishna blesses us
with advanced devotion. So, you know, it, we should not hesitate in preaching
about Krishna. Thinking that, oh, I have so many realisations. I am not so
advanced. Actually speaking, as compared to Kali yuga's level of understanding
of people. Most people have no knowledge at all. As compared to that, even a
devotee, who spent a few years in Krishna Consciousness has tremendous
knowledge. And when we share, our understanding deepens. And then, as our
understanding deepens, we can, you know, understand, we can share that deepened
understanding. So, we have to begin somewhere. So, Krishna is sha..., you know,
first, in the previous verse, He says, do not share it, this with everyone. But
then, He is saying, those who share it, actually, they are very dear to Me. And
I, they are performing pure devotional service. And they will perform pure
devotional service by My mercy. And then, they will come back to Me, also. So,
now, "ya idaṁ param...", "mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati". Krishna is telling. Speak
this to my devotees. Now, what does it mean My devotees? See. We, again, the
"idaṁ" is referring to the confidential knowledge about devotion. This should be
spoken to My devotees. So, here, the word devotees refers to upcoming devotees.
Those who are devotionally minded. You know. So, we speak about Krishna's, we
cannot speak about Krishna's love to entirely new people. They cannot comprehend
it, only. People who do not even know God exists, if we tell them God is a, you
know, you know, is a blueish complexion cowherd boy, who wears a peacock
feather, then they, what nonsense? This is mythology, they will say. So, for
them, we have to go step by step. And, you know, explain the existence of God.
Existence of soul. So, that is what Srila Prabhupada did in his preaching. Srila
Prabhupada gave people experience of Krishna through the chanting of the holy
names. But then, in his classes, he focused on basics. And then, for devotees,
he also, you know, he gave his Bhagavatam purports. He gave his Chaitanya
Charitamrita, you know, and translation. And purports. He gave his Krishna Book.
So, by which, he told, you know, Krishna's glories to us. So, we have to, you
know, talk with people according to their level. And bring them to Krishna.
Closer. And closer. So, even new people, at an ultimate level, they are also
devotees. They are potential devotees. Because they are also souls. Who also
have, you know, you know, within them dormant and attraction to Krishna.

So, if we see them as potential devotees. And attract them towards Krishna.
Then, also, we are doing a very valuable service in, in furthering Krishna's
message, reach to more and more people. So, basically, when Krishna is telling,
you know, He is telling over here that, "mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati". That
basically is, not a restriction again. It is a, you know, it is a precaution to
present according to the level of people. Yes. Ok. For this level, we have to
present. So, for those who are bhaktas, that means those who are devotionally
minded, for them, to hear the glory of Krishna. And the beauty of Krishna. And
the sublimity of Krishna's love. That will increase their attraction to Krishna
more and more. And that is how they will come closer and closer to Krishna. You
know. So, similarly, you know, for those who are entirely new to Krishna, for
them, just entirely new to spirituality itself, they are talking about basics
will be important. The whole idea is, there is a progression. And Krishna wants
everyone to come closer. And closer to Him. And He guides everyone according to
their level. And He, and He wants us to progress when the knowledge according to
their level. So, by speaking about Krishna to His devo..., to those who are
devotionally minded, we can, you know, please Krishna. We can benefit those
people. We can please Krishna. And we can accelerate our own spiritual
advancement. So, Srila Prabhupada was always concerned that devotees, you know,
not, do not just do their own sadhana. But reach out to other people. And even,
the next verse, Krishna will tell very strongly, you know, that one should, you
know, what happens to those who are very, those who are, you know, those who
share His message. He expresses how dear they are to Him. In the next verse,
further. But in this verse, also, another point to understand is, when we talk
about Krishna's intimate glories. For example, Krishna's past..., intimate
pastimes. Let us say, His "rāsa-līlā" pastimes. Where the gopis demonstrate:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

Where the gopis give up lower level of religion to, to practice the highest
level of religion. So, this kind of practice is exalt..., extra, extraordinary.
And, you know, when the gopis do this, they are, you know, they can be very
easily misunderstood. And they have been misunderstood. Krishna's pastimes have
been considered very immoral. By many people. So, to counter this conception,
misconception about immorality, we need systematic education. And therefore, we
cannot have electropol integral calculus thought to a junior ki..., to a
kindergarden student. Similarly, we cannot have advanced levels of, you know,
you know, of devotional knowledge talked to people who are very new. So, Srila
Prabhupada gave us the highest, you know, goal, prema of Krishna. Goloka prema.
But then, he gave it systematically. In his books, he talks about basic
concepts. And he gradually removes our misconception and helps us to come to the
knowledge about Krishna. In a proper and pure way. So, now, Krishna will talk
about, further, how dear those, who love Him, are to Him.

        na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu
        kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ
        bhavitā na ca me tasmād
        anyaḥ priya-taro bhuvi

So, you know, "na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu". You know. So, among all people, among
human beings, so, the, in the Vedic culture, "manuṣyeṣu" is often used in an, an
inclusive sense. It refers to men. As well as women. "nara" also refers to,
nara, in the generic sense, as males and females both. So, among all human
beings, "kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ". There is no one who will be more dear to me
than this. "bhavitā na ca me tasmād". And "bhavitā", in, you know, in the
future, "anyaḥ priya-taro bhuvi". In this world, will anyone be more dear to Me?
You know. So, sometimes, so, Krishna is telling, such a person is the most dear
to Me. There is no one more dear. So, that means, what is Krishna telling over
here? That how dear such a person to Him. And sometimes, you know, we may
become, overcome by sentiment. And say, you know, I love you so much. I will do
anything for you. And then, in that moment, we tell, then, that person asks, can
you do this for me? You know. No, no, I cannot do that for you. Afterwards, we
tell like that. So, Krishna is saying that do not think my declaration is
sentimental like this. He is saying "bhavitā na ca me tasmād". That even in the
future, there will, becoming no one more dear to Me than you. That means,
Krishna is telling this is a guarantee for all time. For all time. One who
shares His message with others, would be very, very dear to Him. So, here,
Krishna is revealing how dea..., how eager He is for all the lost souls to come
back to Him. And how grateful He feels to those who assist Him in getting those
souls back to Him. He is, Krish..., they are saying Krishna comes as Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. And He is having the, you know, fruits of love of God. When he comes
to Kashi, he says, he is stru..., he says, I came to Kashi to distribute the
fruits of love of God. But actually, people are not interested. People, they
were all impersonalists. And they were not interested. So, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
said that, you know, I am carrying so many fruits. How can I carry them alone?
So, I want some people to distribute this with me. And he says, actually, people
are not taking. So, I will give it free. Just accept it. And not just accept it.
Just help me in distributing it. So, similarly, Krishna is telling over here
that one who assists Me in distributing this knowledge, is so dear to Me. There
will be no one who is more dear to Me than this. So, most dear to me. So, now,
of course, this superlative is also qualified. When Krishna is saying, there is
no one more dear to Me. What does it mean? That means there can be many people
who are as dear to Him. So, actually, when we go into the spiritual realm, there
can be many bests. There is not only one best. So, you know, you know, you know,
we should not think that the preachers are more, are more dear to Krishna than
other devotees. And if we have been given some other service. If we have the
service of cooking. Garland making. Deity worship. You know. And we are not
doing preaching, then we should not think that, we are less dear to Krishna.
Actually, you know, you know, everybody is dear to Krishna. No doubt. But at the
same time, those who are trying to reach out to Krishna directly, those who have
that spirit of reaching out to Krishna, they are special. You know. In an army,
you know, army, when we, the, if army has to function, it is not just the
soldiers who are fighting on the war front, they comprise the army. Along with
that, there is a backup staff. You know. The army needs food. They need cooks
who cook the food. The army needs doctors who take care of the sick patient. Of
the, peo..., of the soldiers who get wounded. Or the soldiers who fall sick. And
they need, you know, intelligence. So, they need a technology. They need, you
know, spies. They need, you know, so many s..., support is needed. So, all of
them are, are serving the nation in a very valuable way. All of them are
sacrificing. So, all of them are hea..., are, in their own, glories. Now, of
course, those who are on the war front, you know, the fighting, actually,
risking their lives, maybe facing the first bullets, they are, in one sense,
specially glorious. But the point is, it is all a team work.

So, nobody should claim privilege. And become proud because of one's specific
service. So, you know, that way, all, every service to Krishna is special. And
precious. And whatever service we are doing, we are fortunate to have the
opportunity to serve Krishna. And be a part of the team. You know. That is, you
know, executing Krishna's mission of compassion in this world. So, yes, those
who are at the front-line, you know, sharing Krishna's message with, you know,
with, you know, with people, they are chartered. Taking the miscon..., fighting
the misconceptions that are there in this world. Challenging and countering
those misconceptions. Yes, we can say they are special. But those who are doing
this, we should not think, they should not think that I am doing something
special. They should think, actually, I am a servant of Krishna. They are
servant of Krishna. And ultimately, what Krishna sees is, how much of a service
attitude I have developed. So, what is important is for me, to have a service
attitude. And I try to develop that as much as possible. And by that, I move
closer and closer to Krishna. So, beyond this, you know, another point to
recognise is, preaching, also, we should not have a very restrictive definition.
Preaching is not just sitting on an asana. And speaking classes. Yes, that is
preaching. Definitely. But in a broad sense, preaching means, you know,
inspiring other souls to come towards Krishna. You know. You know. So, in the
Christian tradition, there is a great saint, Saint Francis. So, one time, he
said, you know, preach all day. And on a few occasions, when required, speak a
few words. So, the idea is that preaching does not mean just giving lectures.
Yes, that is also one part. But then, our actions are also preaching. And our
actions, along with our words, they comprise the effective peaching. So, people
have to see that we are transformed. That we are devoted to Krishna. And we are
concerned about other living beings. And when people see that, then, you know,
they become attracted to Krishna. As it is, says, people do not care how much we
know. But people know how much we care. So, we should know about Krishna. And
then, along with that, we should also care about people. Because they are the
souls who are Krishna's beloved children. Lost children. And we have the
opportunity to help them to come back to Krishna. You know. So, we help, you
know, you know, we value the souls as parts of Krishna. And help them to connect
with Krishna. So, our actions are also important. So, preaching is not just
speaking about Krishna. Any action that inspires a soul to come closer to
Krishna is preaching. You know. You know. And it is valuable. It is important.
It is essential. And preaching at a deeper level also means, you know, removing
the obstacles on the path of people to come to Krishna. You know. You know. That
means, you know, first is, we create attract..., we, app..., wis..., act in such
a way by which people who are, who have forgotten Krishna, they can come closer
to Krishna. You know. You know. So, we speak about Krishna. Unnecessary, that is
preaching. Other is, we act in such a way, oh, these people, these devotees,
they are, you know, really good people. I want to become like them. So, we
inspire people, also, come to, closer to Krishna. And another level of preaching
is, removing the misconceptions that stop people from coming towards Krishna.
So, for example, you know, Srila Prabhupada, you know, you know, would say that,
you know, by, by refuting atheism, refuting atheistic theories, like, say, the
theory of evolution. So, Prabhupada said, by refuting this, you will make
spiritual advancement.

So, what is the idea over there? The idea is that, you know, this particular,
you know, the, ka..., atheistic notion, or other atheistic notion in general,
they form a wall between the soul and Krishna. So, now, preaching does not just
mean speaking about Krishna. That is just there. But preaching also means
breaking down that wall. So, there are, so, we see, most of Srila Prabhupada's
purports, they focus a lot on, you know, countering misconceptions. They focus
on telling, ok, this is wrong. This is wrong. This is wrong. We should give it
up. And in this way, by removing misconceptions, you know, Prabhupada helps
people to come closer to Krishna. So, you know, you know, Srila Prabhupada's
purports, espe..., you know, what are they doing? They are bringing people
closer to Krishna. Not just by speaking about Krishna. But also by speaking
about what are the misconceptions that people have. The misconceptions that form
a wall between people and Krishna. And breaking down those misconceptions. So,
there can be intellectual misconceptions. But there can be other obstacles,
also. In people coming close to Krishna. So, removing those obstacles are also
important. So, that is also preaching. So, for example, creating a social
support system for devotees. You know. Having counselling arrangements. Having
marriage bureau. Having, you know, other social support systems. These are also
a part of preaching. Because there are material things which peo..., devotees
need in their life. And if those material things are not taken care of, then,
you know, you know, you know, then, for those material things, people may have
to go away from Krishna. For those material things, people may have to go away
from Krishna. So, we should not want people, people should not need to go away
from Krishna for anything. And we should be able to create, within the devotee
community, arrangements by which, people can keep coming closer and closer to
Krishna. So, where they are? You know. Wherever people may be. Preaching does
not mean just getting new people to start chanting Hare Krishna. No. Preaching
means helping everyone to move closer to Krishna from wherever they are. So, if
somebody is, you know, not knowing Krishna at all, helping them to come to know
Krishna, that is preaching. But somebody knows Krishna, to help them to know
Krishna more. To help them to advance deeper in their devotional life. In their
relationship with Krishna. That is also preaching. You know. So, therefore, you
know, at a generic level, anything that removes obstacles. And inspires soul to
come closer to Krishna is preaching. And just like in an army, any activity,
that is done, to support the army's endeavor, that is preaching. Along with
that, the army's front-line soldiers, who fight the war, they are special. So,
those who are actually sharing Krishna's message by speaking about Krishna's
glories, they have a special position. But that should not make them proud. That
should not, that should actually make them feel the gravity of the
responsibility that they have. You know. We have been given this responsibility.
It is important for us to share this respon..., to execute this responsibility.
So, you know, you know, with this mood, when a devotee shares Krishna
Consciousness, it is such a precious asset. And we can see from these two
verses, you know, you know, you know, you know, we can think about how glorious
Srila Prabhupada is. And how dear he will be to Krishna. That Prabhupada in his
old age, when it, without any money. Without any contacts. Without any
institutional support. All alone went to America. You know. isking his life.
Enduring heart attacks. And, you know, went to the most degraded place in the
world. And, you know, shared Krishna's message vigorously. Prabhupada would all
day and all night, he would be justspeaking about Krishna. All day, he would
speak about Krishna to people who came to meet him. And all night, he was
speaking about Krishna to people who did not come to meet him. By writing books.
Which would reach to those people. So, Srila Prabhupada is so dear to Krishna.
And Srila Prabhupada is actually the greatest example of a devotee of Krishna.
Who is utterly dedicated to sharing Krishna's message. And by Srila Prabhupada's
mercy, we have got "Bhagavad-gītā As It Is". We have understood the devotional
lessons of Bhagavad Gita. And we can share that essence with others. So, now,
Krishna is giving a descending ladder of mercy. So, He is saying, ok, you know,
what? Now that you know this message. Share this message. You will become very
dear to Me. You know. Somebody may say, oh, but you know, sharing this message
is very complicated. I cannot do all that. Then, Krishna says, if you cannot do
that, then at least study the message. So, next verse will tell, at least study
the message. So, let us look at this verse now. So:

        adhyeṣyate ca ya imaṁ
        dharmyaṁ saṁvādam āvayoḥ
        jñāna-yajñena tenāham
        iṣṭaḥ syām iti me matiḥ

So, Krishna is telling "adhyeṣyate". "adhyeṣyate" means to study. "ca ya imaṁ".
One who studies this knowledge. "dharmyaṁ saṁvādam āvayoḥ". So, this is a
"saṁvādam" about dharma. Now, it is interesting. Krishna has earlier only told
"sarva-dharmān parityajya". He says the, the conclusion of the "saṁvādam" is to
give up dharma. But then, why is Krishna calling it as a "dharmyaṁ saṁvādam"?
That it is a, you know, you know, dharmic conversation. Because there is
"apara-dharmaḥ". And there is "para-dharmaḥ". So, Krishna is telling that this
is a conversation about dharma. About various levels of dharma. And what is the
supreme dharma? "dharmyaṁ saṁvādam āvayoḥ". "āvayoḥ" means between us. So, then,
such people who study, those who study, one who studies this, what is that
person doing? "jñāna-yajñena tenāham". You know. "jñāna-yajñe". "jñāna-yajñe" is
a worship of knowledge. Or worship by knowledge. You know. "tenāham". By "tena"
is, by that person, "aham" is I. "iṣṭaḥ syām iti me matiḥ". By him, I am being
worshipped through "jñāna". "iṣṭaḥ". "iṣṭaḥ" is worship. "syām" means shall be
or is. Is being worshipped. "iti me matiḥ". This is My opinion. So, what does
this mean? You know. You know. Krishna, He describing how, you know, devotional
an activity study of the Bhagavad Gita is. Many people think that, ok, Bhagavad
Gita is a very philosophical book. We are rasik bhaktas. So, you know, we will
study. We will relish the pastimes in the "Bhāgavatam". We will relish the
pastimes in "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". You know. We do not want to be jnanis.
Actually, Bhagavad Gita is not for jnanis. Bhagavad Gita is for bhaktas. And
Krishna is telling that, you know, studying the analogy of Bhagav..., message of
the Bhagavad Gita is what? It is a, it is a form of bhakti. It is a form of
worship. Generally, when we do arati. When we do worship of Krishna, we may take
a diya. We may take an agarbatti. We may, incense. And we will worship Krishna
with that. So, Krishna is telling that do not think that worship can be
performed only with a torch. Only with a lamp. And an incense. He says, worship
can be performed with not just gross paraphernalia. Also, subtle paraphernalia.
Subtle paraphernalia is our own intelligence. So, when we, you know, study the
Bhagavad Gita, we are worshipping Krishna with our intelligence. So, it is a
very devotional activity. And it is a limb of bhakti. It is integral part of
bhakti. You know. Krishna is saying, different people may have different
opinion. Some people may say, this is "jñāna". Whatever. No. "iti me matiḥ". And
His opinion is the supreme opinion. Because He is the Supreme Lord. So, by
studying the Bhagavad Gita, we are worshipping Krishna. But of course, we
shoul..., also should have a devotional disposition. There may be scholars who
study the Bhagavad Gita very scrutinizingly. But if their disposition is
anti-devotional. That means they think, oh, they come to the Bhagavad Gita, not
with an open-minded attitude of knowing what the Bhagavad Gita is teaching. Of
wanting to know what the Bhagavad Gita is teaching. Rather, they come to the
Bhagavad Gita with a preconceived notion. You know. Yes. The impersonal brahma
is the highest. And that is what I want to prove with the Bhagavad Gita. Then,
that sort of study is not having a dev..., it is not having a devotional
mindset. So, they do not intend to worship Krishna. And that is why their study
does, may not con..., does not constitute worship of Krishna. That sort of, you
know, that sort of misinterpretation of the Bhagavad Gita is undesirable.
Prabhupada would strongly, you know, condemn that. And Krishna has also talked
about this. He has talked about in, in 3.32. He says:

        sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān
        viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

        ye tv etad abhyasūyanto
        nānutiṣṭhanti me matam

So, He says that those who are envious of Me, "ye tv etad abhyasūyanto". Those
envious of Me, they may have a lot of "jñāna". "sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān".
Their "jñāna" is lost. They are deluded. Because they are "viddhi naṣṭān
acetasaḥ". "acetasaḥ". They are misdirected. So, Krishna is not talking about
academic scholars. Or imper..., or, you know, you know, or other kinds of
scholars who misinterpret the Bhagavad Gita. Or who study the Bhagavad Gita with
their own agenda. But devotees who study the Bhagavad Gita to understand it more
and more. To understand it deeply. They are actually, you know, worshipping with
their intelligence. It is a very devotional activity. And what we are doing in
the Bhakti Shastri course. Studying the Bhagavad Gita. This is actually a very
central limb of bhakti. And by this, we will understand how much Krishna loves
us. And our desire to love Krishna will increase. And in this way, our bhakti
will be nourished. So, explicitly, by understanding how Krishna is glor...,
Krishna is so loving, b..., our love will increase. And implicitly, because
bhakti itself is a form of service to Krishna. We are worshipping Krishna. We
are doing "arcanaṁ". In a way. By, we are actually worshipping Krishna with our
intelligence. That its.., that al..., that action will also nourish our bhakti.
And in this way, by studying the Bhagavad Gita, we will move forward. In our
devotional understanding. Now, Krishna will say that, ok, you know, in the next
verse, let us see what He says. He, if you cannot study, then at least hear.

        śraddhāvān anasūyaś ca
        śṛṇuyād api yo naraḥ
        so ’pi muktaḥ śubhāḻ lokān
        prāpnuyāt puṇya-karmaṇām

So, you know, "śraddhāvān anasūyaś ca". You know. You know. "śraddhāvān". With
faith. And "anasūyaś ca". Without envy. "śṛṇuyād". Just hear. Those who hear,
the, "api yo naraḥ", those, those human beings who hear, "so ’pi muktaḥ". Those
people will become liberated. From what? "aśubhāḻ lokān". You know. Inauspicious
planets. "prāpnuyāt puṇya-karmaṇām". And they will attain the abodes which are
attained by those who are "puṇya-karmaṇām". Those who do "puṇya-karma". So,
here, what is Krishna doing? Krishna is making things even easier for us. So, in
68-69, He said, ok, now, you have understood my message. Preach this message to
everyone. And He says, if you cannot preach. In 70, He says, study at least. He
says, you know, in 7..., 70, if you can, 7..., 70, when He says, if you cannot
study scrutinizingly, at least hear this message. It is like, you know, somebody
is falling in a river, you know, falling in a well. And somebody just throw...,
you know, somebody throw..., throws a rope from outside. And that person says,
ok, now, hold onto the rope. And, you know, climb out ot..., of it. You know. He
says, oh, I cannot climb out. Then, he suddenly says, ok, just hold onto the
rope, I will pull you out. You know. You know. Somebody says, oh, no, I cannot
do that. Then, suddenly, that person takes a rope. And then, ties it up. And
then, makes a lasso around it. And then, he says, just tie this rope. And just
be still. I will pull you out. So, like that, Krishna is offering increasing
mercy. He is saying, first, stu..., you know, speak this message. Share with it
others. You cannot do that? Study it. If you cannot study it, at least hear it.
So, here, we see how eager Krishna is for our elevation. That He is offering us,
you know, more and more mercy. And our acharyas explain over here that when
Krishna He says, when He is saying over here, you know, you know, "muktaḥ śubhāḻ
lokān". So, this is not referring just to going to Svarga. You know. "prāpnuyāt
puṇya-karmaṇām". So, yes, one can go to Svarga even by doing, you know, yo...,
any form of yoga. But He is talking about elevated abodes like Dhruvaloka. So,
in Dhruvaloka, Dhruva is a pure devotee. And the Lord Vishnu is also present.
Although, this abode is in the material world, you know, this is an exal..., it
is almost like the spiritual world. And there, in the association of "Dhruva
Mahārāja" and the other exalted devotees over there, the devotee will advance.
And will ultimately get liberated. So, here, we see, Krishna is offering
multiple levels of worship. And He is encouraging us to, somehow or the other,
connect with His exalted message. And thereby, advance in devotion. And return
back to Him. So, in the next section, we will discuss, you know, Krishna's last
statement. And then, Arjuna's response. And then, "Sañjaya"'s concluding verses.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
