Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rY3H2-qixo8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=rY3H2-qixo8&event=video_description&redir_token=MTIR47mMyHN_453yaP-Rk6cT6G18MTU0ODQ4OTUzMEAxNTQ4NDAzMTMw&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_119_-_Bhagavad_Gita_13.04-13.12_-_The_components_of_kshetra_and_jnana_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are in the Thirteenth Chapter with the Bhagavad Gita. The Thirteenth Chapter is
often considered to be the philosophically most, you know, complex and intricate
chapters. And it contains many verses which are, you know, quite difficult to
comprehend. And we will come to that section. Especially the section 13.13 to 19
is quite abstruse. Abstruse means, you know, difficult to comprehend. So, the,
we are, just now started discussing about "kṣetra" and "kṣetra-jñaṁ". So, let us
look at 13.4.

        tat kṣetraṁ yac ca yādṛk ca
        yad-vikāri yataś ca yat
        sa ca yo yat-prabhāvaś ca
        tat samāsena me śṛṇu

"tat kṣetraṁ". "yac ca yādṛk ca". "tat kṣetraṁ" refers to that "kṣetraṁ". So,
basically, this is a verse which is like a summary verse. Which talks about
what, all that is going to come later in the chapter. "yac ca yādṛk ca".
"yad-vikāri yataś ca yat". So, you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada
translate that that that field, then as it is, "yādṛk". "vikāri". Whatever
changes. "yataś". "yataś" is what is its origin. "yat-prabhāvaś". What are its
influences? "tat samāsena". In summary. "me śṛṇu". Please hear. So, therefore,
what we are looking at now is, you know, you know, Ar..., Krishna is telling
Arjuna, in brief, I am explaining. So, let us look at what is all there. So,
13.4 is a co..., summary verse. Which will be, you know, giving a glimpse of
what is going to come later. So, how the body is constituted. That is text 6.
What changes the body undergoes. That is mentioned in text 7. And text 20. How,
when, and where the body is produced, you know, that is 6. 21. And 22. The
identity of the knower and the field of activities. You know. That is text 14 to
18. And 23. And the influence of the knower. That is "prabhāvaḥ". So, text 14 to
18. So, basically, there are five topics. Which are mentioned in this. "yad
kṣetraṁ...":

        tat kṣetraṁ yac ca yādṛk ca
        yad-vikāri yataś ca yat
        sa ca yo yat-prabhāvaś ca
        tat samāsena me śṛṇu

So, "tat samāsena". In summary, it is being described over here. So, let us look
at Srila Prabhupada's purport briefly. You know. Basically, Prabhupada says
that, you know:

"This is something like equating the potent and the impotent."

What is that? He says the Jiva with the Supreme Lord. So, the Supreme Lord has
all potencies. The Jiva is not exactly impotent. But as compared to the potency
of the Supreme Lord, the Jiva's potency is insignificant. That is why we cannot
equate the Jiva with the Supreme Lord. So, now, let us loo..., move to the next
verse.

        ṛṣibhir bahudhā gītaṁ
        chandobhir vividhaiḥ pṛthak
        brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva
        hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ

"ṛṣibhir bahudhā gītaṁ". So, "ṛṣibhir bahudhā". That the "ṛṣi"s have sung, you
know, va..., in various ways. Have. So, "gītaṁ" can refer to songs. It can also
used to defer, descriptions. So, "ṛṣibhir bahudhā". The "ṛṣi"s, in various ways,
have described, the "chandobhir". By the Vedic wi..., hymns. "vividhaiḥ pṛthak".
Various. So, different "ṛṣi"s have defried..., described in different hymns. In
different way. And this is also being talked about in "brahma-sūtra-padaiś
caiva". "brahma-sūtra" refers to the "Vedānta-sūtra". Now, this word has many
names. Generally, Prabhupada would prefer the name "Vedānta-sūtra" to describe
this. The, you know, traditional commentators. That is why Madhvācārya, he says
commentary in the "brahma-sūtra. That is what, gene..., normally would be the
word that is used. They all mean the same thing. "brahma-sūtra" and
"Vedānta-sūtra". So, you know, you know, you know, as we have discussed in the
first class. When we discussed the overview of the six systems of philosophy.
That, you know, "Vedānta" is the conclusion among the six systems of philosophy.
And this particular book establishes how "Vedānta" is the conclusion of all the
systems of philosophy. So, it is called as "Vedānta-sūtra". At the same time,
the book is also talking about Brahman as the ultimate reality. So, in that
sense, it is also "brahma-sūtra". So, here, Prabhu..., Bhakt..., here, Krishna,
in the Bhagavad Gita, is using the word "brahma-sūtra" to describe this.
"brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva". So, you know, you know, "padaiḥ" refers to the
sections of the "brahma-sūtra". There are "adhaiya"s. And there are "padaiḥ"s in
the, you know, adikar..., there are adikaranas. "adhaiya"s. "padaiḥ"s. "padaiḥ"
is a unit of, you know, unit of prose construction. Just like we have chapters.
So, like that, "padaiḥ" is also a unit. So:

        brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva
        hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ

"hetu-madbhiḥ" refer..., refers, refers to cause and effect. Or logic. The
"brahma-sūtra" is largely based on logic. It focuses on explaining how, you
know, you know, it is, starts with scripture. So, the whole purpose of the
"Vedānta-sūtra" is to establish how Brahman is the ultimate reality. And the way
it does it is by sequential progression. It establishes step by step by step
how, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, how,
you know, the various systems of thought that are there, there were there at
that particular time including, h..., not just the, you know, orthodox thoughts.
But also the heterodox thought. Orthodox are those which accept the Vedantic
systems of sch..., philosophy. Which accept Veda as the authority. And
heterodox are those which reject Veda as authority. So Buddhism. Janism.
Charvakism are heterodox. Whereas, you know, yoga. Memi..., you know, yoga,
Vedanta, you know, Sankhya Yoga. Then, "Vaiśeṣika". Then, Namamsa. And Vedanta.
You know. So, all these are, you know, you know, the, you know, you know, you
know, orthodox. Orthodox means these accept Vedic authority. So, whatever be the
schools of thought, how among them, the Vedanta is the highest. That is what is
established. And scripture is quoted. But the m..., import of scripture is
established through both, you know, quoting other parallel scripture verses. And
also as through, you know, you know, establishing the authority by, you know,
logical inferences. So, we see significantly here, Krishna is quoting authority.
Krishna is saying, what I am speaking is not something which I have concocted.
Of course, what Krishna speaks is never concocted. Because Krishna is the
ultimate authority. But Krishna is setting a standard by saying that, He, He,
what He is speaking is, what has been spoken earlier by the great sages.
Chanda, chanda can refer to a particular way in which the Vedic hymns are
recited. Chanda can also refer to "Chandogya Upanishad". There are also the
word, chanda comes over there. So, you know, you know, generally, the Vedic
hymns do not talk so much about the ultimate reality directly. The Vedic hymns
focus more on karma kanda. And the ultimate reality is talked about more in the
Upanishads. So, here, chanda can, you know, refer to "Chandogya Upanishad". Now,
Prabhupada explains that, there is "Vedānta-sūtra". And then is "Parāśara"
sutra, also. Prabhupada says that:

"Vyāsadeva’s father, Parāśara, is also a great sage, and he writes in his books
of religiosity, aham tvaṁ ca tathānye.… “"

You know. That we:

"are all transcendental,"

You know. You know.

        aham tvaṁ ca tathānye

That verse, that is actually more or less similar to, you know, "na...":

        na tv evāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ

And 2.12:

        na tvaṁ neme janādhipāḥ

That, you know, all of us. I. You. And all these kings. We are all
indestructible. You know. You know. So, you know, "brahma pucchaṁ pratiṣṭhā".
This is what we discussed last time. The five levels. "Anna-maya". "Prana-maya".
So, the connection of all this is that these are various levels that which
Brahman is manifested. And this is where, levels at which we ultimately realise
the Absolute Truth. So, Prbhupada writes:

"One has to search for this truth in the Vedānta-sūtra, or Brahma-sūtra."

So, then Prabhupada quotes a few "sūtra"s. You know. You know. From the
"Vedānta-sūtra". That we will, we will not go into that. As we, they are quite
technical. Now, we come to descr..., we have description "sankhya". So:

        mahā-bhūtāny ahaṅkāro
        buddhir avyaktam eva ca
        indriyāṇi daśaikaṁ ca
        pañca cendriya-gocarāḥ

        icchā dveṣaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ
        saṅghātaś cetanā dhṛtiḥ
        etat kṣetraṁ samāsena
        sa-vikāram udāhṛtam

So, "mahā-bhūtāny ahaṅkāro". So, as we know, there are twenty-four elements in
Sankhya. Which are listed in the sixth verse. So, "mahā-bhūtāny". Which are the
"mahā-bhūtāny"? Earth. Water. Fire. And air. And ether. They are considered
gigantic elements. These are five. Then, "ahaṅkāraḥ" is the sixth element.
"ahaṅkāraḥ" refers to false ego. Then, "buddhiḥ" is the seventh. "avyaktam" is
the unmanifested. The "pradhan". That is the eighth. Then, "indriyāṇi daśaikaṁ
ca". So, five "karmendriya"s. Five "jñānendriya"s. And the mind. So, "daśaikaṁ".
They are eleven. So, we had six in the first line. Two in the second line. That
is eight. And then, we have eleven in the third line. That is, you know, you
know, nineteen. And then, "pañca cendriya-gocarāḥ". And then, the five sense
objects. There is form. Touch. Taste. You know. Smell. And, you know, you know,
sound. So, like that, they are the, you know, five sense objects. So, these
constitute the, you know, twenty-four elements. So, Krishna i..., what is
Krishna describing over here? What is going on in this section, actually? We
understand that there is "kṣetra". And there is "kṣetra-jñaṁ". So, now, Krishna
is right now describing the "kṣetra". So, first, He described "kṣetra-jñaṁ"
briefly as, see, He is the, you know, that, one who is a knower of the field.
That the atma. And the Paramatma. And then, He is saying, now, I am going to
describe to you where, where the "kṣetra" comes from. So, He is describing that
here. And He is describing various things in connection with that. So, "pañca
cendriya-gocarāḥ". So, like that, you know, the "kṣetra" is material nature.
What is material nature constituted of? These twenty-four elements. So, He
is describing the twenty-four elements. Now, He moves forward. And He starts
describing further:

        icchā dveṣaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ
        saṅghātaś cetanā dhṛtiḥ
        etat kṣetraṁ samāsena
        sa-vikāram udāhṛtam

So, it is intre..., interesting. You know. So, Krishna had told in the fourth
verse that, you know, that "kṣetraṁ", you know, "vikāri yataś ca". So, "vikāram"
is transformations. So, what are the transformation? What are the changes that
the sou..., you know, that the "kṣetraṁ" undergoes? That He is describing in
this verse. You know. "vikāram" is change. "sa-vikāram udāhṛtam". You know. So,
what are the "vikāram" that the "kṣetraṁ" undergoes? "ic...", this is described.
"icchā dveṣaḥ". These attachment and aversion. And then, naturally, concomitant
with that is "sukhaṁ" and "duḥkhaṁ". So, that, which, for which we have "icchā".
Accordingly, we experience "sukhaṁ" in connection with that. And that, for
which, we have "dveṣaḥ", we experience "duḥkhaṁ" in connection with that. So,
you know, for when we get something, which, for which we have "icchā", we get
"sukhaṁ". And for that, which we have "dveṣaḥ". For example, say, I do not like
a particular sabji. And if that is the only sabji in the meal, I, my mouth will
turn in distaste. So, when I have "dveṣaḥ" for something, that leads to, when I
get that, there is "duḥkhaṁ". The simple example. There are, of course, many
bigger things which we may not like. And we get in life. So, you know, like now,
these are considered to be true, with the "vikāram" of "kṣetraṁ". How is that?
The soul, the seat, the source of consciousness is transcendental. That is
not a part of "kṣetraṁ". That the soul is "kṣetra-jñaṁ". But the, you know, the
analogy, which will come back again and again in this chapter, is the analogy
of a person watching a movie. You know. A person is watching a movie. You know.
The person is like the "kṣetra-jñaṁ". And the movie screen on which the, you
know, movie is being played. That is like the "kṣetra". So, now, at a, you know,
at a level of, you know, constituents or components, what is the "kṣetra" made
up of? You know. There has to be a projecting screen. There has to be projector.
There has to be the proper, you know, say, you know, acoustic arrangements. The
lighting arrangements. All that thing by which the attention will gravitate
towards the TV screen. So, all that is the background. But then, so, that is the
"kṣetra". That is the, you know, that is the area where that, you know, you
know, where that visual experience o..., audiovisual experience of the movie
will be, you know, will be created. So that it can be experienced by others. But
then, within the movie, what happens is, "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". So, you know, if
the hero and the heroine are embracing. Then, there is "icchā". And that leads
to "sukhaṁ". And then, the hero is being pound. Beaten up by the villain. There
is "dveṣaḥ". One does not want that to happen. Or the, the villain is chasing
after the heroine. There is "dveṣaḥ" for that. And that leads to "duḥkhaṁ". So,
"icchā". So, there is "icchā". And then, there is "dveṣaḥ". So, based on
whatever is happ..., so, this, consider "kṣetraṁ","vikāram". Because actually,
the changes are happening within the illusory framework of the, you know, movie
theater. You know. You know. Of the movie projection. On the screen. But they
have an effect. So, it is interesting. Further, He says that "saṅghātaś cetanā
dhṛtiḥ". "cetanā" refers to consciousness. Now, it is interesting that
consciousness is also s..., called as a, you know, "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". Now, we
know, consciousness does not come from matter. Consciousness comes from the
soul. There is a whole book of Srila Prabhupada. Which is titled as, which is
conversa..., which is conversation with a, you know, you know, a primarily
Bhaktisvarupa Damodar Maharaja. And other disciples, also. You know. Where,
which is called "Life comes from life". Where the primary focus is on
establishing how, you know, the source of consciousness is not matter. But
spirit. "Life comes from life". That is. As the name suggests. You know. Life
does not come from matter. So, you know, that being the case, then why is this
verse stating that, you know, "cetanā", which means conciousness, is a
"kṣetraṁ". "vikāram", is a, you know, transformation, is a tran..., a change. A
transformation of matter. You know. Because this is not talking about
consciousness per say. This is talking about consciousness projected within
matter. This is talking about consciousness as it is experiencing the virtual
reality. Or the movie reality. So, going back to the earlier example. The person
is watching in a movie theater. The person has, you know, the spectators have
their own consciousness. So, they can look around. Look left. Look bottom. But
right now, they are looking straight at the movie theater. And as they are
looking at the movie theater, what is happening? Their illusion, their whole
attention is focused on the movie theater. And their consciousness is projected
into that movie theater. And then, whatever changes are happening, they actually
have nothing to do with their original life. Their real life. Real life in terms
of, you know, the life which they have opp..., abouts at the movie theater. But
that is what they are experiencing right now.

So, like that, we have a different life. We have a life at the spiritual level
in relationship with Krishna. But unfortunately, we have forgotten that life.
And right now, we are focusing on an alternative life. What is that alternative
life? You know. It is not just an alternative. It is an illusion, actually. So,
and, you know, you know, you know, you know, it is, you know, it is a temporary
illusion which we have. And that, unless we are identifying with a particular
body. A particular family. A particular nationality. And then, we are
experiencing a set of emotions. So, the consciousness that we are experiencing
right not is a "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". It has got nothing to do with the original
purest consciousness of the soul. So, "saṅghātaś cetanā dhṛtiḥ". "dhṛtiḥ" refers
to convictions. So, we also have certain convictions. This is good. This is bad.
You know. An Indian may think that Pakistani is a rival. And Pakistanis may
think Indians are rival. So, we all have certain, certain conceptions. Certain
convictions. So, all these are produced by "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". You know. So,
"sa-vikāram udāhṛtam". So, in this way, Krishna is describing the "kṣetraṁ".
And, and the "kṣetraṁ". So, this is a condense description of sankhya. Which is
given in the Thirteenth Chapter. You know. So, now, here, Prabhupada explains,
you know, you know, Prabhupada says:

"One who desires to know the twenty-four elements in detail along with their
interactions should study the philosophy in more detail. In Bhagavad-gītā, a
summary only is given."

You know. You know. You know. You know. So, sankhya is itself a whole complex
and, you know, developed belo..., philosophy. And a theistic version of sankhya
is explained in the, you know, in the Third Canto of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". In the
"Teachings of Kapila". So, you know, you know, you know, you know, this theistic
sankhya is the sankhya wherein the idea of how ultimately the, you know, the
analysis of the twenty-four elements should lead us from matter to spirit. And
from, and within the renounced spirit, it should lead us to supreme spirit of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the understanding of theistic
sankhya. You know. You know. So, "summary only is given.", Prabhupada says. So,
Krishna's purpose here is not to exhaustively analyse sankhya. He is basically,
as we know in the Bhagavad Gita, there is a particular context. The context is
for Arjuna to understand what is it that He should do on the battlefield. That
is not just fight or not fight. Yes. Fight or not fight is the decision. Which
he has to take. But on, based on certain understanding. So, what is that
understanding? That understanding is that he is a part of Krishna. And as a part
of Krishna, he, it is best for him to act in harmony with Krishna. So, how will
he act in harmony with Krishna? By, you know, learning to love and serve
Krishna. And that, you know, learning to love and serve Krishna will be based on
the understanding that Bhagavan is the highest sadhya. And bhakti is the highest
sadhana. So, Krishna is analysing sankhya here. So, as to help Arjuna over a
period of time understand that the ultimate reality is, you know, that even
sankh..., that is bhakti. That even the analysis of sankhya leads to Bhagavan
as the highest reality. And bhakti as the best sadhana. That is what we have
talked about here. Now, after describing this "kṣetra". Krishna, in the next,
you know, five verses, will describe the twenty items of knowledge. So, this is
the, you know, you know, the longest set of verses that Srila Prabhupada puts
together. In the 20 to 23 also are five ver..., you know, 20, 21, 22, 23, there
are four verses which Prabhupada has put together in the Sixth Chapter. But that
is also actually 3.5 verses. Because the fourth verse is half. Which is, you
know, which he takes as one verse. And then, 24th verse, he makes us having six
lines. Six lines in English. Or three lines in sanskrit. So, generally, two
verses being put together happens quite, as sev..., several times. Three verses
being put together happens sometimes. But this is the only place in the whole
Bhagavad Gita, where Srila Prabhupada gives a combined purport for five verses.
And the reason for that is, you know, in one sense, you know, logical and sound.
Because, you know, these five verses are talking about one theme. And what is
that theme? That theme is, you know, about jnana. So, Arjuna has started with
questions. Let us look, you know, quickly go back a few steps to understand how
this chapter is progressing. So, we see here that, you know, you know, Arjuna
had asked six question about "kṣetraṁ". "kṣetra-jñam". You know. "jñānaṁ".
"jñeyaṁ". And "puruṣaṁ". And "prakṛtiṁ". So, "kṣetraṁ" and "kṣetra-jñam", He has
answered the questions now. The "kṣetraṁ" is the body. And He has described in
ref..., His, He has described sankhya's analysis of the "kṣetraṁ". And then, He
has described "kṣetra-jñam", and the two "kṣetra-jñam"s. Atma. And Paramatma.
Now, He is going to "jñānaṁ". So, then, after that, will be "jñeyaṁ". So, let us
look at "jñānaṁ" now. You know. You know. You know. You know.

        amānitvam adambhitvam
        ahiṁsā kṣāntir ārjavam
        ācāryopāsanaṁ śaucaṁ
        sthairyam ātma-vinigrahaḥ

So, we will look at one by one. The verses. It is significant that Krishna
begins this description with "amānitvam". "amānitvam" means humility. And
"adambhitvam" is pridelessness. Now, we may wonder. What exactly? Is there any
difference between "amānitvam" and "adambhitvam"? Yes. There is a significant
difference. "amānitvam" refers to the, "amānitvam" refers to, you know, you
know, you know, not to be proud when we have reason to be proud. And
"adambhitvam" means not being proud when we do not have reason to be proud. What
do we mean by that? You know. Sometimes, some people put on a facade to look
bigger than what they are. Say, if a person is a mill..., billionaire. And that
person says I am a billionaire. You know. You know. That is, you know, that is,
you know, you know, pride. But when a person is not a billionaire. And that
person claims I am billionaire. Then, that is "damba". That is hypocrisy in one
sense. So, when one, so, Krishna says, we, neither, you know, that means we
should not, you know, brag about what we have. And so, then, what to speak of
bragging about what we do not have? So, in general, people want to look big. You
know. They want to look big in the world's eyes. You know. I am so great. I am
so this. I am so that. They want to look big. You know. You know. And in order
to look big. They, what they try to do is, they try to avoid looking. You know.
They end up. And they try to look big. They end up looking small. Because when
people speak a lot about themselves. You know. I have done this. I have done
that. I am like this. I am like that. Then, what happens by these thoughts? When
people say, I am like this. I am like that. The end result of it is that those
people end up becoming, you know, you know, miserable. Why? Because they become
so dependent. So terribly, you know, they become afflicted by terrible sense of,
sense of inadequacy. And in a, and insecurity. Because they are always dependent
on others' praise. Others' recognition. Others' glorification. And without that,
they are, just have no shelter. No security. So, therefore, you know, you know,
those who aim to look big are small. They are small. They do not have any
self-security. Self-esteem. So, that is why they, they are actually in a
terrible predicament. So, "amānitvam adambhitvam". So, first thing, Krishna says
is humility. Kena Upanishad also says: one who thinks, he knows, does not know.
And one who knows, he does not know, knows. So, the idea is that a person does
not claim that I know everything. See, even hund..., a devotee knows Krishna, a
devotee understands that there is so much more to know about Krishna. So, that
is why a devotee never claims that I know Krishna entirely. You know. In fact,
even Arjuna says that Krishna, only You know.

        svayam evātmanātmānaṁ
        vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama
        bhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa
        deva-deva jagat-pate

So, Krishna told Arjuna after the Chatur Shloki Bhagavad Gita that, actually,
after Krishna spoke Chatur Shloki Bhagavad Gita. Then, when Krishna, you know, 
Arjuna was summarising his understanding. He says, Krishna, only You know
Yourself. "svayam evātmanātmānaṁ". That You alone know Yourself. Nobody else
knows You. "vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama". "vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama". That You alone
know Yourself. And nobody else knows You. So, in this way, what Krishna is
essentially telling Arjuna is that, you know, you know, sorry, you know, you
know, you know, what, you know, what Arjuna is telling Krishna is that actually
that nobody knows me. You know. Nobody knows You. And even Krishna says that,
actually, "prādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha". When I tell My vibhutis, also, I will tell
principle. Because "nānto ’sti vis...":

        nānto ’sti mama divyānāṁ
        vibhūtīnāṁ paran-tapa

That, actually, My vibhutis are unlimited. So, even for our spiritual knowledge,
we should not be proud. What to speak of our material iden..., material
knowledge? "amānitvam adambhitvam". And then, "ahiṁsā kṣāntir ārjavam". "ahiṁsā
kṣāntir ārjavam" means, so, "ahiṁsā", as we know, is nonviolence. Now, actually,
these attributes, these twenty elements of knowledge, we have discussed them
once. Because Srila Prabhupada talks about them in the Isopanishad. When he is
talking, when he is talking about the vidya. Vidya section. Verses 9 to 11. So,
at that time, the Tenth Verse, Tenth Mantra of the Isopanishad.

        anyad evāhur vidyayā-
        nyad āhur avidyayā
        iti śuśruma dhīrāṇāṁ
        ye nas tad vicacakṣire

So, when Krishna is talking about that, He talks about two things over there.
You know. You know. He talks about how, there is one result which comes from
vidya. Another result which comes from avidya. So, there, He talks about those
two results. And one of those results is that one gets the positive. You know.
That, so, there, when he is talking about vidya, Prabhupada conno..., connects
that vidya with the twenty items of knowledge. And he says that, vidya
essentially leads to development of all these virtues. So, at the end of this
set of verses, Krishna will say:

        etaj jñānam iti proktam
        ajñānaṁ yad ato ’nyathā

That all this constitutes knowledge. And apart from that, everything else is
ignorance. So, Krishna describes knowledge in terms of, you know, you know,
virtues. Not in terms of items of information. You know. The technical knowledge
is important. But the technical knowledge alone is not important. The technical
knowledge alone is not important. Because, you know, you know, you know, the
technical knowledge has got nothing to do with the character of a person. You
know. A person may be a very good engineer in terms of making, you know, making
good houses. Or making good, you know, bridges. Or whatever. That person is
civil engineer. Or good cars. And planes. If that person is, you know,
mechanical engineer. Or pneumatics engineer. Or whatever. But that ha..., that
has no reflection on the character of the person. Because when the person
studies engineeing, that does not lead to, that does not lead, you know, that
education does not contain anything about, you know, character development. So,
even within scien..., even education, there is humanities. And there is
sciences. These are two broad divisions. Of course, commerce is one more
division. But humanities is a broad division. And humanities, there is
literature. There is, you know, art. There is poetry. And all these things come
up. So, you know, you know, you know, to some extent, humanities talks about the
finer aspects of the human being. And sciences talk about the, you know, you
know, aspects of nature which we can control. And which we can change hopefully
for our better ma..., our benefit. But either way, most of the knowledge that is
there in today's, you know, educational scenario. That does not focus much on
character development. It focuses primarily on earning. So, you know, you know,
you know, the purpose of education is not just to earn a living. The purpose of
education is to actually develop character. So:

        amānitvam adambhitvam
        ahiṁsā kṣāntir ārjavam

So, we will see. All these, that are talked about, are qualities. "ahiṁsā" is
nonviolence. So, let us look at what Srila Prabhupada says about each of these
qualities. The first thing is that Srila Prabhupada says over here is that, you
know:

"This process of knowledge is sometimes misunderstood by less intelligent men as
being the interaction of the field of activity."

That means some people think of this also as the "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". Which
Krishna has talked about in the previous verse. Sixth and Seventh. But he says,
this is not "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". This is the way from, this is the, you know,
path of "kṣetraṁ". "vimukti". You know. You know. You know. You know. One has to
get liberated from "kṣetraṁ". For that, this process is requir..., used. But
actually, this is the real process of knowledge. So, this is, Pra..., as
Prabhupada further mentions:

"This is actually the means to get out of the entanglement of those elements." 

We are not studying the elements. We get out of these elements. So, Prabhupada
explains that all these elements are important. We will come back to the upper
part. Let us recite the ve..., all the verses first. You know. You know. You
know. So:

        indriyārtheṣu vairāgyam
        anahaṅkāra eva ca
        janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-
        duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam

        asaktir anabhiṣvaṅgaḥ
        putra-dāra-gṛhādiṣu
        nityaṁ ca sama-cittatvam
        iṣṭāniṣṭopapattiṣu

        mayi cānanya-yogena
        bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī
        vivikta-deśa-sevitvam
        aratir jana-saṁsadi

        adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvaṁ
        tattva-jñānārtha-darśanam
        etaj jñānam iti proktam
        ajñānaṁ yad ato ’nyathā

So, here, Krishna is describing. "etaj jñānam iti proktam". All this is
"jñānam". And apart from that, whatever is there is "ajñānaṁ". "ajñānaṁ yad ato
’nyathā". So, what all is He describing over here? As Prabhupada mentions in the
purport that among all these, the most important element is:

        mayi cānanya-yogena
        bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī

"mayi cānanya-yogena". So, you know, you know, you know, you know, actually, you
know, the Hi..., you know, unalloyed devotional service to Krishna. So, now,
this, Krishna is talking about "jñānam" over here. So, within "jñānam", one
element is described as bhakti. So, actually, this is just one element from the
perspective of the "jñāni"s. As we know, the "jñāni"s also practice bhakti. We
will discuss about the yoga ladder in its technical details a la..., in a
little later class. But the important point right now is, you know, you know, to
understand that even the "jñāni"s have to practice bhakti at some level. Only
when they practice bhakti, by which, that, that they get realisations. And then,
they get elevation. Liberation, also. Bhakti has to be there in all processes.
So, here Krishna is talking about "jñānam" sadhana. And even the "jñāni"s have
to develop certain qualities. And of course, you know, these qualities can also
be, you know, they can, they are also helpful on the path of devotion. And that
is why we, Prabhupada explains to us in terms of how a devotee can understand
and develop these qualities. You know. You know. You know. So, generally
speaking, in, when we get a disease. First of all, there is a visible symptom.
Ok. It, ok, I am feeling some pain in my stomach. And then, when I feel pain in
the stomach. That, that is just the visible. You know. That is not, not just
visible, I would say. Perceivable symptom to us. That, that is what is tangible.
Or perceivable to us. But then, there are X-rays. And there may be CT scans.
And there are other things. We say, ok, that pain in the stomach is because of a,
say, appendix problem. And then, then, there is a treatment. So, then, there may
be a set of complications. Ok. The, my appendix has grown too big. Or it is
being moved. Its position has become this. Or it has become infected. Or
whatever. So, now, these are not some things which can be perceived immediately.
They are some thing which, you know, we need a Jnana Chakshu to perceive. The
Jnana Chakshu here refers to not philosophical Jnana Chakshu. But the medical
Jnana Chakshu. You know. The doctor has to use, you know, the technical
instruments as well as the technical, you know, knowledge to understand that.
And then, after that, you know, there is a progression. There is a solution.
What is the solution? Maybe, you have to do a surgery. And cut the appendix. So,
that means, there is first a, just like there is an iceberg. You know. When
there is a huge iceberg that is floating. So, often, just one to..., small part
of the iceberg is above the ground. Above. Sorry. Above the water. And below
the water, there might be a giant iceberg. That is what happened when the
Titanic collided. So, what happened was the, there was a, guard was not alert.
And they saw this. And when they saw this iceberg, it was too late. The ship was
moving too fast. And they just could not wear off. And it was so big that they
just could not turn off. So, then, you know, iceberg, a small part of it is
above. But below that is the giant, you know, body of snow. It is almost like a
moving island. Or a moving mountain of snow. Boom. When the ship collided, there
was a tuck. The ship just rattled. And cracks. And then, crumbles. And drowns.
So, like that. What essentially happens over here is that when we see, when I
have a disease. Then, there is one tangible symptom which I see. You know. For
example, I may find that I have some difficult things following.

And then, I have some vomitting. Or some joint paints. Or whatever. And then, I
find that actually I have got leukemia. I have got blood cancer. So, there is
one perceivable symptom. But below that there is much more serious, you know,
problems which are there. And then, there may be, there may be a solution. I may
try, you know, you know, you know, you know, I may try chemotherapy. I may try
radiotherapy. I may try some form of extreme naturotherapy. Whatever. So, there
can be different things which I may try. So, those are used for treatment. And
then, after that, you know, that, that, that, that, there is the cure. So, like
that. When there is the glacier. First, I see the top part. Then, I see, the,
oh, the, such a giant. I, even if I do not see, with my knowledge, I understand,
there must be giant glacier below. And then, after that, tuck. I have to turn it
around so that I can get out of the way. Somehow or the other. Whichever way is
possible. You know. So, in the same way, what is required over here is to
understand that, you know, there is a visible symptom. What is the visible
symptom? Of, our problem is, will be described over here.

        janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-
        duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam

So, this is a symptom. There is old age. There will be disease. There is death.
These are all so tragic. So painful. So, these are, you know, now, birth, we
have discussed earlier how birth, ma..., many people may not think it to be
painful. But it is painful. You know. You know. Because the conscious being is
trapped in the mother's womb. So, birth. Old age. Disease. And death. These are
the miseries of material existence. So, one when, once when pursues this. Why
are these miseries there? Then, that, so, so, perceving these miseries is like
perceiving the, you know, you know, tip of the ice..., the visible part of the
iceberg. Below that, we have to understand is the misdirection of our
consciousness. The mat..., there i..., the, so, the deeper problem is our
consciousness, instead of being attracted to spirit, is attracted to matter. And
that misdirection of consciousness from matter to sp..., from spirit to matter
causes a variety of bad qualities. And the redirection of matter to spirit will
bring about the, you know, development of those virtuous quali..., virtuous
qualities. So, you know, you know, there is a prob..., there is a visible
problem. Then, there is a surface problem. There is a deeper problem. And then,
there is a solution. So, the surface problem is the "janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-".
The deeper problem is that there is no "amānitvam". There is no "adambhitvam".
There is no "ahiṁsā". There is no "kṣāntir". No "ah...", no, "ah...", there is
no this. This. This. This. This. All these qualities are not there. And what is
the solution? The sol..., now, for example, if I go to a doctor. I say I am
feeling very weak. H..., h..., doctor says, you have got anemia. You have got
th..., you got, your, your, your ane..., your blood pressure is, your, you know,
RBCs are very low. You know. And then, your blood pressure is not proper. And
then, your pulse is irregular. And this. And this. The doctor gives me a series
of technical parameters of all that is wrong. He says, that is ok. But please
tell me, what is the treatment. What should I do? You know. I, I, I cannot do
much just by knowing my cholesterol is too high. Or my blood pressure is too
low. Or my RBC count is too less. What should I do practically? That practically
is, doctor say, ok. Take this, this, this, these medicines. So, knowing that,
there is no "amānitvam". There is no "adambhitvam". There is no, you know,
"ahiṁsā". All these are like knowing the deficiencies. And knowing that this is
what we have to work on. But, you know, you know, in the bhakti path:

        mayi cānanya-yogena
        bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī

That to the extent we start practicing bhakti, to the extent that we start
cultivating, embracing the path of devotion, to that extent we will start making
spiritual advancement. And to that extent, we will be able to, you know, you
know, rapidly, you know, advance and go back to Godhead. So, and then, we will
go beyond "janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-", also. Just as a person who takes the
proper treatment becomes free from the deeper problem. As well as from the
substance, surface problem. So, that is why Prabhupada also quotes:

        yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā

That a devotee is free from, you know, the devotee has all the good qualities of
devatas. We discussed this verse earlier. So, I will go, not go into that right
now. And then, Prabhupada explains that "ācārya-upāsanam". The word accepting a
spiritual master. And worshipping spiritual master. That is the most important
among these. Because that is the basis for which other things progress. You
know. So, now, Prabhupada's explanation of these are quite classic. Prabhupada
says:

"Humility means that one should not be anxious to have the satisfaction of being
honored by others."

To not have the satisfaction of being honored by others. It is a classic
definition. That means not that a devotee should not be honored by others. You
know. What happens when we practice devotional service is that we do get
honor. Isn't it? How do we get honor? We get honor by the fact that we are, you
know, you know, by the fact that we are honored in the sense that, you know,
people may even come and offer obeisances to us. Now, where do we see that in
worldly life? So, a devotee accepts respect. But a devotee does not expect
respect. What is the difference between accept and accept..., expect? Accept
means we understand that it is a part of Vaishnava etiquette. It is a way of
reciprocating affection. And pro..., con..., proper conduct among devotees. So,
you know, it is not that we tell others do not offer obeisances. Yeah. We accept
respect. But we do not expect respect. Expect respect means that we do not
demand respect from others. So, that is how it is. So, a devotee is not anxious.
A dev..., is a devotee concerned that wherever I go, am I properly respected or
not? No. A devotee is not concerned about that. A devotee is concerned how best
can I serve Krishna? When, what, whatever be the situation, how can I best serve
Krishna? And that is what the devotee primarily focuses on. How can I best serve
Krishna? And then, based on that, the devotee serves Krishna in different ways.
So, and then, Prabhupada says that:

"As for actual advancement in spiritual science, one should have a test to see
how far he is progressing. He can judge by these items."

There is, Prabhupada is saying that, on, so, Prabhupada is giving us a very
balanced perspective. One side, he said that, if you practice bhakti, then, we
will develop these good qualities. But then, he also makes the point that if we
are practicing bhakti, then we should be having these qualities. That means,
what is he saying? That, you know, you know, you know, the test of spiritual
advancement is the development of these qualities. So, you know, in one sense,
we do not have to do anything extra to develop these qualities. We have to just
practice devotional service. These qualities will come. But while practicing
devotional service, we also try to do these thi..., you know, we should also
make sure that these qualities are coming. Just like if a patient is taking the
medicines, then at that time, you know, the proper medicines will lead to the,
say, if the, you know, RBC count is low. If the person has got anemia. Then,
now, if the pat..., proper is taking, the patient is taking, say, proper iron.
Or whatever is required. Then, the RBC count will rise. So, one does not have to
do something extra of, for that. Apart from whatever is the prescription that is
given. But then, while the prescripton is being given. And the prescription is
being taken. One also has to observe. Ok. Is the prescription leading to the,
now, improvement in the expected parameters? If that is not happening, then,
maybe there is some other factors. Maybe, there is some complication. Maybe, you
know, that person maybe has some other disease. Or some other, you know, some
other problem because of which that have, medicine is not having the desired
effect. So, he can, so, like that, we, we might be committing offenses. Because
which, the process of devotional service is not leading to the desired results.
So, we have to observe both ways. You know. So, Prabhupada gives a, you know,
you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, very elevated explanation of
nonviolence over here. You know. You know. You know. You know. Prabhupada says
that actually, you know:

"One should try his best to distribute real knowledge to the people, so that
they may become enlightened and leave this material entanglement. That is
nonviolence."

So, Prabhupada is saying that nonviolence just does not mean not attacking
others. Actually, the soul is evolving through various species. And now, the
soul has come to human form. And for the human form, the soul can become
liberated. So, when the soul can bec..., the soul has the opportunity to become
liberated. To not let the soul, you know, take that opportunity. That is
violence. It is like, you know, you know, a patient is in a hospital. Where the
patient can be cured. And the patient is cured. The patient can get discharged.
So, if the doctor does not give the proper medicine, then the doctor is not
necessarily doing anything wrong. The doctor is not giving some, you know,
doctor is not, you know, stealing some organ. But just negligence is also, you
know, a culpable. From a doctor's part. You know. When the doctor knows that
this is the medicine which should be given. And doctor does not give that
medicine. That is also crime in one sense. So, that is, so, Prabhupada, so,
Prabhupada says, similarly, when we know that people can be benefitted by
spiritual knowledge. And still, we do not share spiritual knowledge, then
that is, you know, you know, that is violence. And we are ob..., we are
obstructing, or we are not facilitating the people's spiritual recovery. So,
real nonviolence means to not interfere with people's spiritual recovery. And
then, Prabhupada explains, you know, about tolerance, also. "ahiṁsā kṣāntir
ārjavam". So, you know, you know, we had discussed about tolerance earlier.
Tolerance is not impotence. Tolerance is persistence. It is not that we just
accept everything that is inflicted upon us. But tolerance means that we do not
let the, you know, small things in life distract us from the big things. And we
keep our, so, somebody might insult me. Something might go wrong in my life, in
the daily ra..., routines. But I do not let that distract me from my ultimate
spiritual purpose. And, you know, Prahupada explains that, you know, you know,
you know, "ahiṁsā kṣāntir ārjavam". So, "ārjavam" is simplicity. Or
truthfulness. So, a devotee is not unnecessarily diplomatic, is not
unnecessarily political. You know. Now, Prabhupada explains something very
significant over here. You know. You know.

"Because a bona fide spiritual master is a representative of Kṛṣṇa, if he
bestows any blessings upon his disciple, that will make the disciple immediately
advanced without the disciple’s following the regulative principles. Or, the
regulative principles will be easier for one who has served the spiritual master
without reservation."

This interesting. So, Prabhupada is acknowledging the possibility here that
somebody can become spiritually advanced even without following the regulative
principles. So, you know, the, you know, there is also, regulative principles
are important. But they are not all-important. Ultimately, it is one's
attraction to Krishna. And "bhaktya sanjayate bhakti". Actually, it is one's
attraction to Krishna that is developed by one's connection with devotees. You
know. One's, by the pro..., when we get, you know, one associates with those who
have bhakti. Then, by their association, we also get bhakti. And by that, we
make spiritual advancement. So, "bhaktya sanjayate bhakti". So, the regulative
principles will be easier to follow for one who has served the spiritual master
without reservation. So, there are two ways. One will automtically become
spiritual advanced. By serv..., getting the mercy of the spiritual master. Even
without following the regulative principles. And oth..., conversely, that one
will be able to, one will get strength to follow these regulative principles. By
practicing devotional ser..., by serving the spiritual master. So, either way,
the important is that one should be strongly connected with devotees. And that
attraction to devotees is the proper on the spiritual path. It is not just the
following of the regulative principles. Then, Prabhupada explains the standard
what is cleanliness. So, we are not going to all of that. We discussed about
"vāco veg...", of "jihvā-vegam", also. So, it, Prabhupada explains same point
over here. So, now, here, Prabhupada now talks about the suffering of the
unborn. These are the, these are the, you know, miseries.

        janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-
        duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam

So:

"Unless we have a pessimistic view of this material life, considering the
distresses of birth, death, old age and disease, there is no impetus for our
making advancement in spiritual life."

Now, are devotees pessimistic? This pessimism is more of, you know, realism. You
know. If somebody gives a glass of water. And you should say that, oh, this
glass is half empty. Then, you say, no, see, positively, see, this, glass is
half full. So, seeing the call, seeing the glass is half empty. That is, we
could say, pessimism. And seeing there is a, glass is half full. That is
optimism. But if the glass is fully empty. And somebody says, you know, why are
you giving me empty glass? He says, no. Why are you so pessimistic? And
actually, do not think negatively. You know. This is not thinking negatively.
This is just objective negative. Somebody is thirsty. And can you please give me
some water? Yes. And the person just gives an empty glass. This glass is empty.
Oh. Why are you such a negative thinker? Why are you so pessimistic? The, oh,
actually, it is not a matter of pessimism. It is reality. So, actually, denying
reality is not optimism. It is stupidism. It is what? Stupidism. Actually, it is
not that we, you know, see, when it would be pessimism is if there were no
solution. If a patient is terribly sick. And if the patient does not know any
treatment. You know. Then, maybe, you could say that not telling the patient
about the sickness. You know. You know. If there is no treatment. No n..., for,
for that particular sickness. Then, we may say that, ok, this is just a
disaster. Why talk about it? Let the patient live peacefully as long as the
patient is going to live. Of course, that is not a sound strategy. The patient
also has to prepare for death. You know. The psychological closure that is
required. With relatives and other emotional issues with the different people.
You know. So, it is best the patient be told and prepared to face the final, you
know, final moments of death. But the important is that to recognise overall the
importance of, you know, you know, you know, being re..., of realism. So, we
have to recognise, you know, that we are, you know, that there are certain
things which are negative in real life. So, if I have a disease, I have a
disease. Accepting that is what enables us to move forward in life. I accept
that. I have this disease. Then, let me see what is the next thing I can do.
The next thing that I can do is to start practicing spiritual life. And, you
know, star..., or tar..., start taking a medicine. And try to see how much I can
be cured. Or if I cannot be cured, then accept that. And make do with life with
however it is. So, either way, the important point again and again to recognise
is that we have to, you know, you know, stay on. And on. You know. We cannot
just deny the reality. We accept the reality that there is a suffering. And
then, we work to, you know, find out a cure for the suffering. But denying this
reality of the suffering, we do not make the suffering go away. In fact, we make
it worse. If I have a disease and I do not, I deny that I have the disease.
Internally, the disease is going to make things worse for me. So, like that, old
age. Disease. And death are inevitable. But they are inevitable only at the
material level of reality. Beyond the material level, there is the spiritual
level of reality. And at the spiritual level of reality, they are not
inevitable. They are entirely avoidable. And when we recognise this. You know.
And avoid these, then we make steady spiritual advancement by that. We get
impetus to make spiritual advancement. So, if at all, there is any pessimism in
the Vedic philosophy. It is only initial. It is not final. Initial means, yes,
there is a serious disease. There is a seriou..., this disease is serious. It
needs to be, it needs to be unsentimentally rigorously treated. So, that initial
seriousness on the part of a doctor is important so that the patient knows what
all is to be done to take the treatment. How important and how unavoidable is,
the treatment is. But after that, the treatment is going to cure. Then, that is,
that is optimism. So, this is, you know, accepting the miseries of birth, old
age, disease, and death is not, you know, pessimism. It is realism. And
Prabhupada talks about these as the universal evils. Now, Prabhupada translates
this as, let us see, you know:

"the perception of the evil of birth, death, old age and disease"

Birth. Death. Old age. And Disease. The evil. Now, normally, the problem of evil
is considered to be major problem in western philosophy. And what is the problem
of evil? That if God is good, then why is the wo..., why do bad things happen in
this world? Why do some small ba..., sometimes, some small babies get some
terrible diseases. And die? Why do innocent people die in earthquakes? And
tsunamis? So, that, that idea is, you know, this is problem of evil. But the
im..., the Vedic philosophy expands the problem of evil to much broader scope.
It does not say that, ok, why do small children die? Why do innocent people die
in terrorist attacks. Or tsunamis. Or whatever. The problem is, why does anybody
die? Why does anybody die at all? You know. We may say that, you know, untimely
death is bad. But ultimately, actually, all death is bad. Isn't it? Nobody wants
to die. And all death is suffering. So, rather than, ye..., yes, certainly,
these are, you know, we may say that there is a particular order in nature. And,
you know, when people grow old and die. That is natural. And peo..., if chil...,
some small children die. Or young people die. That is unnatural. That joilts us.
That is true. But, you know, rather than que..., you know, questioning the
specific problems within the natural system. Why not questio..., why not go
deeper and question the natural system itself? Why is there death at all? And
that is a fundamental question. In Vedanta, this is one of the most fu...,
fundamental issues. You know. If Ved..., Brahma is eternal, then how, how can,
if this world is temporary, then how does the temporary come from the eternal?
How can something, which is asat, acit, nirananda come from that which is
sat-cit, sat-cit-ananda? And that, of course, the Veda, acit, the Veda will
explains by the transformation of the energies. As is talked about "kṣetr...",
you know, here, "kṣetraṁ", "vikāram". So, there is the, you know, energy of this
Absolute Truth. But the point here is that when a devotee gets his broader
vision. Jnana Chakshu. When understand that not the specific. The generic.
Material existence itself is a misery. And within that, we may have as lesser or
greater miseries. But instead of getting carried away by those, focus on the
fundamental misery itself. That is the evil. Then, Srila Prabhupada further
explains that, you know, you know, the, Prabhupada makes an important point over
here.

"As for detachment from children, wife and home, it is not meant that one should
have no feeling for these. They are natural objects of affection."

"natural objects of affection" means, you know, you know, that one should, it is
natural that we will have some attraction for them. So, we cannot be expected to
be heartless in the name of, especially if somebody is in grihasta life. Then,
one has to, you know, have a proper relationship with one's family members. And
one has to take care of the family members. And taking care does not mean just
ranging for the financial and, needs and the, physical needs. That is of course,
you know, financial needs are important in..., the financial is important. But
along with that, one has to take care emotionally, also. You know. We see that
when, you know, when the Pandavas were in the forest. At that time, you know,
you know, they were near Badrikashram. So, then, in the river, Draupadi saw
thousand petal flo..., lotus flower flo..., just flowing through the river. And
then, when she saw, she was attracted. "Bhīma" was around there, only. So,
"Bhīma" saw it. And "Bhīma" went and got that flower. You know. For her. And she
was very happy. And she has thought that, you know, this flower is so beautiful.
She asked "Bhīma". Can you get some more flowers for me? And actually, "Bhīma"
immediately went. And he went up to the Himalaya. Up the, he, climbing up the
Himalayas. And then, he had a big fight with the yakshas over there. In their,
from their garden. That flower had come. Now, we may say, isn't this just a
henpecked husband? You know. The wife is asking for a flower. And the husband is
just running. And having a fight with somebody else to get a flower. No. "Bhīma"
understood that Draupadi was in a state of a, you know, great misery at that
time. First of all, she had been dishonored in the Kaurava assembly. And after
that, they were living in exile. And on top of that, who was, you know, who was
the person who had, who, who had won Draupadi in the Swayamvara. So, although
Draupadi loved all the queen..., all her husbands. But still, Arjuna had a
special place in her heart. And Arjuna had gone to the heavens. So, she was not
there, she, Arjuna was not there for her. So, naturally, she was feeling a
little, you know, you know, she was feeling bad. And he, Arjuna, Krishna,
"Bhīma" wanted to please her. So, "Bhīma" went up. And got that flower for her.
So, actually, taking care also means taking care emotionally. So, there is the,
one has to be affectionate towards one's loved ones. So, affectionate means, it
is not in the name of being, you know, detached, one has to be heartless. So,
there is our ver..., vertical relationship with Krishna. And there is our
horizontal relationship with our loved ones. So, the ideal situation is when the
horizontal and the vertical, both work together. So, our horizontal relationship
strengthens our vertical relationship. And our vertical relationship strengthens
our horizontal relationship. You know. We love our family members. And our
family member, that love for our family members, if they are devotees, helps us
to increase our love for Krishna, also. Because together, we do devotional
activities. And our love for Krishna helps us to develop greater sel...,
self-mastery. Greater sensitivity. Greater maturity. And that helps us to become
better family members, also. You know. So, this works, should work both ways.
So, now, is, what if our family members are not devotees? At that time, also, we
should see this as opportunity for us to internalise the devotional principles
of humility. Tolerance. Sensitivity. And thereby, inspire them to practice
devotional service more and more. You know. Not by, necessarily by being preachy.
Or bossy. But by being, you know, sen..., k..., sensitive. And cons..., you
know, sensitive and kind. And then, you know, only even, there is a, then,
there, you know, atmosphere is entirely pratikula. At that time, one may have
to, you know, do something extreme. So, you know, you know, just like Prahlada.
He, you know, he could not say:

        Matri devo bhava Pitru Devo Bhava Hiranyakashipu

You know. He had to, he respected Hiranyakashipu. But still, he said no. I will,
I will continue my devotion to Vishnu. Those are extreme situations. So,
normally, a devotee should be affectionate. But not attached. So, at, you know,
we will discuss about this conception of difference between affectionate and
attachment more in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
