Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FdIl3IpWP64
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=FdIl3IpWP64&event=video_description&redir_token=RAVzuyvUhK0IhgzGOAglCTFUDT98MTU0MDY1ODY1NEAxNTQwNTcyMjU0&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_025_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_1_Part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to the Nectar of Instruction. We are discussing the first, second verse
now. The first verse we will complete and then we will go to the second verse
if possible today.

The first verse, what we are discussing is the six vegas.

        vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ
        jihvā-vegam udaropastha-vegam
        etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ
        sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt

So, we were discussing first about atonement. There is a direct method, there is
a, the traditional method of cultivation of qualities for purification. And then
there is the pancaratra method, the devotional method, centered on practicing
bhakti yoga. And in that, we discussed about "vaco", "manasah", and
"krodha-vegan", based on Srila Prabhupada's commentary. We will complete that,
the remaining three vegas, and then we will look at what Srila Prabhupada says
based on Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur's commentary. Let us look at the PPT
here.

So we have "jihva" and "Udaro Pastha" vega. So in "jihva" vega, the urge of the
tongue. Now this is to eat. "vaco vegam" refers to the urge of the tongue to
speak. Now "jihva vegam", Srila Prabhupada says that actually people are
controlled by their tongue and they are running here and there becauase of that.
So people are forced to eat in non-devotee shops. Even devotees, and the
solution is prasad. And then, the solution has two parts, be grateful when
Krishna supplies, accept as mercy, and take at scheduled times. Let us look at
this a little bit more in detail.

Now, today, many people are committing suicide with their tongue. The way they
are eating, they are inviting that, not just in terms of the kinds of food that
they eat. That is definitely there, but also the quantites of food that they
eat.

As an old egyptian probably (?, 02:23) says that, now you live on one third what
you eat, the remaining two third lives your physician. So this is all the more
true in today's society, where obesity is fast becoming one of the most
widespread causes of avoidable disease, disease, not just, disease, but even
death. So this, of course, is a combination jihva and udar vega. Srila
Prabhupada does not talk too much about udar vega. The two are connected. So
what is the essential difference?

Jihva vega refers to the taste. You know, we want to eat a lot of variety of
objects that are delicious. And udar vega refers to the quantity. Now, we want
to eat it more than what we, our body needs. So, of course, where the is desire
to eat variety of food stuffs, then that jihva vega lead, will lead to udar vega
also. So the point is not to have a hairsplitting analyses between the two. The
point is to understand the underlying common principle of controlling the urge
of the tongue.

Now, jihva vega today is especially difficult to control in today's culture
because in the past, food was primarily given as charity, and even when food was
sold as a commodity, it was never marketed as agressively as it was today.
Although people throughout history have eaten delicious foods, according to their
culture, according to social situations, but the sheer amount of marketing that
happens today is historically unprecedented. And because of that, people are
caught in a cultural bind actually. The cultural bind is, because our society
often looks down at people who are obese. Now, people who are fat, the whole
society is moved, idea is to look good, to look smart, and generally, smart
looks are equated with thin looks.

So a person who is obese is almost treated like a "pare barya", is a, is like a,
like an untouchable, or a visually untouchable, unseeable person. Such a person
actually, people, just to try to avoid looking fat, do all sorts of things. They
do bariatric surgeries, they often undergo anorexia, they do not eat food
properly. So on one side, people have uncontrolled tongues which are further
fueled by the external propaganda, which makes them want to eat more and more
and more, and on the other side there is the cultural glamorisation of the thin
figure, which prevents people from eating, and both ways, people want both, want
to have a thin good looking figure, and they also want to have, enjoy the
tongue's delights, which the tongue is also pulling them and externally also the
culture is glamorising various foods.

So it is a, it is a torturous situation and generally, it is damn if you do it,
damn if you do not do it. So damn if you do not eat, because the mind will keep
torturing the senses, tongue will keep torturing, if you do it, then we become
mre weight and we face problems because of that. So either way, the point is
that we have to raise to a higher level of consciousness. Just trying to control
the senses at the same material level of consciousness, it is nearly impossible.
It is like playing a game that we cannot win, and we cannot quit.

Imagine there is a huge boxer, fighting with a thin skinny person, who neither
has strength, nor has skill to fight. And the person, the people are in the
same ring. So, this poor fellow gets beaten again, again, and again. And if
there is a rule that there is no matter how badly this fellow gets beaten, not
allowed to quit the ring. So, what happens? Cannot win, there is just no chance
of winning. But cannot quit, so just get beaten, beaten, beaten, beaten, so that
is the predicament at the material level of consciousness. 

Now, on one level, we are faced with so many desires, and most material desires,
they have these characteristics. They are insatiable and they are irresistible.
Irresistible means we just cannot say no to them. At least at the material level
of consciousness also, it is almost impossible to say no to that. Because we are
living for material enjoyment only, so they are irresistible. And then they are
insatible. That means if I try to satisfy them, they do not get satisfied. They
blaze further and become bigger, and then I become trapped further.

So, this is the two-way bind, insatiability and irresistibility. Insatiability
means we cannot win the game. Irresistibility means we cannot quit the game.
So, we cannot win the game means, even if we satisfy those desires, even if we
get those enjoyments, we do not win, because those desires blaze further and
they want us to get more and more and more, so it is insatiable. And
irresistible means if you say, I will not just bother about the all, just not
bother about this desire, does not work. Because the desires keep haunting,
goading us, biting us from inside, do this, do this, get this, enjoy this.

So that is the sorry predicament that we find ourselves in. And this is not just
a predicament for devotees. Earlier, I talked about, you know, wanting to eat
and enjoy, and wanting to have a good figure and enjoy. That is a predicament
which even non-devotees, even general people face this. And also, beyond that,
there is also the whole point that even materialistic people cannot fulfill all
the desires that are there in their mind. How can they? Because the body is
limited, the resources are limited, the life span is limited, they cannot
fulfill all the desires. So they also have to hard live with unfulfilled
desires and that also causes anguish to them. So the torture is there for
everyone at the material level of consciousness, no matter what happens,
everybody has to struggle and suffer.

Now, when we talk about controlling the tongue, what does it mean? There is one
level of control, that is for looking good. You know, some people fast. There
are many, there are diets for reducing one's weight, are very popular. And there
all kinds of, sometimes crazy diets. Sometimes, there is one, one particular diet
which has become popular because of the advocacy of one doctor, one particular
set of doctors, although other doctors are militantly opposed, they say that
just gorge on one day, and fast on the next day. That means one day eat whatever
you like, whatever you like, just fulfill all your heart's desire. And on the
next day, just take some soup, take some soybean, salad, eat nothing,
practically speaking.

And they say that overall the body is, if you gorge on one day, and fast on the
next day, then overall the body's balance will be such that actually you will
lose weight. Now, first of all, it is very unlikely that the body will lose
weight, but even if that happens, that does not suit the body's biochemical
mechanism. The body just does not know what is going to happen. How am I
supposed to adapt? The body has its own clock and its own system. And it is very
physically and psychologically hazardous.

So people are desperate, which is to, at one side, satisfy the tongue and at
the same time not pay the cost for satisfying the tongue. And because of that,
they are in a trap. So fasting is often adopted by people as a means to decrease
their weight. And some people may be, seem to be very controlling their tongue,
very selecting in their eating. Now, to the extent the person has self-control,
that is appreciable, but just self-control in and of itself is not necessarily a
sign of spiritual advancement. You know, Hiranyakasipu had self-control, but he
was spiritually most regressed, not at all advanced. His whole motive was not at all
devotional. It was entirely anti-devotional, to defy Lord Vishnu, disrupt the
order of Lord Vishnu, and eventually provoke and destroy Lord Vishnu.

So, just the ability to control the tongue, in and of itself is not necessarily
spiritual. Although it is valuable, we could say when essential for making steady
spiritual advancement. But it is not, we should not glorify it as a separate
virtue. But the whole process of devotional service is such that as we go along
the express way of devotional service, the senses automatically get regulated.

So when we take prasad, at that time, we learn to control the tongue. Because
prasad itself circumscribes, it limits the kinds of food that we will get. So
that itself is a major level of sense-control. Because, people, there are so
many allurements for the tongue, and if we decide, I am going to take prasad,
then that limits the varities available for our tongue to titillate itself.

Of course, once we get adapted to those limitations, within those limitations,
prasad also offers us nearly, nearly endless allurements, and as sadhakas, you
know, we also need enjoyment. We need enjoyment even at the material level, and
that is not banned. Bhakti provides us material enjoyment that is within the
principles of dharma. So taking prasadam, feasting on prasadam is not
necessarily against the principles of devotion. But making a habit of that, and
become attached to that, and becoming emotionally dependent on opulent prasadam, 
sumptuous prasadam on a regular basis, can be a serious problem.

Why serious problem? Because, you know, although Krishna prasad is also Krishna,
the question is not whether it is Krishna or not, the question is whether it
reminds us of Krishna or not. So if we are not remembering Krishna when we are
eating Krishna prasad, we are just remembering it as food, as delicious food,
then of course, at a subconscious level, because it has been offered to Krishna,
it will purify us. But at the conscious level, we will not be remembering
Krishna, and at the physical level, because of overeating, inappropriate eating,
there will be physical consequences.

So the manifestations of Krishna, when they come in this world, they generally,
they act at the transcendental level to purify us, but at a material level, they
act like other material substances. So, the deity needs to be cleaned, the
deity, if it has fly, then the deity, the fly has to be moved away. The deity is
transcendental, but at the same time the transcendence is not in some miraculous
potency to do something which is not done, by, normally. But miraculous potency
is in the purification of the hearts, so prasadam will purify our heart.

At the same time, while it will purify us, a lot of the purification will depend
on our consciousness. Our consciousness, if it is just seeing prasad materially,
then there will be inevitably limited consequences of the way we eat prasad, and
the way it jells or does not jell with our body, but along with that depending
on the rememberance of Krishna, the purification will be maximum or minimum.

So Srila Prabhupada talks in the purport about how we have to be careful about
what we eat, how we eat. If you are not careful, then we can get entangled. So,
now, generally prasad is, a temptation that is entirely within the precincts of
devotional service. And we see Caitanya Mahaprabhu feasted with his devotees.
And then he would often invite the devotees to eat more and more. So, arse the
culture of prasadam. So that is wonderful. And we can take prasadam.

At the same time, overall, Caitanya Mahaprabhu has also said, Srila Prabhupada
quotes in the purport, "balana kayber balana perime". That do not eat opulently,
do not dress opulently. So, on a habitual basis, having opulent prasadam is
undesirable. And feast on special occasions, having opulent prasadam is ok.

There, there also, the more we see prasad as Krishna's mercy, to that, to that
extent, we will become purified. Now, Srila Prabhupada in tapsa would also talk
about fasting. You know, you talk about fasting on ekadashi, and fasting on
Janmashtami and other festivals. So why is this fasting important? Fasting is
not just something which is meant to torture the body. Kulusekar Maharaj says in
his Mukunda-mala-strota that "medas-cheda-phalan afgaha nanani", he says if a
person fasts, then the purpose of fasting, if one is not remembering Krishna
while fasting, then "medas-cheda-phalan". So what he says is that fasting is
simply a fat reducing exercise. It does not lead to much spiritual benefit if we
are not remembering Krishna.

If we are remembering Krishna, then fasting provides us an opportunity to
sacrifice the good for the best. What does it mean, sacrifice the good for the
best? See, there is the bad, there is the good and there is the best. The bad is
paap, the good is prunya, but the best is bhakti. Best is Krishna. So prasad is
of course not prunya. Prasad is a part of bhakti only, but still as I said,
prasad has a material aspect to it also which can distract us from Krishna
Consciousness.

So normally, when we practice spiritual life, we have, we give up sinful
activities. We sacrifice the bad for the sake of Krishna. But along with that,
sometimes the good can also attract us and distract us from rememberance of
Krishna. So that is why sacrificing the good for the sake of the best is also
a way to show singlepointed focus on Krishna. So often, our desires gets plead
over a variety of things.

        bahu-sakha hy anantas ca
        buddhayo 'vyavasayinam

In 2.41 in the Bhagavad Gita, Lord Krishna says that "bahu-sakha", many branches
are there for our desires, and then to emphasize he "anantas ca", he says there
are not just "bahu" many, but there are "ananta" innumerable.

So our power to desire gets plead over many objects in this world. And that is
why the strength of our desire for Krishna is not very high. So when we fast,
what is the purpose of that fasting? You know, our desires that have been
dissipated over various things. You know, we just bring all those desires,
concentrate them on Krishna. So much, oh Krishna, do I desire you, more than
food, more than water, more than sleep. I cannot do it throughout my life, but I
can do it at least on special days.

So for us, fasting is a way of showing Krishna the intensity of our longing for
Him. So if we are fasting and thinking of food, then we will not make much
spiritual advancement. In fact, we will torture ourselves by fasting. Or if we,
we are able to fast, then we will become proud of that fasting. You know, if we
are fasting, and then looking at who all is eating what, and thinking, and these
people have no control over the senses, just see how much they are eating. Then,
our body is fasting, but our ego is feasting. And that will not lead to any
spiritual advancement, practically speaking.

But even if that does not happen, so our fasting should not be our ego's feat.
It should be our devotion's fruit. Not our ego's feat means, yes, I can do this,
based on that if you fast, then there is not much spiritual advancement. But
devotion's fruit means that when the, when we decide to fast, our primary focus
is that we do not want to distract our time, and most importantly our thoughts
over desires away from Krishna to anything else at that time. So the purpose of
fasting is to concentrate our desires primarily and possibly, exclusively on
Krishna, at least during the duration of the fast.

So when the hunger starts tormenting us, at that time, if we turn our thoughts
towards Krishna, and fix the thoughts on Krishna, then the rememberance of
Krishna gives us a non-material nourishment. That helps us to trasncend the
torment of hunger. That is what Pariksit Maharaja tells Sukadeva Goswami that do
not think that I am ksut..., I am troubled by hunger. Why? Because I am drinking
the nectar of Krishna Katha from your ears.

So when we are remembering Krishna, then that gives us a non-material
nourishment that minimizes the torment created by the lack of physical
nourishment. And in this way, we experience the reality of the higher happiness
of Krishna Consciousness. See, the higher happiness of Krishna Consciousness
depends on the focus of our consciousness in Krishna. If we are not conscious of
Krishna, we cannot experience the happiness of Krishna Consciousness.

So fasting forces us to become conscious of Krishna because if we are not
conscious of Krishna, then immediately, we become conscious of the hungry
stomach, and that starts tormenting us. So that is why fasting is not just a
physical austerity. It can be a devotional austerity. It can be an
intensification of our devotional advancement, of devotional consciousness, if
it is done properly. So, the occasion, say, like ekadashi, which is normally
there, you know, as devotees, we can try as much as possible to utilise the
opportunity for fasting on ekadashi.

Different devotees fast at different levels. Some devotees fast nirjala. Now,
nirjala fasting is difficult for many devotees and often it is also not so good
for health, even according to ayurvedic doctors because just the body's whole
cyclic system stops, because there is no flood in it. So, fasting with water is
also reco, actually the recommended for its health benefit also. Because it
allows the body to cleanse itself. When the body is not forced to take in new
food constantly and digest it and process it, then the body gets time to
recover, recoup and do some pending work. Just like a machine needs rest, so
that it can function better, similarly the body needs rest.

Digesting mechanism, the metabolic mechanism of the body, if it gets rest from
continuous inflow of new ener..., new food to digest, and process, then it can
work to cleanse itself internally, and heal itself internally. So fasting has a
lot of medical benefits also. In ayurveda, they say "Langanam Parama Oushadam",
that fasting is, is among the best of medicines.

So, the flood fas..., water fasting or flood fasting, taking some juices, eleven
water or fruit. That is one level. So, nirjala fasting is one level. One level,
next to that is water fasting, then one level next to that is some juice fasting.
That below that is just fruit fasting. Below that is taking raw foods, fruits,
vegetables like that. And other stage below that is taking no grains, but only
once a day, or taking twice a day, then taking thrice a day. Now, many devotees
actually on ekadashi, they just consider that, the only fasting is that I will
not take grains on that day. Now, we are missing out on the potential benefits
that we can get from ekadashi, by considering ekadashi to be just a day when we
restrict the choice of the diet, and not restrict the quantity and the frequency
of the diet.

So, ekadashi can help us to go deeper into our Krishna Consciousness. Of
course, we can say that more important than fasting is chanting extra, and
remembering Krishna, extra. Yes, but the physical restriction decreases the
distraction by which we are able to focus the mind on Krishna. Now, of course,
if we find ourselves physically unsuited for fasting, then it is not necessary
to fast. The important point is to practice devotional service. If somebody says
I will fast, but I will sleep all day, then it is better to stay awake, remember
Krishna, serve Krishna and take food whatever is required.

So, fasting should not become another God for us. That means another object of
thought. Our fasting should be a means by which our thoughts get redirected from
food to Krishna. But there is, so what? Jihva vegam can be controlled very
powerfully by fasting on the occasions which the scriptures anyway take, give us
as sacred.

So, Srila Prabhupada writes that when we eat food also, then if we are selective,
oh, this food is delicious, I want to take that, then we are again not seeing
things spiritually. So, if we go to a person's place because that person is
going to give very nice food, then nice prasad, then we are actually succumbing
to jihva vega. Now, it is not that we have to deliberately take food that is
tasteless to counter jihva vega. That is not our process. The, with.. Our
process is that whatever Krishna offers, we accept it. So if on some days,
wonderful prasadam is there, we will take it, on some other days, simple
prasadam is there, we will accept that also. So whenever there are feasts,
having opulent prasadam, it is fine. But we cannot have feast every day, or we
cannot, we cannot be looing look for feast every day.

Now, then second point is with respect to controlling jihva vega is, so one is
the regulation of the quantity and the variety, and then the other is the
regulation of the frequency. So jihva vega is, has three controls. Variety of
food that we take, should not be too opulent. Quantity should be regulated
depending on how much is suited for our body.

Generally speaking, there is hunger and there is pseudo hunger. So, hunger means
that the stomach is empty, and the stomach needs food to continue its
metabolical functions of the body. But pseudo hunger is if somebody says I am
hungry for gulab jamun. Hunger, real genuine hunger, is never specific. It is
generic. Specific hunger is always pseudo hunger. So, generic hunger means, when
the body needs things for its metabolism, then that means it needs some input by
which its functioning will go on. So, what the input it is, is not particularly
important from the body's metabolical point of view. It just needs fuel for
running on. And, of course, it has to, the, what is put in has to be nourishing,
but the point is that it is generic. You know, whether it is chapatis, or
whether it is bahakris, or whether it is paratas, or whether it is bread, cooked
by devotees, that does not matter so much. What matters is that, it should be
nourishing enough for the body.

But when there is pseudo hunger, that means there is I want this particular item
itself. Now, it is not wrong to want a particular item, if it is, can be offered
to Krishna and they can, that is fine. But we have to know what is the body's
actual need, and what is the mind's need. It is not that we have to reject all
the mind's needs, but at least we should know. Ok, this is the mind's needs, and
then I can decide whether I am going to fulfill the mind's needs or not. The
body's needs have to be fulfilled.

So, whenever the hunger becomes specific, not generic, that is a safe way to
understand that is not hunger, that is pseudo hunger. So pseudo hunger is what
causes fat. Genuine hunger does not cause fat. Genuine hunger does not even
actually bring our consciousness down to tama or rajaguna. When we overeat, then
we want to oversleep. Either we want to oversleep or because of overeating, then
people want to, people get into passion, and they want to enjoy. So, it,
generally, when we eat too much variety, too much quantity, then that sort of
eating can drag our consciousness down to passion or ignorance.

So, satisfying hunger does not lead to any such problems. It is only pseudo
hunger that causes these problems. So with respect to, after considering
controlling the quantity, the variety, then let us look at the frequency.
Now, frequency means that how often we should take prasad. There is the pastime
of Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya and Caitanya Mahaprabhu in the Caitanya Caritamrta
that after Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya had this momentous
conversation in the temple of Jaganath Puri, temple of Jaganath, and then
Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya was converted. The next morning Caitanya Mahaprabhu
came to meet Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya and gave him prasad, to, brought some
prasad for him. So, Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya has woken up late and he just came
out and saw Caitanya Mahaprabhu, offered obeisances. And then he got up. He said
I am so fortunate that I am able to see you. And then Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave
him prasadam, and he immediately took the prasadam on and ate. So then, he said.
What is this Sarvabhauma? He says you are a brahmana. You have not taken bath.
You have not done your sandhyavandana. How can you eat food like this?

And then, Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya said, he quoted a verse from the Purana
saying that "prapti-matrena bhoktavyam", he says that as soon as prasad is
obtained, immediately we should eat it. "prapti-matrena bhoktavyam". And
Caitanya Mahaprabhu has become so happy. It is said in Caitanya Caritamrta,
Caitanya Mahaprabhu felt as if the purpose of His descend from the spiritual
world had been fulfilled, that as if he had conquered the whole universe.

Now, what was Caitanya Mahaprabhu so ecstatic about? Now that eat prasad as soon
as you get it, that is not the the main lesson of this pastime. The main lesson
of this pastime is the transformation of the heart of Caitanya Ma... of
Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya and his development of faith in the principle of mercy.
He was earlier a dry logician. He was an impersonalist. And his fo..., he was
not focused so much on bhakti, although he was worshipping Jaganath. The idea
was that ultimately one has to use jnana, and those who are of this category,
they think that what brings advancement is the rigid adherence to the rules, not
so much the principle of mercy.

So, what Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw in this pastime is by that, Sarvabhauma
Bhattacharya's faith in the principle of mercy has become far greater than in
his, his faith in the rigid adherence of rules. So it was that which made
Caitanya Mahaprabhu elated.

So, when there are deity prasadam comes, and when one sees the prasadam as
mercy, and then one does not bother about one's rules, and takes the deity
prasadam. So that is, what is, it is the increased faith in the principle of
mercy as compared to the principle of rigid adherence of rules. That is what
Caitanya Mahaprabhu appreciated.

Now, in our case, what happens is, we are really not thinking of prasadam as mercy.
We think of prasadam as opportunity to enjoy. So if some offer, if some other
devotees are, we should admit (?, 30:28), when somebody takes prasadam just
whenever it comes, we should not think what the con..., we should not try to
figure out what the consciousness of that person is. Now, that devotee can take
that, but for ourselves, we are not here to judge others.

But we really want to make sure that our consciousness stays spiritual. So if
somebody gets prasadam at other times, then we may decide we can take a little
bit, honor it, if we want, or we can offer obeisances to it, that is another way
of honoring it, that is what Haridas Thakur did in his last days when Caitanya
Mahaprabhu brought prasad to him. Or we can keep it and take it later to eat it
at prasadam times. It is best that we keep our prasadam times regulated. That
means take prasad at fixed times.

So, that will ensure that we are not food conscious, we are Krishna conscious.
We are always thinking: where will I get good food? Will I get good food? So
this is jihva vegam. Now, let us move forward to, we also discuss udar vegam in
this also.

Now, when it is said that, we should either, Prabhupada would often quote
ayurveda, and say that, fifty percent of our stomach can be filled with food,
twenty-five percent can be kept for air, and twenty-five percent for water. So,
the idea is, how do we, somebody may say, how do I know what is fifty percent?
So Krishna gives a broad guideline:

        naty-asnatas 'tu yogo 'sti
        na caikantam anasnatah

He says one should not eat too much, and one should not eat too little. So how
do we know what is too much, and too little? We do not know for ourselves right
as a zee formula, but over a period of time, we learn from ourselves. Sometimes,
we eat a little less, and we find that we are feeling too hungry afterwards.
Sometimes, we eat too much and we feel sleepy. Then, by that we understand that
this is how much I should be eating. So it is something we learn by experience.
And our diets, quantity may also change as we grow, because then our physical
engagement may change, our, the level of energy that we have, the level of
digestive capacity that we have will change.

So one important point is that, this regulation does not have to be rigid. It
can be dynamic. That means depending on the nature of the service that we are
doing, suppose somebody may be fasting, normal times, but if there is a service,
if there is a yatra, and if there is a lot physical movement to be done, lot of
physical service to be done, then at that time fasting will unnecessarily
disrupt our ser..., capacity to do service. Then, better not fast at that time.
Similarly, if we are having more service physically, then we may eat more.

So udar vega is not necessarily the point of just sticking to a fixed quantity
in eating. It is eating whatever is required for our bodily nourishment. And
depending on the kind of engagement we have, that may vary.

And now opastha vega. So, now, the Vedic scriptures do not reject sex. Sex is an
important part of life. It is the way new life comes into the world. So, it is
actually, Krishna said:

        dharmaviruddho bhutesu
        kamo 'smi bharatarsabha

That I am sex life that is not contrary to religious principles. So, sometimes,
the whole idea that even within marriage, sex life should be restricted. That
may seem too much of an intrusion into one's private life and it may seem too
restrictive. Actually, the point here is not to restrict. The point is to have
a balance in one's perspective. You know, to the extent, actually paradoxially,
our culture glamorises sex more and more, and as it glamorises it, it devalues
it also. What, how does it devaluate? The more we glamorise sex based on, you
know, the physical form, good looking form, that are shown everywhere, to the
extent people are constantly misstate artificial sexual stimulation, constant
agitation. And then sex becomes just an activity for physical release, just an
activity for gaining physical release. That is no real intimacy between the two
people. That is what happens when it is done as a professional activity in
prostitution. There is just a physical release.

So, actually, sex is considered so sacred. It is so valued that it is reserved
for procreation. It is not that this considered to be sinful, something so bad,
something so negative, that it should not be there. That is not the point. When
something brings new life into the world, it is not to be considered wrong. But
the point is when that, which has the potential to bring new life into the
world, that which is so glorious, we make it so trivial, that it is just a
casual activity for gaining some relief from boredom, for just gaining some
physical release. Then, we are trivialising that which is special.

So, the point here is that sex offers a, offers human beings the opportunity to
become cocreators with God. You know, God is creating new life, and He is using
a male and a female to do that. So what is actually a sacred activity, we make
the culture around us today, it by its incessant glamorisation of that activity,
trivialises it. And when it trivialises it, then it becomes just an activity for
physical release. And then it further it becomes, it can become more
unregulated, as I said, it can go into the means where people forcibly violate
others and commit all sorts of sexual crimes.

So, the focus is on maintaining the spiritual vision, and doing things for the
purpose for which they are meant. So, that way one can control the "pastha". So,
the point here is no to deprive. The point is to retrieve. What does it mean?
No, it is not that the focus is no, no, no, no, no. It is not that. It is not
deprive. She said. It is retrieve. Retrieve means that this particular
activity has a purpose, and you want to retrieve that purpose within our own
understanding and act according to that purpose.

Now, let us look at Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur's commentary. We have
discussed most of these points already. So, we just discuss them briefly now.
So, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur has written commentary called anuvritti,
and initally describes that vacho, so basically he talks about vacho vega. In
that, he says, there is prajalpa of the karmis, jnanis and karma kandis. So, all
the newspapers that are there, all the magazines that are there, all the
channels that there are there, that talk about so many things, this is all
leading to prajalpa. It is all based on mundane talk.

So, now, it is not that devotees have to be completely oblivious of worldly
things. But often, the worldly news is not really new. You know, one social
commentator said, all the news is old things happening to new people. All the
news is old things happening to new people. And there was some accident,
disaster over there. Then that was one year ago. Now, there is some disaster
here. And there is some disaster there. Ok, there was this, there was this
tournament, and this stepherd... This team won the tournament. That team won the
tournament. That team won the tourment. So, it is just old things happening to
new people.

So, it is not that devotees have to stay uninformed about material things, but
we do not have to think that being informed about every single thing that is
happening that anyone considers important, we have, that is so im..., that is
all important. No, we should be aware of basic things, but beyond that, we focus
on being aware of our own true self. You know, become aware of ourselves as
souls, and the, our real life with Krishna, and for that we have to study
scripture, associate with devotees, and tune our consciousness spiritually. So,
for our functional purposes in the world, whatever basic awareness that is
required is fine. But just getting involved in endless talks over socio
political issues, and cultural issues, if that is not leading to any Krishna
Conscious inferences, conclusions, then that is, that can be a waste of time.

Actually never before in human history, has information been so totally diversed
from function. Information been diversed from function. In the past, people's
information was based on their function. So what does a, if a person is an
artist, if artisan, say, if a person is a potter, then what does the person
learn? The person learns pottery. So the information is connected with the
function.

For the potter does not need to do everything about everything. But today, we
have so much information that serves no function. You know, this happened in
this part of the world, that happened in that of the world, you know, in this
year, this person, war had taken place at that time. And in that year, that had
happened. And this is, if we are giving some competitive exams, in which this is
the standard of knowledge that is required, we can study it.

But in general, there is the point here is not to suppress our curiosity. We all
have curiosity because being conscious is the nature of the atma. It is "cit",
but we can direct our curiosity radar towards Krishna instead of letting the
curiosity radar go on towards material things. Because they are endless, and
they are ultimately useless. Why useless? Because how is that information going
to serve any function alas? Now because we have so much information that serves
no function, so we create a function for them. What is that? We create functions
in terms of there are quizzes which are based on trivias.

Ok, how many daughters does this film star have? Or this politician, how many
wives did he marry? This is, this trivia, but then there are quizzes, that
sometimes people earn lakhs of rupees by winning quizzes the way the questions
are essentially trivia. So, this is not really required.

Again, the point is not to condemn general knowledge or to say, say that we have
to be unaware. But the point is we have to connect information with function.
Otherwise, we will just go on an endless information gathering spree, whereas,
which will not really lead to any functional utility. So, the solution is Hari
Katha. And what happens when we have this information seeking mentality? When we
get to come to scripture also, then we are constantly looking for information
only. Its scriptural information is meant to serve transformational function.
That means when we hear something, we apply it, and we become better human
beings. We can become better devotees.

The scriptural information is like a doctor's prescription. A doctor's
prescription is not just for information value. It is for transformation value.
It is meant to cure us. But if we are habituated to information diversed from
function, then even we get scriptural information, yeah, very good class. At the
end of the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna did not tell Arjuna, very good class Krishna,
what did Krishna tell Arjuna? "karisye vacanam tava" I do what you say. And
he did it. So information has to be connected with function.

So when we hear Hari Katha, at the, we should not be looking just for new
information. Although, new informaton is definitely valuable, but at, we are
looking for transformation. So, the information, whatever function it has, when
we use it for that function, then the transformation results.

Now, with respect to manasah vega, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur says that,
the mind's urges can be classified in two, avirodha prthi, and virodha
yutakrodha. So, avirodha prthi, prthi means attachment, avirodha means
unrestricted, unregulated attachment. And virodha yuktakrodha, so avirodha prthi
means when one is attached, one does not accept any rules and regulations. No
stopping. I want to enjoy, the way I want to enjoy, the time I want to enjoy,
the quantity I want to enjoy. That is what it is, avirodha prthi. And when there
is obstacles, so even if we do not accept any religious, scriptural regulations,
still there will be practical restrictions that will come. And when those
restrictions comes, when our desires are not fulfilled, then "virodha
yuktakrodha", then he gets angry.

So, here he brings "vacho vegam", "manasah", "krodha vegam". So, he makes
"krodha" as also one of the vegas of the mind. Now, the point here is that
again, the point of analysis is never to split our hair. Split our hair means
try to find out minute differences in categories. That is never the point. When
the scriptures give us typology, typology means classification into various
types, the purpose is to gain a framework for our thinking and living.

So, whenever there are any class systems or classification is there, it will
never map accurately into reality. Because reality is complex. So the system of
classification is meant to act as a guide... guideline for thinking and living.
It is not meant to be like a precise point-by-point correlation with everything
in reality. That is not the purpose. So whether anger is classified as separate
vega or is it classified as a subcategory of mind, that does not matter. But
there is, so generally, whenever there is anger, we can look back at what was it
that caused it, we will find it some frustration. And when we find out, ok, it
was due to frustration, then we can look back and see, what was the expectation
that caused the frustration? And whether expectation was realistic, whether the
expectation was desirable, whether it was necessary.

So, by that, by recognising that anger comes by frustration, frustration comes
by expectation, we can go to the route. And check whether that expectation was
warranted or not. And many times, our expectation itself of others, of things,
is unwarranted. And that is what causes frustration. That is what causes
eventually anger.

So, when there is avirodha prthi, that means there is unrestricted attachment,
then the expectation is too high. And then, when there is frustration, actually
anger comes up. So the way to curve anger is not just to not get angry. But it
is also to decrease our expectations, to know that this world is a place of
misery. Things will go wrong over here. Therefore, if you have too many high
expectations, we are preparing ourselves for frustration and suffering. Now
after this, let us look at the jihva, udaro, pastha-vegam.

Now, in jihva vegam, now, this is the point that our acharyas make that the
jihva, udaro and pastha are in straight line, so we wonder what is the physical
linearity of all three got to do with anything. Our desires are something which
are in the mind, so what have they got to do with the position with the three in
one line? The point is, the three in one line indicate that there is a physical
connection between the two, and our desires are not entirely mental. That they
are connected with the physical body, and physical stimulus can increase them,
and physical expressions come out when those desires become strong.

So there is the spiritual level, there is the mental level, the physical level.
And physical affects the mental, the mental affects the physical. So if I lay
down on an easy chair with my head resting against the comfortable headrest, and
then try to study, you know, my physical posture will make me more susceptible
to sleep. And I feel, oh, the desire to sleep, if it was there, it will become
stronger, the desire to sleep is not there, still the desire to sleep may also
come.

So, the physical is connected with the mental. So, the tongue is, when we eat a
lot, then the stomach becomes bloated. When the stomach becomes bloated, then
actually there is passion in the body increases. And when the passion increases,
then one wants to express itself, that has to be expressed in various ways, so
sex, illicit sex is also one way.

Now, there are various kinds of urges of the tongue. Among the various urges of
the tongue, actually speaking, the urges for delicious food based on the various
rasas, there are six different rasas, which can be stimulated, and when those
rasas are stimulated, that causes, causes agitation of the tongue. So, we may
control that agitation, Then we are not succumbing to the jigva vegam. So here,
the song by Bhaktivinoda Thakur, which Srila Prabhupada has given us as the
prasadam prayers, "sarira avidya-jal", as it comes. Now, actually, the song has
two parts. The first is a verse from the Mahabharata:

        maha-prasade govinde
        nama-brahmani vaisnave
        svalpa-punya-vatam rajan
        visvaso naiva jayate

So, it is a prayer of lamentation, saying that, well, us, I, we do not have faith
in the tree maniestations of mercy, "maha-prasade go...", "nama-brahmani" and
"vaisnave", the holy name, the prasad, and the devotees. These are actually
three ways in which we, three things in which we do not have faith, but the three
things if we do, our faith can increase. So, the first, it is a prayer of
lamentation.

And then there is a meditaton on how faith, how prasadam is so glorious. Now, we
see this prayer itself reveals the depth of the philosophical contemplation of
the vaishnava acharyas. In many world religions, there is the tradition of
saying grace. It means, thank God for the food that has been given. That is a
good tradition. But the acharyas are thanking God, not just for food that is
given, food is needed for survival, without food we will die. So naturally, when
food is given, it is a valuable gift. It is essential gift and we are grateful
to God for that, but the acharyas, Bhaktivinoda Thakur is not thanking God, oh
God, if you did not give me food, I will die, so thank you for giving me food.
Actually, at that level, nature is providing food to everyone. Of course, it is
important for humans to be conscious that the food is coming from God. Animals
cannot be conscious of that.

But the point is, nature provides food to everyone. So, bodily maintenance is
arranged for by nature. So just thanking God for bodily maintenance, is
basically thanking God for being able to live at the animal level. We need God's
grace to even live at the animal level, but thanking God to live at the animal
level to fulfill the animal needs of the body, that it is, that does not
indicate a very high consciousness. So the whole prayer of Bhaktivinoda Thakur
is focused on how Krishna has manifested through the food, as the food, as
prasad, so that we can learn to control our senses, and become liberated from
material existence by engaging in devotional service. So the whole first part of
the prayer is a meditation on how we are trapped in material existence.

        sarira avidya-jal, jodendriya tahe kal

So the body is not just "avidya", it is not just it puts us in ignorance, but it
puts us in a trap of ignorance, "avidya-jal". And further, the senses drag us
further into ignorance. They drag us towards death. They drag us towards
activities that will perpetuate our karmic bondage and cause us to go on cycle
of birth and death again and again, "jodendriya tahe kal". And "jive phele
visaya-sagore", that there is not just one sense of object, there are ocean of
sense objects all around us.

So, we are in a really very tough situation. We do not know about higher
knowledge or a higher taste, body has covered that up for us. Then the senses
are dragging us towards sense objects, and thet are terrible. There are almost
infinite number of sense objects around us. And, and on top of that, "tar'
madhye jihva ati, lobhamoy sudurmati", that among all the senses, the tongue is
the most voracious. Actually, those who learn to control the tongue find that
other senses also come under control without much difficulty. There is of course
always a challenge to control any sense, but the tongue, when it, we, feeds
enjoy mentality, then that enjoy mentality to rest of the body also. And other
senses also become aroused to the enjoy mentality.

So in this way, when we control the senses, then we, we, we can begin control of
senses by controlling the tongue. So this whole prayer is "ta ´ke jeta kathina
samsare", because of these uncontrolled senses, feel that we are in very great
difficulty in this samsara. But seeing us suffering, struggling, sinking in the
samsara, Krishna, "krishna baro doyamoy, koribare jihva jay", He comes to enable
us to conquer the senses, and how does He do that? "sva-prasad-anna dilo bhai",
so He gives us His prasad and we are meant to take it to our heart's content,
not to our tongue's content because the tongue will never become contended. The
tongue will always stay discontended and keeps us discontended.

So, "sei annamrita pao, radha-krishna-guna gao", that take the food, which is
actually "amrita" nectar, and after taking it, what do we do? We want to get
energy so that we can, we can engage in devotional service, "radha-krishna-guna
gao". And then "preme dako chaitanya-nitai", so we can call out to the mercy of
Sri Gauranga, Nityananda, please help us. We are struggling. It was by your
mercy that we can engage in devotional service. So, we want to serve Radha
Krishna, and we need the mercy of Gaura Nitai for that.

So it is a profound medtation on our miserable, vulnerable, perishable condition
in material existence, and the rescuing grace that Krishna manifests through
food, as prasad.

So now, after that, Srila Prabhupada goes to the belly and there he talks about
stomach diseases. We talked about how most of the sufferings come because of the
overeating, so obesity is a cause of avoidable disease and death, major cause.
Now, there, foods can also be various types. We will discuss about food in the 
various modes when we go into the discussions and the seventeenth chapter of the
Bhagavad Gita. But here, there are, there is a list of various foods, which are,
which can be of various kinds.

So, we see, the person eats, it is, there are people who are tamasic, they eat,
they eat corpses. So meat eating is tamasic. Then, eating spo..., food that is
too spicy, is rajasic. Then, fru... eating milk and grains, that is sattvik.
Then, taking intoxicants, also tamasic. Then beyond all this is, offering food
to Krishna, and taking it, that is delicious. But if somebody goes to some rich
person's house, some mansion, just for visiting food, then we are not really in
devotional consciousness over there. So prasad is transcendental, but our
consciousness is passionate at that time.

So now, sometimes devotees wonder, should we differentiate between prasad. You
know, is this, is this pras..., is this prasad passionate? Is this rajasic? Is
this tamasic? Is this sattvik? Should we look at prasad that way or not? Prasad
is transcendental, no doubt. Because it is offered to Krishna. So, at the same
time, we also have to understand that we are not transcendental, and certain
effect will be there on us to honor prasad. So, we have to check what is the
effect that I want, and what is the effect that is coming on me. So we look at
it from two perspectives.

Say, for example, many people who are familiar with the Vedic culture, because
they may be, say, hindus, they are Indians born in India. When they come to an
ISKCON temple and hear, oh there is pizza prasad. They get a cultural shock.
Because they think, how can pizza be prasad? Their idea of prasad is, you go to
a temple, and then you stretch forward your hand reverentially, make the palm
folded, and then you get some caranamrta, get some paid, get some sweet, get some
sugar, and some... that is what they consider prasad. So prasad for them, you
know, for them, pizza is a western delicacy. How can pizza be prasad? They get a
cultural shock by that.

So the point is prasad is not just a cultural, cultural commodity. It is a
spiritual principle. Cultural commodity means, ok, in, you know, in the culture
that we may have been brought up in, but as generally, we would have equated prasad
with a particular item. Ok, this food is what is prasad. But actually, prasad is
a spiritual principle. The spiritual principle is that whatever we eat, we offer
to Krishna before that, and then take His, the reminisce as His mercy. So,
seeing in this way, it is, prasad should not be restricted to one small morsel
that we get at the end of religious function. All the food that we eat should
be prasad. So in all the food that we eat should be prasad. Then prasad has to
become a spiritual principle. Because different people will eat different kinds
of food.

Now, certainly, Krishna does not want the flesh of his own other fellow
children. So, that is why we cannot eat non-vegetarian food. We cannot offer
non-vegetarian food to Krishna. So pras..., non-vegetarian, we cannot have
non-vegetarian prasadam. But the different people have different cultures, and
in their cultures, the cousines are different, and accordingly, the foods are
different. So, if somebody is from a part of the country, part of the world,
where pizzas are very common, and they are, the people are habituated to eating
pizzas, and then they offer pizzas, and then take pizzas. So then, that is perfectly
alright. That is the normal food. So what they are doing is, the cultural
translation of the spiritual principle will vary. The cultural translation, or
the cultural expression, so for us, prasadam may translate as sweet, or if, are,
if we are devotees who have a culture of taking full meal as prasad, then it may
raise as the chapati. Now that is prasad for us. So, that is fine.

Now, the cultural translation of prasad will vary depending on time, place,
circumstance. So pizza can also be prasad. Because what is important is the
spiritual principle that the spiritual principle is that the food that we eat,
we offer to Krishna and then we take that. But this does not necessarily mean
that pizza prasad is a, is necessarily a very desirable prasadam which everybody
should be excited about. It is prasadadm, no doubt. So, we do not see prasadam
in terms of material vision. This is goodness, passion, ignorance. Nor should we
see prasadam, oh, this is an Indian item. This is a Chinese item. This is an,
this is an Italian item. Now, for a functional, conversational point of view,
they may be told, oh, today, there is Italian. But internally, we should focus
on the point that it is prasadam.

So, although there is no rule against, say, Indian devotees taking Chinese
food, Chinese prasadam. The point is that we need to remember Krishna. So, if
we, if we get Chinese food, then, even if the Chinese prasadam, we are thinking
more of Chinese than prasadam, so in our consciousness the focus is not Krishna.
The focus is something else.

So, the same applies to, say, western, there we can, you can have mantra rock.
If you have Hare Krishna mantra rock, then in some, in rock music, then those
for whom rock is familiar, that is the way they are spiritualising their music.
That is the way they are bringing Krishna into the music with which they are
already familiar, and for them, it is good. But for those, who are not exposed
to rock music, now, of course, practically any people in India are exposed to
rock music, but for those who are habituated to a traditional culture, for them,
to participate in mantra rock, all that is happening is that they will, you
know, hardly be thinking of the mantra, they will be thinking more of rock.

So each of us has to take a moral inventory, a devotional inventory of
ourselves, and decide what are the things that I can do in which I can maintain
my remembrance of Krishna. And of course, it is not that I have to give up all
those activities. I may do all those activities also, but then I have to be
honest with myself. You know, I, I should not just spiritualise them, whitewash
them, saying that, oh, this is all devotional. I can, if I feel, if my desire is
very strong, and my desire is not very, is not anti-devotional, then I can do
those thing. But I should not think that that is the same as doing activities
which help me to remember Krishna better.

So, I am not saying that, say, a paratha is a better prasa... or higher prasadam
item than pako... than pizza. That is not the point here. The point is I have to
check individually what brings me greater remembrance of Krishna. So, if I am
excited just because of the material nature of the item, then I am not really in
devotional consciousness, and I have to be honest about that. I cannot
artificially say that everything is equal. So, Srila Prabhupada, we see, even
when he went to America, which are part of the world, he taught Americans, not
just the universal spiritual principles, he also taught them specificic cultural
practices. So taught his western disciples to run, to be a, to wear traditional
dresses, to cook traditional cousins, and to learn traditional songs.

So Srila Prabhupada wanted very much for our traditional culture to be
continued. So now, Srila Prabhupada wanted the Krishna Conscious Movement,
ISKCON, to act as a bridge which takes traditional Indian culture to the rest of
the world. So now, the challenge with the bridge is, it is very difficult to
have, once a bridge is constructed to allow only one-way traffic on the
bridge, so there is two-way traffic. So, what is happening is that quite, the
original intended traffic was that, the traditional culture should go through
ISKCON to people all over the world. But what is happening is also that, the
other way traffic. That means the culture from all over the world is coming
through ISKCON to the traditional places in India.

So, devotees who may have never heard, before they were introduced to ISKCON, of
chowman or pizza, they, they start taking chowman prasadam and pizza prasadam.
And again, this is not bad, but we have to be aware of what is happening, and
whether what is happening is taking us towards Krishna or taking us away from
Krishna. You know, we have to be clear in our consciousness of what are the
things that are anikul to our bhakti, and what are pratikula to our bhakti, and
do them accordingly.

Now, go beyond this, we will discuss about the remaining sections in tomorrow's
cla..., next class. Thank you. Hare Krishna.
