Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mjoznoOkf20
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_024_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_1_Part_1_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=mjoznoOkf20&redir_token=bGEI8Xv8M2z62xUnm-ASaVpwnFt8MTU0MDY1ODYxMUAxNTQwNTcyMjEx&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to the Bhakti Sastri course. We are discussing Nectar of Instruction. We
have completed one class, in which we discussed the preface of Nectar of
Instruction, and we also had an overview of the flow of the contents of the
Nectar of Instruction. Today, we will start with the first verse of Nectar of
Instruction. So let us begin.

        vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ
        jihvā-vegam udaropastha-vegam
        etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ
        sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt

So "vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ", so here Rupa Goswami starts with talking
about an interesting concept of "vega". So "vega". What does it mean? The word
"vega" means urge, urgency. You know, in sanskrit, in vernacular language, they
can name murarati (?, 01:06), the word "vega" often means speed, so "vega",
Prabhupada translates as urge. That means the other is desire, and there is
urge. The difference between a desire and an urge is that an urge is something
which is urgent, which makes us want to act immediately, which demands that it
be fulfilled at once. A desire is something which is there. We want to do it.
But we may have the desire to maybe see the Himalayas or see the Niagra falles,
we may have a desire to go and see the seven wonders of the world.

Many kinds of desires we may have. They are more like ideal desires, daydreams.
But urge means, when that comes, we want, we have to do it. It is urgent. That
is the very meaning of the word urge, "vega". "vega" is that "vegavan".
"vegavan" is speed. So when that urge comes, when the "vega" comes, it is very
speedy demand, and has to be fulfilled. So, this is what he is talking about,
"vaco vegam".

So, he is talking about six kinds of urges over here. That means these are the
desires that when they come, they demand they be fulfilled immediately. So they
are the urges of the speech, "vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ", so here for the
sake of rhym and for the sake of structure, Rupa Goswami merges the word
"manasaḥ" and "krodha", and he uses the common "vegaṁ" for them. He does the
same for "udaropastha". So he is talking about the urges of the mind, the urges
of anger, then "jihvā", the urges of the tongue, now, the tongue urges, he
classifies that as the urge to eat, whereas the "vāco vegaṁ", he talks about the
urge to speak.

So when the tongue is speaking, it is acting as a gyanendriya. When the tongue
wants to eat, it is acting as a, it is acting as a gyanendriya, acually. Sorry,
when it is eating, it is acting as a gyanendriya. We take in food through it. We
taste food. We come to know about food through it. Whereas when we speak, speech
is a way by which we get work done.

So "vaco" refers to the karmindriya function of the tongue and "jihva" refers
to the, "jihva-vegam" refers to the gyanendriya function of the tonue.
So then "udaropastha-vegam", "uda" refers to the belly. The stomach has an urge
to eat a lot, and "opastha" refers to the genitals. They have a desire to enjoy
also. "etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ", these urges, the person who tolerates,
one who is able to stand, to tolerate them, "viṣaheta dhīraḥ", so such a person
"sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt", such a person is qualified to be a teacher
of every, everyone in the world, such a person is capable of taking disciples
all over the world.

That means the capacity to control the senses enables the person to gain
one qualification that is important for becoming a guru: A sober person who can
tolerate the urge to speak, the mind's demands, the actions of anger and the
urges of the tongue, belly and genitals is qualified to make disciples all over
the world.

Now this may raise a question, that this books is starting with Upadesamrta.
That is the title, so it is starting with Upades for the disciples. So how does
it start by talking about the qualifications for a guru? Is it asking that the
disciple, that the seeker is becoming, going to become a guru? And why should
for a seeker it talk about the qualifications of a guru? There are multiple
understandings. The first is that the seeker begins by finding a guru, and the
seeker has to know the qualifications of a guru. The guru is one who has
conquered all these urges. Now, of course, the guru has both regulative and
positive qualifications. So the regulative qualifications are described over
here in terms of the capacity to control and conquer the body and the mind.

Along with that, there are also the positive qualifications in terms of the
attachment to Krishna. And that, we will be describing in later verses when Rupa
Goswami talks about the levels of devotees, and exalted devotee, who sees
Krishna everywhere, and who is serving Krishna one pointedly. But here, at one
level, it talks about how a disciple should talk, should see the qualifications
in a guru. At another level, it recognises that even the seeker has to aspire to
become a seer. Even the seeker should know these are the qualifications that
eventually I have to have to acquire. And so, by spelling out those
qualifications right in the beginning, the clear mindset is created. This is the
direction in which I have to go. There is much more which I have to do when I go
in this direction, but this is important.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught exemplary devotion, but he also taught devotion that
was coupled with detachment and renunciation, because he himself was a sannyasi,
and the six goswamis were sannyasis, and even his grihasta disciples were not
attached. They were attached to Krishna, not to the world. So, the detachment
from the world and the capability to control the urges of the body and the mind,
that make us attached to the world, that is an important qualification of a
bhakta. So this qualification is what the seeker should also aspire to develop.

And in that sense, this positioning of the "sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt",
the positioning of this verse right at the beginning of the Nectar of
Instruction indicates the direction in which Rupa Goswami will lead us. So he
will start first by talking about how one needs to control, control, control the
negative side of bhakti, negative side of our own life on the path of bhakti.
And then it will talk about how we will be able to nourish the positive side.
And through this progression, the Bhakti-Rasamrta-Sindhu, the Upadesamrta will
guide us towards prema.

Now, Srila Prabhupada's purports begins in a very interesting way. He seems to
start a little abruptly, but we see the depth of Srila Prabhupada's thought
here. It is, without giving any prologue or that this is a question, this is a,
he is not giving any instruction in the Nectar of Instruction, it is already
done in the preface. Prabhupada comes directly to the point. And his point is
also very deep. He says, yes, we all want to control the senses if you want to
make spiritual advancement. But how, but how can one do that? What is it that
makes one, a person have uncontrolled senses? And what can help the person to
control the senses?

So he immediately goes to the conversation of Sukadeva Goswami and Pariksit
Maharaja in the Sixth Canto of the Bhagavatam, First Chapter, where Sukadeva
Goswami is asked by Pariksit Maharaja how can people give up sinful activities?
So the context is that, in the previous Canto, the hellish sufferings are
described, and Pariksit Maharaja being a compassionate person, he had been a
responsible king, concerned about the well-being of his citizens, so both as a
responsible administrator, and as a compassionate vaishnava, he is concerned
about the plight of those who are this time to suffer in hell. He asks: how can
they be delivered? And then, he says, those who have committed sins, as a
reaction to that, they have to suffer, but if they commmit atonement, they can
escape the suffering.

So Sukadeva Goswami speaks this is the first level answer. Generally speaking,
the sages see the level of the questioner and answer accordindly. And sometimes,
they give multiple levels of answers where the answer moves deeper, and deeper and
deeper as one becomes more perceptive. So this is the first level answer that
Sukadeva Goswami gives. In the Chandogya Upanishad, there is a conversation, how
many Katidevaha, how many Gods are there? So the figure moves forward, first
they say, so many hundreds of Gods, then less, then less, then three, then to
finally one. So the idea is, as people start evolving, they understand, there
cannot be multiplicity of God. There is ultimately one God. So this is how the
seeker, the teacher also raises the level of understanding of the student.

So when he starts, he starts by describing that do atonement. Then, Pariksit
Maharaja has been a king, and he has seen how when criminals are put in jail as
a punishment, that punishment in and of itself does not reform the criminal
thoroughly. They often come out of the jail and they commit crimes again. In
fact, many times in the jail, they get contaminated by even worse association,
and therefore they commit even greater sins. So therefore, what is the way out?
The way out is not simply atonement. So in our present punishment is not exactly
an atonement. But basically it is a way in which a person is given consequences
for the miseries by the king.

So, those consequences can come voluntarily also. You know, a person does an
atonement, that means, oh, I have done this wrong, and I want to atone for this.
This is what I will do. So scriptures describe atonement, but he says that,
that does not work. I have seen that imposing punishment whether done by the
state or done by oneself does not work. And he uses the example that this is
just like elephant being bathed.

Prahupada used one example of Christians go for confession and the thief being
punished. So, now, some people go for confession, and even after they do the
confession, then they come back and say that again I want to do sin, and again,
they will do confession. So that sort of confession is not much use.  Sometimes
they say that, ok, I have done this sin, please give me confession, and next
week, I am going to do sin again, so please give me advanced confession for
that. Now, advanced confession makes a mockery of the whole process of
confession. When we make confession, the idea is that I are not going to commit
sin again. So if somebody does advanced confession, that means that person has
no intention of reformation at all. And that is definitely a mockery of
confession.

So this sort of confession does not work. And what is the solution? So
therefore, he says, just like an elephant may bath, but then elephant comes and
puts dust on it, on own body, so then that sort of atonement is no use.
Similarly, he said, this is of no use. Then Pariksit Maharaja goes forward and
asks deeper. Sukadeva Goswami answers deeper. He says "yukentuka marsanam", we
can absorb oneself in the cultivation of knowledge. He says even that is not
enough because even in their knowledge, still that does not lead to
purification.

See, atonement does not work because one has not lost the sinful mentality.
Sinful mentality is still there and that will make a person use wrong things
again. And he says, even if a person acquires knowledge, understands that I am
not the body, I am the soul, still the suffering does not go away, because one
still thinks that I am independent of God. I am atma, on the path of jnana, one
does not really connect with God and get a higher taste. So he uses the example
that when a liquor pot is washed, still the smell of liquor remains. Like that,
even if a person is cleansed, some sinful reactions still remain, some sinful
contamination remains, and the person is attracted to sin again. And then
finally, he says that, the way out is by the practice of devotional service. So
let us look at this quickly.

So Maharaja Pariksit asked the question about atonement, and exploring,
explaining the futility of atonement, Srila Prabhupada talks about these three
analogies, the elephant bathing, the thief and the police, and the confessions.
And then Prabhupada moves forward to the develop of discussion of real
atonement, that is talked about by Pariksit Maharaja. So this in was the
awakening of our dormant Krishna Consciousness. And this is training according
to regulative principles and methodical life. So, we will discuss this
one-by-one.

What this means is that how do we awake, how do we reform ourselves completely?
Now, to reform ourselves, we have to revive our original nature. Now, we are
originally pure. We have become contaminated now. Now, without returning to
our original pure nature, if we try to decontaminate ourselves, then we just
ship from one kind of impurity to another kind of impurity, from the impurity of
passion and ignorance to the impurity of goodness. And that does not
really restore us to our original nature, and we can be always dragged down
again, because we are just shifting from one unnatural state to another for
atma.

So when we return back to our natural state of loving and serving Krishna, then
we actually become purified. And then we attain a purity eventually, that is the
purity beyond return. We attain a point where we will not fall back again. So
what all does it involve? Srila Prabhupada explains that there are two ways to
do it. So the training according to regulative principles and methodical life,
in that when I want to do real atonement, err atonement, I am sorry, I do not, I
will not do this again. That is the idea. So, one has training according to
regulative principles and methodical life.

So what all does it involve? It involves traditional tapasya. So in tapasya,
"tapasya brahmacerana samena chadamenacha". So, it is a long verse which Sukadeva
Goswami describes in. Prabhupada would quote this verse "tapasya brahmacerana",
so one does austerity, and Prabhupada would give the example of austerity as
fasting on ekadashis, "brahmacariena", so to practice of celebacy. Celebacy does
not mean renouncing family life, celebacy means, it can also mean practicing
householder life also according to principles of dharma. So, now, "tapasya
brahmacariena samena chadamenacha", then mind and sense controlled.

So what is the mind and sense control actually? It is an interesting concept.
When we talk about mind and sense control, often we put the two of them
together, but it is not necessarily together. Actually, mind control is safer
and better than sense control. Although, in one sense, it is tougher also. But
in another sense, it makes things easier. How? "samena chadamenacha", actually
"sama" and "dama" are considered to be characteristics of a brahmana.

        samo damas tapah saucam
        ksantir arjavam eva ca
        jnanam vijnanam astikyam
        brahma-karma svabhava-jam

Lord Krishna in Bhagavad Gita describes, in the eighteen chapter, the
qualifities of a brahmana. So therein, he describes the sama and dama. It is
also described by Sukadeva Goswami over here. So sama is mind control, dama is
sense control. So the idea is, it is always better to control the mind itself.
So if the mind itself does not go to wrong thoughts, then the senses will not
get stimulated, and then there is no trouble of controlling the senses. Because
the senses are gone out of control, then there is no need to control them. It is
like if I know I am in this room and I have got a precios jewel in this room,
and I know that just outside this room, outside the door, there is a thief, who
is waiting to, bounce in, bounce in, take the jewel and go off, and run away
with it.

So what will I do? Now, I locked the door, bolt the door, chained the door, and
never opened the door. Make sure the thief does not come in. So like that, the
room is like our consciousness, in our consciousness, we have the jewel of
Krishna. And outside the door, there is the thief of maya. And maya is waiting,
waiting to come and steal away our Krishna consciousness, TACK, waiting to
bounce in and bounce with the jewel, and take it away. Now what should we do?

We should not let maya come in only. That means we are busy ourselves in Krishna
Consciousness so much that we locked the door for maya, that there is no way she
can come in. We keep, and we keep ourselves absorbed in Krishna, then the door
gets locked. That is in my control. That means we do not let the mind, locking
the door means, we do not let the mind go entertain the thoughts of sense
gratification only. That is not so easy. We can try it. Definitely, it is much
safer if you can do it, and it will be happier also because we will be absorbed
in Krishna. But we cannot do that, that means somehow, we leave the door open,
and as soon as the door even little cracks open, TACK, the thief bangs on the
door, and throws it open and then recharges him.
   
So at that time, what do we do? Oh, now that the thief has come, let him take the
jewel and go out. And go out, what can I do? No, at that time, we jump on the
door, and then we TACK, we try to force the door shut. We fight the thief and
push thief out, and then lock the door again. Now the struggle involved in
fighting back the thief and closing the door is much greater than just in
keeping the door locked. Similarly, the struggle involved in fighting of the
agitation after the mind has got agitated, and the senses have got stimulated,
after that, the struggle is much greater. That means, we leave the door open,
thoughts about sense gratification come in, after thoughts come in, then we
become agitated. When we say, no, I am not going to indulge in this.

And then the senses have got, become hungry now because they have tasted blood.
Just like when a tiger tastes blood, then the tiger, restraining the tiger
becomes difficult. Similarly, when the senses taste, oh, there is pleasure
available over here, the senses, they are like tigers, when they taste blood,
then restraining them will become difficult. But then the fight will be much
greater. However, we can fight. It is not just because we have become agitated,
we have to succumb to the agitation. Just because the door has been left open, a
thief has to come, has come in, it does not mean that the jewel has to be
stolen. You can push the thief out and lock the door.

Similarly, when the mind gets agitated, then the desires come in, and shake up
our consciousness, they are coming, maya is coming to steal away Krishna from
us, we can push maya, we can chant. We can dis... The mind is agitated, but we
do not let the agitation express itself at the sensory level. We do not act
sinfully. We may desire.. sinful desires may come in, but they do not transform
into sinful actions. That is sense control. So mind control is better. First if
"sama", if "sama" does not work, or at least do "dama". Then beyond that, there
is "tyagena satyasoca nabhyam yamena yamenava".

So tapasya, brahmacarina, austere celebacy, samena sadamenaca, tyagena
satyasoca, bhyam renunciation, satya truthfulness, saucam bhyam cleanliness, and
yamena yamenava, by the practice of rules and the regulations of the process of
yoga.

Now by all this, what happens? By all this, one gradually becomes purified. This
is the traditional method of tapasya that is talked about in the Vedic
literature. And it is important, as devotees also, we can follow this and follow
some principles. But our focus is not on following these principles. Our focus
is on, focus is on purifying our hearts through the direct engagement of
devotional service.

Now, if you see, in all these, "tyagena satyasoca bhyam yamena yamenava", there
is the focus, the focus is not on Krishna. The focus is self-restraint. The
focus is on self-mastery, which is good. It can become a good platform for
practicing Krishna Consciousness, but in and of itself, even celibacy, is not
spiritual or devotional. There are so many, there are rough times if ... event
atheists can be celibate. It may be difficult. But atheists can be a celibate.
So celibacy in and of itself is not spiritual. When we say a brahmacari, a
brahmacari is not just a celibate. A brahmacari is a person who is trying to do
charan in brahma, one is trying to live in brahman, pursuing brahman. So these
are material. "tyagena satyasoca nabhyam yamena yamenava", these are helpful
because they set up a platform by which you can practice bhakti steadily and
swiftly.

At the same time, what this verse recommends is that this is a gradual, this
revelation of tapasya, is a gradual process. In contrast with that, we can have
the pancaratrik tapasya. The pancaratrik tapasya is what Rupa Goswami did. Now
what is pancaratra? Pancaratra is the method centered on devotional activities.
So there is, the pancaratrik vision (?, 23:22) centers on taking shelter of
Krishna and the practicing devotional service in a way that is centered on
bhakti, on the worship of the deities, and the service to the spiritual master.
So, when we practice devotional service in this way, at that time, by such
practice, we make swifter spiritual advancement. So there is Rupa Gowami telling
us, dos and don'ts.

And what are the dos and don'ts that he tells? The Dos are practice bhakti under
guidance of guru in the association of devotees. "Tandera charanasevi bhakta
nrsingha vas janame janame hoy ei abilasa". So my desire is "Tandera
charanasevi", I want to serve your lotus feet of my spiritual master, and how do
I want to serve? They say "bhakta sanivasa", by living in the association of
devotees. "janame janame hoy ei abilasa", this is my aspiration, life after
life. This is the mood of a devotee. This is what we should do. And
purification is guaranteed if we do this, serve the spiritual master in the
association of devotees.

And the don'ts are we follow are the four regulative principles. We do not
indulge in sinful and immoral, antidevotional activities. Among these two, the
devotional processes are far more potent and that is why they are far more
important. On the path of bhakti, the celibacy, sri prasad, brahmacari,
sadacharya, they are important, but they are not all important. And sometimes, a
person may be a brahmacari, but that person may not be necessarily as
devotionally disposed as the person who is not brahmacari, the person who is
grihasta, but has greater devotion.

So the important point is that renunciation, self-control, truthfulness, all
these are conducive for the practice of bhakti. And that is why we adopt them.
And to the extent they are conducive, to that extent, we utilise them. And when
they become obstructive instead of being conducive, then we reject them. That is
why we have Caitanya Mahaprabhu making the famous verse saying that:

        naham vipro na ca nara-patir napi vaisyo na sudro
        naham varni na ca grha-patir no vanastho yatir va
        kintu prodyan-nikhila-paramananda-purnamrtabdher
        gopi-bhartuh pada-kamalayor dasa-dasanudasah

So he is saying that, he is disidentifying himself, distancing himself from all
the four varanas and four ashramas. Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is in a
very privileged position both ways, among the four varanas, the brahmana is the
highest, among the four ashrams, sannyasi is the highest. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is
a brahmana and a sannyasi. So he is in the most privileged position in the
varnashram, and he is still distancing himself from both these things. Oh, I am
none of these. And what am I? I am simply the servant of the Lord of the gopis.
And that Lord is the reservoir of all joy. He is the greatest source of
happiness. So as sadhakas, we do not need to practice the traditions of tapasya,
to the extent that it helps us in the process of devotional service. Now, how do
we apply this?

So, now, Srila Prabhupada is going to talk about, so we have to practice
tapasya, and when we apply the principle of tapasya, applying the principle of
tapasya is to do "vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ". So let us look at the
application here.

The application is based on Srila Prabhupada's purport and Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakur's purport. So Srila Prabhupada himself quotes Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakur's purport in the second part of his purport. So let us look
first at Srila Prabhupada's purports. So Prabhupada talks about "vāco vegam",
"manasaḥ vegam", "krodha-vegaṁ", then he talks about "jihvā" and "udaropastha"
briefly, and then we will go to Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur. Now what is
"vaco vegam"? The urge to speak. So Srila Prabhupada used the example of karmis
and jnanis, who are speaking things which are unconnected with Krishna, and by
such speaking, they are simply inviting the snake to come and devour the toad.

This is a graphic example given from nature. The Bhagavatam gives us many
analogies down from nature to illustrate its many profound principles. So, when
we are in this world, we attempted to speak many things.

        āyur harati vai puṁsām
        udyann astaṁ ca yann asau
        tasyarte yat-kṣaṇo nīta
        uttama-śloka-vārtayā

That that person who is not engaged in glorifying the Supreme Lord, for that
person, with every rising and setting of the Sun, life is diminishing, person is
dying with every passing day. So what do we do? When we engage in prajalpa, it
is just when the toad speaks, toad is croaking, croaking, croaking, then the
snake cannot stand tall and see where the toad is. So it is really difficult for
the snake to find the toad. But when the toad speaks that sound basically
attracts the snake. Ok, the toad is here, let me go and eat it.

So similarly, it is said that when we speak unnecessarily, we attract the snake
of death. Now we wonder how does this happen? Now, some of us may feel that, ok,
there is destiny, and our life span is fixed. If our life span is fixed, then,
more, actually not exactly the lifespan, it is the number of breath that we are
going to take that is fixed, then at that time, we are going to die. Is it that
if I speak more, I am going to die faster. What exactly does this example
convey? It is not that time is going to grow faster, it is not that death
necessarily is going to come closer, but the point is, that the flow of time is
relative to the way we engage it. So if we engage ourselves in frivolous
activities, and often frivolous activities just consume our time so much that we
do not realise it only. And when we do not, sometimes we get into prajalpa, and
so much time just goes away in that, just chit-chatting, chit-chatting,
chit-chatting. And actually, we see in many ways, most newspapers, most
chatrooms, and things like that, they are basically often filled with prajalpa.

So, this sort of prajalpa is undesirable. We will discuss more about prajalpa,
but here we are talking about "vaco vegam", the urge to speak. So often, when we
speak, we get so absorbed in that that time just flies away, and we do not
realise it also. This was both Pururad's realisation and Erirath's realisation,
and they said, when we got into sense gratification, then just how time went
away, I did not realise only. So that is what happens if people sometimes,
people start watching TV. And one programme, second programme, third programme,
and just time flows away.

So, the important is that actually we will waste so much time without realising
how much time we have wasted. So that is the problem with this sort of
engagement and activities. And that is how the, our speaking and our gossiping,
is like a toad speaking in that sense. So now what is solution to this?
Solution is, Srila Prabhupada explains, not silence, but Krishna Katha. Because
we cannot stay silent for very long. Even if we try, we will have natural urge
to speak. And if we do not dovetail that natural urge properly, then the only
result will be that we will feel ourselves suppressed. And when we suppress
ourselves for too long, after some time, suppression just expresses itself in
ugly ways.

So, we have to spiritualise our urge to speak. So when we learn to speak about
Krishna, it is supremely satisfying. Because when we speak about Krishna, it
purifies us, it benefits us, and similarly, it purifies and benefits others. So
the process of bhakti is so wonderful that whatever our bodily urges are, we are
not asked to give them up. We are asked simply to supplement them, to
spiritualise them. And in fact, there is no activity more auspicious than
talking about Krishna. So every opportunity that we have to speak about Krishna,
we can be grateful for that. Now, that opportunity may be on the vyasasana, where we
are speaking formally to people, or it can be informally speaking to one or two
people.

But every opportunity to speak about Krishna is taking us closer to Krishna and
it is helping others to come closer to Krishna. So in this way, the very tongue
that normally attracts death, can now attract Krishna. When Krishna sees, oh,
this devotee is speaking about me, sharing my message with others, Krishna
becomes pleased by that. Krishna says that one who shares my message with the
others, that I am very pleased with that person, I love that person, and I bring
that person back to me quickly. I guarantee him pure devotional service.

        tasman manisyesu
        kaschin mey prikratyama
        bahitam basvana
        tasman anya taro bhui

Krishna describes in 18.68, in the Bhagavad Gita, that such a person is so very
dear to me, no one more, ever more dear to me than one who shares my message
more. So this is the wonderful power of bhakti, that the very thing which is
causing us bondage can now become the source of liberation for us. Then after
that, after we look at vaco vegam, then let us look at "manasaḥ vegam".

So "manasaḥ vegam" means the urge of the mind. So there, the problem is that we
cannot have a vacuum. We can skip our mind empty. That will attract the
anarthas. The solution is to meditate on the lotus feet of Krishna. Prabhupada
uses the example of Son and Krishna. The mind has to think about something. It
may think about things randomly. Or it may think about things systematically.
But thinking cannot be stopped. Speaking can be stopped for some time at least.
We can be silent for some time. We cannot be all the time silent. But as far as
the activities are concerned, the mind is far more active than the physical
senses. And it is not only its activity more, but its speed is also far greater.
TACK. One thought, second thought, third thought, four thought, so it can think
fast, and move faster. The mind can move faster than the speed of light also.
The speed of light is considered the fastest by modern physics. But the mind can
go much faster than that.

So now, this "manasaḥ vegam", this urge of the mind, we cannot freeze the mind.
Even when the mind gets caught in one object, sometimes, when we are attached in
something, and the mind gets caught in a particular sense object. If the
alcoholic is there, the person's mind is caught in that bottle of alcohol. But
actually even then, the mind is not at rest. Actually, the mind is caught within
the bottle of alcohol, and from there, it is having so many imaginations, oh, I
will drink this, I will do this, I will do that, I will do that. And those
imaginations also endless. So, the mind in and of itself can never be inactive.
So, why cannot it be inactive? Because its very nature is to be active. It is
settled in the gross senses. Now when the gross senses are active, the mind is
further active, hyperactive. So the best thing that we can do for the mind is
give it a safe and satisfying avenue for activity.

Just like a child, we cannot expect the child to stay silent. The child is by
nature is active. The child starts playing with the knife, or starts playing
with the lighter, and starts running on the fire of the gas, then it is
dangerous. So instead, what does the mother do? The mother gives the child some
toys to play with. The child becomes satisfied. So like that, we cannot avoid
the mind being active. What we can do is give the mind a safe avenue for
activity. And what is that safe avenue? That is Krishna Consciousness.

Srila Prabhupada used the example that just as hitya gour example in Caitanya
Caritamrta that:

        kṛṣṇa—sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra
        yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa, tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra

So it is a very interesting way of putting it. He uses the word "adhikāra".
"adhikāra" means authority, Krishna Das Kaviraja Goswami is saying that wherever
there is Krishna, maya has no authority. Maya has no jurisdiction. It is an
interesting phrase because the implication is two-fold. One is that, the
converse is also true. That means wherever there is no Krishna, there is maya's
authority only. That falls under maya's jurisdiction. And by default, material
desires will be there, whether they are manifest, or they are not manifest right
now.

So now, the second point is that, how does maya's jurisdiction, maya's
control or particular area go away? How does she withdraw from our
consciousness? It is "kṛṣṇa—sūrya-sama". Even in the room, light is off, at that
time, if I am irritated with the darkness, and stumbling on something, falling
on something, I am groping around. Now, what can I do? You know, I cannot use my
fist. You darkness, I will punch you, get lost. I cannot curse the darkness. You
know, I cannot even use sharp sword. I will chop you to pieces. No, it is all,
these are useless. Where the darkness comes, the only way to remove darkness is
by gaining light, by getting light.

And with all the previous efforts, that removing darkness was impossible. But
as soon as a light comes out, actually we do not, comes on, we do not have to do
anything separately to remove the darkness. Just the bringing of the light,
TACK, the darkness has to flee. Similarly, "yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa, tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra
adhikāra", where there is light, darkness has no authority left over there.
Similarly, when we bring Krishna, maya has to go away. Maya cannot stay on. Maya
just has to be driven out. So the solution is to when we meditate on Krishna's
lotus feet means, we serve Krishna. The lotus feet represent basically service.
So when we serve Krishna, by that service to Krishna, when fixing the mind in
Krishna, we can drive away maya. So, this is again not mechanical. We have to
absorb ourselves in Krishna. Because again, the point is that we have to fill
the mind with Krishna.

So if I am just uttering Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, and all that I am doing
uttering Hare Krishna is, just my lips are speaking, but my mind is still caught
up in all the parade of sense objects that the mind, the world is presenting in
front of me. Then, such chanting, it is also beneficial at one level, but it is
not acutally transformational. It still, it does not allow my mind to move from
material things to Krishna. Therefore, "manasaḥ vegam", the vega of the mind,
has to be controlled by directing it towards Krishna. And how do I direct it
towards Krishna? That is something which each of us has to find out for
ourselves. That each of us is unique. Each of us has a unique relationship with
Krishna. Of course, at a pure spiritual level, the unique flavor of our
relationship, our unique rasa will be revealed, when we become purified, when
our swarupa becomes manifested.

But even now, although our conditioning may be there, and although our spiritual
uniqueness is covered over, and what we do have is material uniqueness, but still,
even in this condition also, because we are unique, our disposition is distinct
to, and we have to find out what is the way I become attracted to Krishna. Some
of us may find that by studying philosophy, studying scripture, understanding
concepts seriously, I become, I become fixed, I become steady against strength.

Some of us may find that by worshipping the deity, by going and praying, by
taking darshan, by offering, by doing puja, by worshipping the deity in feeling
puja, if you are brahmanas, we can do personal worship, that is what gives me a
lot of strength. Some others may find that by singing bhajans, I get a lot of
strength. Someone may find that by just singing the Hare Krishna maha mantra in
beautiful, in different tunes and dancing in kirtans, that gives me a lot of
strength. Someone may find that, ok, the association of a particular gives me a
lot of strength. There is this important role of individuality in the universal
process of Krishna Consciousness.

Although the process of univer... the processes are universal, but everyone of
us is an individual, and we have to find out which process of devotional service
attracts us, in which process we can absorb ourselves more and more. And when we
absorb ourselves more and more in Krishna, then maya will go away. So often, our
struggle becomes more difficult because we try to drive maya away without
finding out how we can get attracted to Krishna. See, ultimately, I am
responsible for my spiritual advancement. My spiritual advancement is not
Krishna's responsibility. It is not my spiritual master's responsibility. It is
not my counsellor's responsibility. It is my responsibility, first and foremost.
Of course, it is their responsibility also. The spiritual master takes the
responsibility of delivering the disciple.

But that is like a doctor saying that I will take the responsibility to cure the
patient. But the doctor cannot be there all the time making sure, nagging the
patient, are you taking this medicine, are you taking this medicine, are you
taking this medicine? When the doctor says, I will take responsibility for the
patient, for the curing of the patient, that means, the doctor says, you know
what, I will use all my knowledge, all my experience to recommend the best
possible treatment. And if any complications take place, I will use all my
abilities that I address the complication. But taking the treatment is the
patient's responsibility.

So in that sense, the getting cured is the patient's responsibility. Offering
the facilities for the cure is the doctor's responsibility. Similarly, our
spiritual advancement is primarily our responsibility. The spiritual master is
like a doctor, the spiritual master provides all the facilities,is primarily
our responsibility. The spiritual master is like a doctor, the spiritual master
provides all the facilities. You know, he will provide us his own association
through classes, and through personal association. He may provide us senior, his
senior disciples, who are trained, he, who can inspire and guide us. He can
provide us his or use, he may write books and provide books for us. He may build
beautiful communities, may build beautiful temples, and have deities, through
that he provides facilities. That is what Srila Prabhupada has done for all of
us as our, as the founder acharya of our movement.

But ultimately, it is our responsibility to make spiritual advancement. So once
we understand that now fixing the mind in Krishna, fixing my mind on Krishna is
my responsibility. Then, we will become serious. Ok, what is the way I can fix
my mind on Krishna? By doing this, by doing that, by doing that. And each of us
may take a devotional inventory of our own spiritual life and find out what
attracts us to Krishna and then fix the mind on Krishna by that. And then we
will be able to stay steady and happy in our devotional life.

Then, "manasaḥ vegan", then "krodha-vegan", so "krodha-vegan" is the urge for
anger. So actually, Prabhupada says, the problem is that anger cannot be
stopped. And the solution is to apply against blasphemous. Prabhupada uses the
example of Jagai, Madhai, Hanuman and Arjuna. So among all the six anarthas that
are there, lust, anger, greed, envy, pride, and illusion, you know, probably the
one anartha that almost everyone agrees is bad, is anger.

Lust, materialistic people think that is good. You know, the more lust there is,
we will enjoy. Of course, they also have some limits. They do not, materialistic
people feel that, sex should be consensual, should not be forceable, whatever.
But they think lust is good.

Similarly, greed, people think, people may decorate greed by the title
ambition. You have to be ambitious.

But anger is something which almost everybody agrees. It is bad. Because often
anger makes a, makes us do things that make a problem, that create a bigger
problem than the original problem. Somebody has done something wrong and I speak
such things in effort of anger, and it breaks that person's heart. So first,
the whatever thing that was in that, that got broken, and the person's heart got
broken. So the problem becomes worse. So therefore, anger is something which
can be quite detrimental. And it is very dangerous also at times. And especially
when we are in devotee association, when we commit offenses by the effort of
anger, that can be very dangerous. Of course, if we have deep rooted malicious
intentions, if we somehow are envious of devotees, and we want to put them down,
and because of that, we speak wrong things. That is much worse. But if in the
heat of the moment sometimes, we just speak some thing, because we wanted to do
some service, and we are not able to do that because of the negligence of some
devotee, then that is excusable. That should not be repeated, but that is not a
serious off..., that is not a serious offense. Because offense primarily means
we have a harm causing mentality towards others.

So, now, what do we do with our anger? Actually, it can be expressed in
devotional service, but in a very regulated way. Srila Prabhupada normally gives
these three examples, but if you think about all the devotional literature that
is there, there are not many examples like this. And the important point is that
rather than focusing on how I can use anger, we should focus on that how I can
control anger because there is a very thin dividing line between whether I am
using anger in Krishna's service or anger is using me in maya's service. How do
we know the difference? Whether I am using anger in Krishna's service or anger
is using me in maya's service. Actually, it will, it will depend on two things,
one is the motivation and the second is effect, effect. The effect internally
will depend on the nature of the relationship and the situation in which we
became angry.

So first and foremost is, you know, if I become, many times when some things go
wrong, our anger is not so much because, oh, some service to Krishna got
disciplined. Our anger is because I was doing with the service and now my good
name will be spoiled. What will people think about me? So I, when we are more in
a mood of preserving our own name, and then we burst out on others, then the
Krishna element is very less. So, in general, it is good for devotees to avoid
anger. Hanumanji did become angry when Lord Rama was blasphemed, but at the end
of it, we see in Lanka, Hanuman starts lamenting. Hey, what did I do? You know,
in the feat of anger, he has burnt Lanka, and he looks around, and he sees
the whole, almost the whole of Lanka is ablaze, at least the area where
everybody is ... (?, 47:39) anythings. Has Sita also got burnt? What did I do?
What was I thinking that I got in the feat of rage? And the whole purpose for
which I came has been defeated because of my rushness. And he starts goading
himself for that. And at that time, a divine voice comes, do not worry, Sita is
fully safe. And he feels relief. But still, at that time, he speaks that anger is
very dangerous. We must be very careful over getting angry.

So, in general, if our motivation is not pure, then the anger can be very
counterproductive. And beyond that, consequence. Sometimes, I may say my
motivation is pure, but that does not mean the other person can take the anger.
The other person may still become devastated by that, and that person's
spiritual life may get shattered, or moral may get shattered, so we have to be
extremely careful when getting angry.

Srila Prabhupada would some time use the example that a person can show fangs,
but not bite. There is a story of Narada Muni, who preached to a snake, and the
snake became a devotee, and the snake stopped biting. But when it stopped
biting, others started biting, you know. So then, Narada Muni came and saw that
the snoke was injured, and the snake told him, its pity comment. So Narada Muni
said, yes, I told do not bite others, but that does not mean you cannot show
your fangs. You can show your fangs. That means, the point is, that sometimes we
have to speak assertively so that people take us seriously. Otherwise, if we are
always kind and gentle, it may happen that kind and gentleness, people start
exploiting us, pushing us around, not taking us seriously and doing all sorts of
things with us, which are basically exploitative. So at that time, we have to
take a firm stand. So taking a firm stand is not becoming angry. Because when
take a firm stand, it is we who are in control. When we become angry, it is
anger that is in control.

So whenever, so when anger comes in control, that means when we are speaking
something, we lose awareness of what we are speaking, and we just blast out
things, and then if some..., after somebody gives us a tape recorder of what we
have spoken, we hear it, then we are horrified. I spoke all those things, how
could I speak all those things?

So, if, if we lose control of ourselves by we are speaking, then it is most
likely that it is not that we are using anger in Krishna's service, it is maya
who is using us or it is anger who is using us in maya's service. Therefore, for
us as devotees, we should make it a principle in general that I will not become
angry. Because for us at the sadhaka stage to experience spiritual anger is
difficult. It will just be material anger and adust. And material anger can be
very very damaging for our spiritual life, in terms of our relationships. And,
so when we meditate on Krishna's fotus feet by, so, we can blaspheme... we can
direct anger against blasphemers. What does it mean to direct anger against
blasphemers? That does not mean that wherever we see a blasphemer, we just go
and start speaking all sorts of abusive words to the blasphemer, not at all.
Directing the anger to the blasphemers means that, we, in an intelligent, refute
their misconceptions. So again, even while dealing with atheists, while dealing
with blasphemers, we have to be in control. We have to be aware of what we are
doing, and act accordingly.

The Bhagavatam uses the example of daksha, of the yagna daksha, and basically
there was this curses and countercurses, and the whole yagna became an assembly
of devastation. It all started with daksha having an overestimation of his own
position, and so when Siva offered obeisances, he considered that as a put down,
and then he spoke a lot negatively about Siva, and then after that, Siva went
away, and then Siva's wife, Parvati came, and Parvati was disrespected, and when
Parvati was disrespected, then she committed suicide, and then Siva showed
angry. He sent Virabadra, and Virabadra to kill everyone over there, destroy
the, everything over there, by the sacrifice, then he killed Daksha Vijapati,
and manhandle of the many sages also were over there, priests rather who were
performing sacrifices.

So before, so all this was later, huge complications. When Brahmaji personally
had to go Lord Siva's abode and pacify him, but even before that, they were
countercursing and countercursing, when the Daksha Vijapati cursed Siva, and
the Siva's followers cursed the Brahmans, the Brahman cursed Siva's followers,
and what happened? Now, the point is not whether the anger was justified or
not. The point is whether the consequence was right or not. The consequence
became undesirable. Now, the followers of Siva were right in saying that, oh
actually, our spiritual master was blasphemed, we have to counter, yes, we have
to counter, now, you know, every devotional principle is integrated in a
framework of other devotional principles. We cannot take one principle in
isolation and applied.

See, ultimately, here, the most important devotional principle is that we
remember Krishna, and we help others to remember Krishna, and all of the
devotional principles are subordinate to that. So:

        smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇur
        vismartavyo na jātucit
        sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur
        etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ

That all rules and regulations are subordinate to this one principle that we
should always remember Krishna. Now, if I take this rule that we should not hear
the blasphemy of our spiritual master. That is true. But in the name of
responding to the blasphemy, I create, make the situation worse. And when I make
the situation worse, then there are curses and countercurses, and there are
further complications, and there is conflicts, and conflagrations and violence.
Then have I really served the purpose? It is not that we should be afraid of
conflicts and confrontations. But the point is we should, our goal should be,
ourselves go closer to Krishna, and help others to go closer to Krishna.

We cannot isolate any rule from the overall framework of rules that are given,
overall scriptural framework that is given. And the primary scriptural rule is
ehat we should always remember Krishna. So we should always react to all
situations, including blasphemy, in a way that is anikul to our rememberance of
Krishna. So when we direct our anger against atheists, that means that, we use
the passion, even the anger we could say for systematically and thoroughly
refuting their misconceptions. So, we use logic, arguments, see anger can
energise us, but rather than letting that energy go out of control, rather than
making that energy to take control of us, we channelise that energy so that we
vigorously, even vehemently, voraciously refute the misconceptions. And that
way, we will check the arrogance of the atheists and the blasphemers. And those
who are valorous, those who are sitting on the fence, they will see, ok,
these people, what they say makes sense, and they will come towards to Krishna.

So our goal is to remember Krishna ourselves and to help others come close to
Krishna. So atheists may not come close to Krishna, but at least, those who are,
who are under atheistic influence, those who may get affected by atheists, they
can come towards Krishna by our sharing of Krishna Consciousness in a vigorous
way. So in this way, the urge for anger needs to be controlled and then
channelised as vigor, and even vehemence, we could say, in our efforts to reach
out, to share Krishna Consciousness with others. This is how "vāco", "manasaḥ",
"krodha-vegaṁ" can be regulated.

Thank you. We will continue the remaining vegas in our next class. Hare Krishna.
Srila Prabhupada ki jaya.
