Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tcs0hJqz0Xw Audio:
https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=C_1mmGEoTHBhTfruMCHgBWMoEt18MTU0MTgzMDkwMkAxNTQxNzQ0NTAy&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_041_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_11_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=Tcs0hJqz0Xw&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction.

Today, we will be discussing the last verse. That is the eleventh verse. The
ninth and tenth verses we discussed, the topmost place and the topmost devotee.
Now, both these analyses are combined together to talk about both of them in
offering their combined through service of Radha-kunda. So, let us look at this
particular text. So, here, we will see, before we look at the text, let us look
at the translation of the verse.

	kṛṣṇasyoccaiḥ praṇaya-vasatiḥ preyasībhyo ’pi rādhā
	kuṇḍaṁ cāsyā munibhir abhitas tādṛg eva vyadhāyi
	yat preṣṭhair apy alam asulabhaṁ kiṁ punar bhakti-bhājāṁ
	tat premedaṁ sakṛd api saraḥ snātur āviṣkaroti

So, "kṛṣṇasyoccaiḥ", "occaiḥ" means high. So, kṛṣṇasyoccaiḥ", a very high object
of love for Krishna. "praṇaya-vasatiḥ", that object, "vasatiḥ" is vast, reside.
So, "praṇaya-vasatiḥ" is where Krishna's, where love resides, object of love.
"preyasībhyo", so "preyasī", "preyasī", "preyasī" means lovers. "ībhyo" means
among them. "preyasībhyo ’pi rādhā", so among all of Krishna's lovers, Radha is
the highest. "occaiḥ praṇaya-vasatiḥ".

"kuṇḍaṁ cāsyā", and her kunda, "munibhir abhitas tād", "munibhir abhitas", the
"munibhir" has stated, "muni" is feeling in all respects. "tādṛg eva", exists
similarly, "vyadhāyi", so the "muni" is described that just as Radha is the
topmost of the gopis, similarly, her kunda is the topmost among all places.

"yat preṣṭhair apy alam asulabhaṁ", "yat preṣṭhair", so "preṣṭhair",
"preṣṭhair", means the dear, most advanced dear, those who are most dear to
Krishna, those who are most advanced. So, for even the most advanced devotees,
"apy alam asulabhaṁ", it is difficult to obtain. "kiṁ punar bhakti-bhājāṁ", so
even for those who are advanced devotees, it is difficult to obtain this place,
then what to speak of those who are just engaging in devotional service.

"tat premedaṁ", that "prem", "sakṛd api saraḥ", that, that love of Godhead,
"saraḥ" is the river, "snātur", so one who bathes, "snātur", "snān", so one who
bathes in the holy place, "āviṣk...", "āviṣkaroti", it arouses. So, by, by, by
eating in that holy place arouses "premedaṁ sakṛd", that "premedaṁ", it, even
arouses that love, "sakṛd", even once, bathing.

Let us look at the translation:

"Of the many objects of favored delight and of all the lovable damsels of
Vrajabhumi, Srimati Radharani is certainly the most treasured object of
Krishna's love. And, in every respect, Her divine kunda is described by great
sages as similarly dear to Him. Undoubtedly Radha-kunda is very rarely attained
even by the great devotees; therefore it is even more difficult or ordinary
devotees to attain. If one simply bathes once within those holy waters, one's
pure love of Krsna is fully aroused."

Let us look at the overview of the text. We will see that what is the specialty
of Radha-kunda? So, serving Radha-kunda is the theme of this verse. It is not
just bathing in Radha-kunda or living in Radha-kunda. It is serving Radha-kunda.
So, why, why Radha-kunda? Because it belongs to Radharani, who is the most
beloved gopi. She is as dear, and that place, Radha-kunda, is as dear to Krishna
as Radharani himself, herself. And there are unlimited glories. You know, with
the sacredness of it can cast, castly comprehended by us. And it is very rare to
attain. Let us look at these points one by one.

The scriptures extol the glories of God and those associated with God. Now, when
we hear those glories, we sometimes may think that, what, how do we make sense
of this? So, that is through service. You know, when we go to Radha-kunda, it is
not to just see with our eyes. In fact, going to holy dham is not for
sightseeing purposes. It is for purifying, for the purposes of purification.
When we purify ourselves, then the spiritual vision will awaken, and then we
will be able to see. We discussed in our earlier class how text, scriptural
description, plus sensory perception, then it is a, the, complemented with inner
spiritual revelation. That helps us to see the dham actually. So, until then,
until that spi..., spiritual revelation happens, we go to dham primarily for
purification.

So, when we talk about Radha-kunda, attitude has to be of service. And in the
Bhakti-Rasamrta-Sindhu quotes a Puranic verse, it is said:

        ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi
        na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ
        sevonmukhe hi jihvādau
        svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

"ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi", the name, and anything of Krishna, "na bhaved grāhyam
indriyaiḥ", that the gross senses cannot understand, cannot, they are not
perceived into the gross senses. "sevonmukhe hi jihvādau", when we serve
Krishna, becoming the bitter tongue, "ādau", "ādau" is beginning with "jihvā".
And what do we do? "sevonmukhe", so we are all currently "vi-mukhe" from
Krishna, "mukhe" is phase. "vi" is "varudha rupena". So, Krishna is there, right
next to us in our heart. But our heart, we have, we have turned away. We have
become "vi-mukhe" from Krishna. So, because we are seeing away from Krishna, we
are seeing material things instead of spiritual. So, right now, we cannot
perceive the spiritual, when, even when it manifests in the material world. Our
vision is glued, revetted, locked in the material. So, therefore, we need to
free it. And the way to free it is by service. By ser..., rendering service to
Krishna with our material senses, with our material mind and intelligence, with
our material talents, and trying to invest as much of our heart, of
consciousness as possible in it, we become purified. So, "sevonmukhe", so
when Krishna sees that we are trying to turn towards Him, then "svayam eva", by
His own free will, "sphuraty adaḥ", He reveals Himself to us. "sphuraty",
"sphuraty" means spontaneous remembrance. So, Krishna gives us spontaneous
remembrance to us by His own free will. When He sees that we are sincerely
trying to serve Him. And then our consciousness which becomes unglued,
unrevetted, unlocked from matter. And then we are able to perceive spiritual
reality.

So, service is very important even when we go to Radha-kunda. Sometimes, people
think that just by going to a place like Radha-kunda, we become spiritually
advanced. And that is why people sometimes are very eager to stay in
Radha-kunda. And then when they tell others that, oh, I am staying in
Radha-kunda. Oh, you are so fortunate, so advanced. You have lived in the holy
place, most sacred place. So, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur did not entertain
such pretentiousness. He said that for people who live in Radha-kunda, but who
have not controlled their senses, and especially if they are given into immoral
activities at Radha-kunda, then that same Radha-kunda can become Nara-kunda for
them. So, instead of taking them Radharani, the immoral activities, if somebody
does over there, that can have disastrous results. That can take one to
Nara-kunda.

So, generally, sinful activities are bad. But sinful activities performed at a
holy place, they are even worse. And sinful activities, performed at a holy
place, while one is pretending to be a holy person, they are the worst. You
know, anybody performing sinful activities anywhere is bad. But so, if somebody
goes to a holy place and performs sinful activities, that is much worse. But if
somebody is externally acting as a very advanced devotee, and at that time,
doing immoral activities, Radha-kunda, that is extremely grievously monstrously
sinful. And the results of that will be, also be very grave. Of course, as
sadhakas, we are not just paranoid about karmic reactions, our greater fear is
that we do not want to displease Krishna. We do not want to displease our
spiritual master, and the vaishnavas, and the spiri..., and Srila Prabhupada.
That is why we avoid sinful activities. But we have to remember also that there
are consequences for our actions.

So, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur jolts us out of our devotional fantasy that
just going to Radha-kunda will be something wonderful. Yes, it can be, but it
has to be proper consciousness. Otherwise, improper consciousness can make
Radha-kunda into Nara-kunda for us. So, actually, it is not just a, this is not
something theoretical. It has unfortunately happened in our Sampradaya that
there are people who somehow pervertedly claim that the pastimes of Radha and
Krishna are not just to be contemplated, and contemplated only in the most
advanced stages of devotion. They think that those pastimes a..., are to
actually be enacted. And who will be enacted? We will enact it.

So, generally, there are different approaches in spirituality. So, the Vedantic
approach is, the U..., especially the Upanishad approach is, separate matter and
spirit. This is matter. This is spirit. So, reject matter and focus on spirit.
That focus on meditation, contemplation, analysis, and then discrimination, and
rejection of matter. So, that is one way. Now, the bhakti way is to use matter
for the service of spirit, and therefore to utilise the spirit. So, in bhakti,
we use various material things in the service of Krishna. And by such service of
Krishna, we become purified. We become gradually elevated. H..., H..., While we
are doing this, there is a danger that not all matter can be used in Krishna's
service. Certain matter can entangle us. And that is why we have to be cautious,
very cautious. They say, the point is yukta vairagya, Rupa Goswami says. That
renunciation is important only when we have some vairagya, then we can do yukta.
We can actually engage it in Krishna's service. So, there are, that is why,
although we say matter can be used in Krishna's service, but we still have
regulative principles. And certain forms of activities are to be given up
because they will con..., drag us down. We will not be able to do them, and go
to Krishna, towards them.

However, there is, apart from the bhakti tradition, there is another tradition,
which is tantra tradition, say, left-hand tantra. So, deity worship is called
as right-hand tantra. Right-hand tantra is auspicious. Left-hand tantra is
widely considered as inauspicious. You know, Devi Vidyabhusana talks about, within
the Bhagavad Gita, in the si..., sixteenth chapter, he talks about asuci-vratah,
unclean vows. So, in this left-hand tantra, now, it is actually, a, a huge
deviation from sc..., whatever is there in the Vedic tradition. And even the
Vedic tradition, what is given, is for people who are very much in tama-guna.
Right-hand tantra is deity worship. Krishna manifests through matter and allows
us to worship Him and serve Him. So, in left-hand tantra, and similarly, Krishna
manifests also as the dasavataras. And He allows us to remember Him and those
who were there at that time to see Him, to interact with Him. And in that way,
we can turn towards Him. So, le..., left-hand tantra, their idea is that any
matter can be used in Krishna's service. And, this is a very distorted
understanding which has been thoroughly rejected by the Vaishnava acharyas. The
idea is that actually matter, everything that is there in this world is simply
the dance of matter and spirit. So, matter is considered to be prakrti and
spirit is purusha. And the purusha is considered to be Siva. And matter is
considered to be Shakti. So, there is, their whole idea is that whole of 
creation is the dance of Shiva and Shakti. And the, their idea is in the tantra
is, it is a very distorted idea that by the union of Shiva and Shakti, spiritual
realisation comes aboard. So, these people have the idea that by engaging in
sex. Sex is basically their equivalence is that Shiva and Sha..., Pa..., Shiva
and Shakti are entering into us. And when we are engaging into these activities,
they are enjoying through us.

Now, our body is our material. Our body is our filled with false substances. And
this is just a distorted idea. So, people think, so they, they do sinful
activities and then they say that this is actually religious. And some, although
this idea has been strongly rejected by Vaishnava acharyas, in, sometimes in
Gaudiya, in history, this came into Vaishnavism also. And some people started
saying that when we perform the pa..., when we do rasa-lila, actually Krishna is
entering into us, and Radharani into, the gopis are entering into these women
and we are performing pastimes. So, Prabhupada would say this is not rasa-lila.
This is rascal-lila. So, this is just very very degraded conception. And now,
there is an understanding that, for example when, some, generally in Vraja,
there are there some dramas. Children perform the dramas. So, some small
children will be dressed as Krishna. Some will be dressed as, as, dressed as
Radharani and the gopis. And they perform rasa-lila. And it is said, and at that
time, when those children are devotionally trained, and they are devotionally
inclined, they are devotionally cultured, then during the time of the pastime,
those children are often treated like Radha and Krishna only.

So, the idea is, at that time, when the rasa-lila is performed, Radha Krishna,
they are so happy to see this pastime happening that they themselves manifest.
And the people who watch these pastimes, they become transported to a higher
level of reality, by remembrance of Krishna through those, through the watching
of those pastimes. So, generally speaking, in such pastimes, there are only
males. Even the gopis are played by small children. Sometimes, if there are, the
children are very s..., not very small. Then, sometimes, girls might be there.
But that dancing is purely ecstatic. And there is nothing more than that. And
there is nothing immoral around holy that is ever allowed in such things. So,
some devotees in the early days of ISKCON went to Vrindavan, saw this happening,
and they decided we will do this also. So, when Srila Prabhupada was in San
Francisco, then in Los Angeles, one of those two places, so then when Prabhupada
said, we are going to do, Prabhupada, tomorrow, we are going to do a drama
tomorrow. And then they said that, so two devotees had to dress as Radha and
Krishna. And when they dressed as Radha and Krishna, all the other devotees
started, came to start offering obeisances, other devotees start doing aarti of
them.

And Prabhupada sat very quietly, did not speak anything. But he saw, watched the
whole drama. Then, he went. And the next day in the morning, Bhagavatam class,
Prabhupada said, we should not do this. He said, you know, like, this can take us
in the wrong direction, and we should not do in ISKCON. So, certain people may
perform some aartis and things like that. But we should not start worshipping
those people. It is possible that Krishna manifests some amisha of his bhava so
that the pa..., drama can happen effectively. But Srila Prabhupada said that
this can take us in a wrong direction. And that is, we do not want imitation of
the exalted pastimes. So, our acharyas have, time and time again, cautioned us
against this.

So, Radha-kunda has tremendous potency, but it also requires tremendous purity.
Otherwise, if you go there with impure hearts, we can be dragged down. This
unfortunately happened many times. And that is why our acharyas are very
cautious that we have the proper consciousness when we go to Radha-kunda. Srila
Prabhupada even went once at the extreme of saying, do not be the Radha-kunda if
you are going to be frivulous, So, Prabhupada was so cautious that leave alone
immoral activities, even just casual swimming, and tossing of water, and playing
in the water of Radha-kunda. Prabhupada has fed that it is inappropriate. So, of
course, Prabhupada did not want an all time ban on the bathing of Radha-kunda.
You know, Srila Prabhupada's words have authorities, you know, in hierarchy. So,
in the front matter of vedabase, Jayadvaita Maharaja explains that, this is
generally understood by all ISKCON sch..., scholars that, you know, Prabhupada
has, Prabhupada's vani has come to us in four ways. There is his purports, which
are the most universal, which he put time, thought, and he wrote the notes. And
then there are his lectures, which he gave. They are a little bit more
contextual spoken to the people who are there at that time. Then there are the
conversations which he had with a group of people at various times. And there
are letters which he wrote to various disciples.

Now, everything that the spiritual master, that Prabhupada has spoken is
valuable, but still they have a hierarchy because the letters are most context
dependent. They are written for a particular person. Conversations are little
more, little less context dependent, and a group of people, assume there is a
context. Lectures are also contextual. You know, purports are among these the
most universal. But Srila Prabhupada considered his purports the most important
contribution, the legacy that he was leaving for posterity.

So, now, when we look at this hierarchy, Srila Prabhupada in one conversation
told devotees do not bathe in Radha-kunda. But he has told repeatedly, in
purports like this, and that is mentioned in the, gu..., guru guru, by sastra,
and sadhus, the glorious Radha-kunda. So, it is not that we have to take the
advanced statement out of context and absolutise a ban for ISKCON devotees in
bathing in Radha-kunda. But at the same time, we have to take that one statement
seriously and understand that we cannot be casual. We cannot be frivolous about
that which is precious, an opportunity to actually bathe in Radha-kunda. So,
now, now it is said here that even by one's bathing, one will gain love of
Krishna. So, we may say I will go and bathe over there. I will go and bathe over
there. Will in and of that itself give us love for Krishna? We have to
understand that in scriptures, whenever anything is spoken, there is value to
it. There is potency to it. But at the same time, in real life, it is one
principle alone that applies. There are multiple principles that come together.
This happens even in law. You know, for example, if one person kills another
person. That is considered to be murder. But if one person kills another person,
and that happens into, happens to be in a war. And that other person is the
enemy soldier, then this person may get a war for doing that.

Or if one person kills another person. And then the person who is killing
happens to be a thief, and the person who is in the house is trying to protect
the house, that is a different situation. Or if that person who is killed as a
person who is trying to molest a woman, and the person who kills the woman in
defense of her chastity, then that is also very different situation. So, there
is one rule that one principle that if you kill, you have to be punished. But
there can be so many other circumstances which also have to be taken into
consideration. So, in real life, it is very rare that one law, which is made in
the law course will map into reality as it is. So, the mapping of law onto
reality involves taking into account the circumstances. And those circumstances
bring into picture other factors. There may be other laws also.

Then, so, similarly, the scriptural statements are two. The law is true. But now
just because A kills B, then B should be hang, say. A shou..., A kills B. Then A
should be hang. That is the law, say. Then, but still, not every time in the
court, A will be hanged for that because there are other factors which the court
will take into consideration. So, similarly, the scriptures give us promises.
The scriptures talk about the glories of certain holy places. And those holy
places, those glories are definitely there. The potency is there, but along
with, there are other factors. So, now, why is it that Jiva Goswa..., Rupa
Goswami here is talking about this bathing of Radha-kunda, bathing in
Radha-kunda only in the eleventh verse? If just by bathing in Radha-kunda, one
can develop love for Krishna, then he does not have to write the full
Upadesamrta at all. He can just write one statement, go and bathe in
Radha-kunda. And he make it repeated in eleven verses. Go and bathe in
Radha-kunda. Go and bathe in Radha-kunda. Go and bathe in Radha-kunda. He does
not do that. He gives a whole series of text, vaishnava, very profound wisdom.
And that series of text is actually helping us move forward progressively, one
by one by one by one, and to come to the understanding of what Radha-kunda is.
So, through all those verses, we become purified by applying that main
instruction, the "upadeśa" given in the Upadesamrta's previous verses, we become
purified.

And after the, we have, we have purified, we have devotionally prepared in our
consciousness, we may bathe in Radha-kunda and then we become stimulated,
energised, electrified with love of Krishna, "āviṣkaroti" as the verse says. So,
there is a process that has to be followed. So, Rupa Goswami does not just put
this at one place arbitrarily. He said, climax of the whole book. So that means,
yes, the Radha-kunda has the potency. But at the same time, there are other
principles which also apply. And when we understand those principles and apply
those principles, then we can actually get the full benefit. So, therefore,
these promises are not exaggerations. At the same time, they, we cannot use
those pre..., promises as bargaining chips, to demand from Krishna. Say, I
have bathed, now I must get love of God. No. That demanding attitude is
antithetical to devotion. In fact, it is, it is, it will bury our devotion in
the graveyard if we have the demanding attitude. So, we have to have a ha...,
submissive, in fact, begging attitude. And that begging attitude coupled with a
systematic process of purification, will eventually enable us to relish the
glories of the Ra..., Radha-kunda. And by bathing there instead devotional
attitude, we will awaken love of God, love of Krishna as it is described.

So, let us move forward and discuss the aspect of madhurya bhakti in terms of
what it is. So, we said that, you know, Radha Ku..., Radha-kunda is so exalted.
Now, why is it so exalted? Because Radharani is so exalted. Now, why is
Radharani so exalted? Because she has the highest love for Krishna. And now,
what exactly is the nature of the love of Radharani and Krishna? And how is that
love different from the, entirely different from the mora..., immorality that
goes on in male-female relationships in this world? There is, at, at level,
sensuality, and sometimes there is, when immorality that goes on. So what is
that exactly? How do we understand it? So, first and foremost, like we discussed
in the earlier class, we have to learn through spiritual vision, based on
scriptural understanding, s..., that we should not see Radha Krishna just as
males and females. We should see them as devotees and the Lord. When we see them
with this vision, then we focus on the devotional interactions, not on the, not
on what we may easily mistake as sensual. So, whatever is present in this world
is in its original and pure form present in the spiritual world. Of course,
there are many, as I said, ma..., o..., the original and pure is present in the
spiritual world. So, there may be much in this world which can, which will be
distorted. Which will be perverted. And that is not present in this, in the
spiritual world. So, what is present in the spiritual world is pure. And it is
transcendental. But at the same time, it is present.

So, now, what, what do we mean by this that the Bhagavad Gita says this material
world is a reflection of the spiritual world? So, throughout the various
spiritual traditions of the world, various great traditions of the world, it is
told that the male-female attraction is potentially dangerous. And one has to be
careful, otherwise this attraction can drag away from the spiritual path. At the
same time, the world's other religious traditions do not give any explanation
of where this male-female attraction comes from. Why is it there here in this
world? That is unfortunately not explained. So, because of that, it is just,
yes, this is a temptation and you have to keep it under regulation through
marriage. And beyond that, nothing more. And that is all there is. So, it is
like a fiat. You have to follow this. But there is no philosophical, logical
explanation of why this is present at all. So, the, only in the Vedic tradition,
the spiritual reality is revealed in its extraordinary s..., flender and flavor.

So, in that splendor and flavor of the spiritual reality. It is expla..., it is
explained that the relationship we have in the world are present in their
original and pure form. So, God manifests in male form as Krishna. And actually
Radharani is God himself manifesting in a female form.

        rādhā-kṛṣṇa eka ātmā, dui deha dhari'

Radha and Krisna are one person. "dui deha dhari'", they manifest as two.

        anyonye vilase kari'

For what purpose? For the purpose of reciprocating love.

        anyonye vilase kari'

So when they reciprocate love like this, what is the purpose of reciprocating
love? It is "vilase". By reci..., they g..., they get great joys, supreme joy by
it. So why does Krishna manifest one as two? Because through that, he
reciprocates love. And the love that he reciprocates is not because of his sense
of incompleteness. You know, in this world, a man feels incomplete without a
woman. A woman feels incomplete without a man. Of course, when hear in this
world, when two incompletes come together, they do not become complete. They do
not become incomplete square. Why? Because you know, they are themselves small
parts. They have to unite with the supreme whole that is Krishna. So that then,
they will become complete. But that does not happen. Of course, if the complete
is in the, the whole is in the center, then things are much better. But still,
that is not the relationship that is here, is lasting, that is eternal. So, we
want a relationship with Krishna. So, that is what will satisfy the heart
completely.

And to get to that relationship, we need to have proper philsophical and
scriptural understanding. So, scriptures describe that Krishna, when He forms
relationsh..., when He formed relationship, it is not because of any sense of
incompleteness. It is because He wants to share His completeness. He wants to
share His completeness. Just as person who is filled with happiness. We want to
go and do something, not in order to become happy, but to share that happiness,
to delight in that happiness. So, this raises a fu..., fundamental question. Why
does God do anything at all? You know, God if is perfect and complete, as we
discussed in Isopanishad. And why does God have to do anything? So, that is why
in the western tradition, there are, there are theologists, like there are many
Greek philo..., Geek, m..., many philosophers, they had their own theology,
conception of God. And they said their idea was that God should be like a frozen
perfection.

Frozen perfection means that, you know, when somebody is making a painting. So,
at that time, slowly as the painting is being made, the image comes up. And in,
as the painting comes closer and closer to perfection, to its zenith, and the
painting becomes more and more beautiful. But a particular point, the painting
becomes excellent. Now, one dab less and the painting is not so good. And one
dab more, and again the painting is not so good. That the painting has to be
stopped at a particular point. And when in the painting is frozen at that point,
then the painting is perfect. So, their idea was if God was perfect, then if He
does anything, then, the, why would He want to do anything? Because we do
something, because we want something. So, then, God, if He does something, He
will become imperfect. But God is not imperfect. God is perfect. So, therefore,
He will not do anything. Because He does not need to do anything. And if He does
something, that doing something will make Him imperfect. Therefore, their idea
is God will not do anything. And therefore, God has to be like a frozen
perfection. A frozen perfection means that God is just perfect, eternally
perfect, and He does not do anything. Now, such a conception of perception may
be theoretically correct, but it is practically unsound. And it is actually
emotionally unappealing. You know, God who is, forever stands in the perfect
pose, and that is all He does. How, how attractive will be, will it be to live
eternally with such a God? Yes, God is all attractive and we can live eternally
with Him like that also. But what about God's perspective? Is God meant to do
nothing, but stand in a perfect pose for all of eternity?

No. The Vedic scriptures understa..., exp..., understand that, actually the
perfection of God, is in a some, entirely different sense. It is the perfection
of love. And love, by itself, involves reciprocation. And there is dynamism in
love. We do something for the beloved. The beloved does something for us. And in
that reciprocation, there is joy. And the perfection of love is when everything
else freezes. So that love can go. Just like, sometimes in the movie, they show,
when a boy looks at a girl, and look, girl looks at a boy, and they say, they
say their love is first sight. And what happens? They look at each other and
they forget the whole world. They are lost in each other's eyes. So, of course,
this is at a material level, it is fanciful, but the point is we understand what
is love. When there is love, then everything else freezes. That is the
perfection of love. In fact, the perfection of love is even greater. Not only
does everything else freeze, the perfection of love will be when everything else
contributes to the intensification of the love. Everything else contributes to
the heightening, to the sweeting, to the deeping of the love. And that is what
happens in the spiritual world, in Krishna's abode. And what ha..., what,
everything in Goloka Vrindavan contributes to Krishna's all-attractiveness, not
just Krishna's all-attractiveness, but Krishna's all loving nature, not just His
all loving nature, to His all loving pastimes.

So, everything that Krishna does, everything that happens, everything that
everyone does, it is all meant to add to the intensity of the love of Krishna
and His devotees. So, when Krishna acts, it is not because of any
incompleteness. It is to share and relish the completeness of love. So, that is
the meaning of the word lila. Lila means that Krishna performs pastimes for the
sake of, lila, some, Prabhupada translates it pastimes, some people sta...,
translate it as play, some pe..., translate it love play. But the point is lila
means it is entirely voluntarily. And it is performed for the sake of joy. So,
Ramanujacharya gives the example in his Sri Bhasya, his commentary on the
Vedanta Sutra that why will the Absolute Truth have to act at all? So, he says
the reason is why the Absolute Truth acts, does any actions, is tha..., is that,
this, this sort of actions are recreation. So, they are like a person who has
his job, he works, and then after that, he comes back, he may do some krida. He
will do some play. So, that is a lila. That person is not obliged to do that
play. But a place for the sake of enjoyment. So, when Krishna, when the Supreme
Lord performs pastimes, that is a lila. That is le..., cre..., done voluntarily.
There is no obligation. When the scripture say:

        na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate

That there is nothing to be done by the Absolute Truth. That means it is all
done for the sake of love. So, when we look further and deeper into this
analogy, Baladeva Vidyabhusana and Govinda Bhasya says actually this exa...,
this example is good, but it is not perfect. Because even when a person plays,
that play is done for some purpose. That is to enjoy. So, the play is done, ok,
now I have done my work, and now I come back, and enjoy. I want to do something
that will g..., and then I will enjoy. So, then the person starts playing. So,
playing is done to enjoy. But the Absolute Truth is Himself filled with joy. He
does not have to do anything to get enjoyment. Like the person plays to get
enjoyment. So, he says, a better example is dancing. You know, that person is
overflooded with happiness. And when the person is overflooded with happiness,
that person just jumps, hands up, jumps and starts dancing. Now, dancing is not
for the purpose of happiness. Dancing is the result of happiness. So, similarly,
in the case of the Absolute Truth, the lila that is performed, is not for the
purpose of happiness. It is the result of happiness. So, Krishna is filled with
so much love, so much joy, atma rama. He is self-satisfied. But that joy wants
to overflow. Just like when a person is happy, the person is, is happy already,
but wants to express that happiness. So when Krishna performs pastimes, it is
not out of any incompleteness. It is not to relish incompletene..., it is not to
gain some completeness, to move from incomplete to complete. But it is to relish
the completeness by sharing that completeness.

So, that Absolute Truth, Krishna manifests as Radharani. And Krishna and
Radharani together, they are God in male form, and God in female form. And they
perform pastimes. So, it is Krishna is relishing with His own expansion. But
actually, the go..., gopis, various gopis, are called as, the expansions of
Krishna, they are called as para kaya vyuha. Para kaya vyuha means that they are
the expansions in separate forms of Kri..., Radharani. So, they are expansions
of Radharani who is an expansion of Krishna. Of course, that, there is a
difference in tattva, but still the point is that they had ultimately meant for
Krishna's pastimes. And they reciprocate love with Krishna. And they delight in
that. So, this has nothing to do with the body based, material co..., materially
motivated worldly love that we see in this, at the sensual level here. It is
simply the Absolute Truth relishing at a transcendental level. And when the
Absolute Truth relishes in this way, the important point is that the Absolute
Truth is, He, simply acting out of selfless love. You see, the Absolute Truth
does not need anything from anyone. Although in the spiritual realm, there is
yoga maya. And that yoga maya makes things happen in such a way that everything
seems to be the sweetness of love being reciprocated and for that sake,
whatever is required is done. So, Krishna can forget his divinity for the sake
of love.

And the gopis can forget that Krishna is God for the sake of love. And in this
way, there can be a systematic reciprocation of love. So, now, to heighten this
love further, there is further excitement. So, when I said Krishna and gopis can
forget Krishna's divinity, that means that the gopis, when yesterday we
discussed how they saw Vishnu, that he, Vishnu is God, earlier we discussed
that. They offered obeisances. They asked where is Krishna. Because they think
Krishna, not as God. They think of Krishna as our beloved. We want to love Him.
We want to serve Him. We want to be with Him. That is their longing. So, when
they act in this way, there, they are aware of Krishna's Godhood, but that
awareness has gone to the background of their consciousness. And in the
foreground of their consciousness is simply the intense, immense, intolerable
longing to be with Krishna. And this is the perfection of love. As I said, the
perfection of love is when everything else that will distract from love is
forgotten. So, in the case of Krishna, everything else, including His Godhood is
forgotten, so that the love can be intensified. And that love reaches its
climax. And then the climax is further. And then the climax is further. And that
goes on for all of eternity.

When Krishna and Radharani, of course, along with all the gopis, perform
pastimes, so their, their love is entirely pure, entirely spiritual, entirely
selfless. And it is the most cherished aspiration for us sadhakas. Now, whatever
we are attracted in this world, those emotions are shadow and shallow as
compared to the vibrant, potent originals of which these are just sparks. So,
the Vedic scriptures help us understand that when we have male-female attraction
here, this male-female attraction has to be given up because this is a
reflection. And there is a reality. You know, when I see a good-looking mango
and somebody says do not eat it. Why? You know, I may protest. It is mango. Let
me eat it. No, do not eat it. There, if I am just told, do not eat it, then all
that will happen, I will think that person is telling me, do not eat it, that
person kills joy. That person spoils. But it is a nice mango, eat it, and enjoy
man. What is this? But if somebody explains to me, actually, here, there is a
reverb. And what we are seeing actually is not a mango. It is a reflection. When
we look up from there, we see there is a land over there. On that, there is a
tree. And on that tree, there is vrajas and muzzles over there. There is the
real mango. You can relish that mango. If you go after this, you will simply
break your head. You will never get the mango. But you go up, climb up the tree,
reach that mango, and you eat that. You will enjoy. Make sense? Yes. Then I
will agree. Now, ok, I do not want this mango. I want that.

So, like that, if people just tell us, I have male form. Someone else has female
form. I like that person. He will like. That person likes me. Enjoy. What is
wrong? No. You are not meant to enjoy. So, why? You said, you spoil spot. But
no. Yes. We can have male-female relationship, within a sacred, within sacred
limits of dharma. But these are not going, this is not the real mango.
Actually, the male-female attraction in this world is a reflection of the
original male-female attraction that is there in Krishna, spiritual world.
And that is not actually just a male-female attraction, that is a devotee Lord
interaction. And the devotee Lord attraction is manifested in its highest
expression in the Lord manifesting in a male form, and the devotee manifesting
in a female form.

But this, it is essentially spiritual. And that v..., vi..., that potent love is
what is real mango, and we are meant to aspire for. So, when the scriptures,
when they reveal to us the reality and then show us, this is the reflection,
then we can give the reflection and move towards the reality. So, it is this
reality that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to give us. And, we, because
Radharani's love for Krishna is supremely exalted, that is why it is considered
to be the highest.

Now, within the various madhuri rasas that are there, you know, there is the
love of Lakshmi Devi for Narayan. There is a love of Sita for Lord Rama. There
is a love of Rukmini Devi for Dwarka Desh. Among all these forms of conjugal
love, the love of Radharani for Krishna is considered the highest. Now, all of
these are supreme, but the love of Radharani for Krishna is highest because it
is not swakiya. It is parakiya. So, swakiya means one's own, so in the other
relationships, the two are married to each other. Because they are married to
each, it is there is a right. There is position over there. And therefore it
becomes swakiya. Now, parakiya means that actually for the sake of
intensification of love, everything else is put aside. Everything else is f...,
for..., is subordinated. So, and whatever will intensify the love is provided.

So, now, the love becomes more exciting, more fascinating, more captivating,
when there are obstacles in the love. So, imagine that there are man and
woman, who are married to each other. But then they play, they participate in a
drama. And in that drama, they are not spouses. They are paramours. So, in
reality, they are spouses. But within the drama, they paramours. So, their
relationship within the drama is, seems to be, is illicit. So, actually, the
relationship of Radha and Krishna is like that. You know, they are eternally, as
I said earlier, they are the same Lord, on, one Lord, who has manifested as two.
So, they eternally belong to each other. So, there is, there is in that sense
nothing immoral in their relationship. But in Goloka Vrindavan, for the sake of
intensification of lila, what is done is they act as paramours. So, Radha and
Krishna, it appears as if they are not united by wedlock. They are, their
relationship is outside of wedlock. And by that, it appears as if it is immoral.
But this is done just for the sake of drama. And what is the purpose of the
drama? That heightens the excitement. That intensifies the love.

So, the idea is, the Vedic scriptures tell us that for sake of love, ev..., for
the sake of God, everything should be given. For the sake of God, everything
should be given up. So, now, we will understand that there are, at an intimate
level, at a logical level, that we should give up sin for the sake of God. So,
yes. We follow the regulative principles. And all the religions have some rules
and regulations which forbid sinful activities at some level. So, giving up the
bad for the sake of God, is good. It is essential. But actually, we have to give
up not only the bad, but also the good for the sake of God. Then that
demonstrates the purity of our love for God.

So, first we give up the bad. And then we become good for the sake of God. But
then for the sake of God, we give up the good also. Now, when we give up the
good for the sake of God, that do..., that does not mean that we, de.., descend
down to bad. No. That means we raise above the good to the level of the godly.
Now, how does that happen? That happens when the devotee transcends morality for
the sake of devotion. So, g..., Krishna th..., tells us when He says in, in, in
the Bhagavad Gita.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

He says give up everything for my sake. Give up everything for my sake. So, even
give up dharma. That means give up the good for my sake also. So, giving up the
good for my sake means that even in morality is there. For my sake, you should
give up morality. So, the gopis, when Radharani and the gopis, when it appears
as if they are married to someone else, but they act as if, they, they act out
of love for Krishna, then this whole setting demonstrates:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya

It demonstrates how they are ready to give up everything for the sake of
Krishna. And e..., for woman, for woman, her chastity is considered, you know,
the most priced thing. But then the gopis demonstrate that they are ready to
give that up. Actually, they do not give that up. They are supremely chaste to
Krishna. But within this world, when they give it up, they demonstrate:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya

So, they, when they give up dharma, they do not become adharma, adharmi. They
give up lower dharma for the sake of higher dharma. So, therein, this is the
demonstration of the purity of their love that they are ready to give up
everything, even dharma, for the sake of Krishna. And in this way, they
demonstrate their supreme love, be ready to give up everything for Krishna. So,
this setting of parkriyas demonstrates the supremecy of love. It demonstrates
how, in the spiritual world, love remains supreme. Krishna conceives His
divinity. And the gopis sacrifice their chastity. And all this is so that love
can rein supreme. Love can rain supreme. That is the spiritual world. And it is
this sublime love of Radharani, Krishna, which is demonstrated in many intimate
pastimes in Vrindavan, and especially in Radha-kunda.

So, the obstacles to love in the spiritual world are not for the sake of, are
not because there are an, an, any anti-devotional factor, forces of factors in
the spiritual world. Everything there is meant to intensify their love. And even
the obstacles are meant to intensify the love. Just like an elephant is very
strong. It has huge strength. But when the elephant is shackled by strong
shackles. And the elephant is very attracted to something and wants to go there.
Then when the elephant finds, wants to go and it is shackled. So at that time,
the elephant pulls, pulls, pulls. And then the elephant pulls, then the
elephant, there is internal realisation and external impression of the strength.
The strength is there in the elephant. But there is internal realisation when
there are obstacles, and the elephant is shackled, say, is tied by very strong
ropes, or strong chains to a big tree. And the elephant pulls with all its
strength. So, the elephant is, elephant, normally, if the shackle is, it says,
oh, why cannot I go there? But when it is, get, it gets some good-looking, very
good-looking food, or something very attractive and wants to go there. Then
it pulls. And then finally, the whole tree starts shaking. Then, f..., then, oh,
I am so strong. I can shake this tree. So, there is internal realisation of the
strength. And then there is also external expression. People ask, oh, this
elephant is so strong. It can shake them, uproot the tree also.

So, similarly, Kri..., the love of the gopis for Krishna is unparallel. It is
immense. But when there are external obstacles there, when there are obstacles
in that love, then there is, there is internal realisation of that love. And
there is external expression of that love. They understand that, oh, this love
is so great that, you know, we are ready to give up everything for Krishna's
sake. And when the world sees how selfless the love of the gopis us.

So, that is this love, that is the sacred gift that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has
brought for the world. And that Srila Prabhupada g..., has given us through the
Krishna Consciousness movement. And Rupa Goswami is pointing us to that love.
So, it is that which we aspire for. And by living according to Upadesamrta, and
bathing in, in Radha-kunda in this consciousness, we can attain that love.

Let us look at the remaining purport. So, Bhaktivinoda Thakur therefore writes,
so we discussed some of the unlimited glories. And we say Radha-kunda can be
rarely attained. That means that it has to be attained in the proper
consciousness. And that consciousness takes efforts to attain. Then, who can
serve in Radha-kunda? Bhaktivinoda Thakur writes that those interested in
advanced devotional service. And they have to follow in the rein, you know, wake
of sakhis and manjaris. These are all devotees who have exalted level of
selfless love for Krishna, as we discussed. And this love of Radha Krishna is so
exalted that it is very difficult to understand. But we can understand when we
are under the protection of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He, through Rupa Goswami
and through the parampara, has given us a pathway to understand this. And most
importantly, we should be eager to go back to Godhead. If somebody is happy just
eating the reflected mango, then that person will not be looking at the other
mango only, real mango.

And then similarly, this is a theme which is being talked about again and again
by acharyas. What does Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvari Thakur write? He says that
Radha-kunda is so great that what to speak of ordinary devotees, even great
devotees, like Naraka..., Narada or Sanaka, they find it difficult to attain
Radha-kunda. So, only the greatly fortunate can attain it. And this attainment,
as we discussed, is actually spiritual.

So, pro..., how should we serve Radha-kunda? By bathing as many times as
possible. And it is the most important form of devotional service. In bhakti,
there can be many most importants also. There are many perfects. So, as many
times as possible means if we go, get an opportunity to go to Radha-kunda, then
we can in bathe. But the important thing is, we also have to live our rest, rest
of our lives, so we cultivate the right mood by which we can bathe and benefit
from there. And that is what Prabhupada talks about. We have to, I have to give
up material conceptions. What are those material conceptions? Not just I am the
body. But also to think that Radha and Krishna, their pastimes are material.
That is also material conception.

Now, residing, we serve under serving maids in loving service of the Lord. So,
so, now, we, when we are in Kri..., Krishna Consciousness movement, we are also
serving the spiritual master. And we are serving the guru parampara. And that
way, we are preparing our consciousness to eventually become purified, return to
the spiritual world. That is the result there is so for. The result that we will
get is the pure love of Krishna in the wake of the gopis. Just as they were
selfless, we will attain selfless love. And we can get that by bathing just
once, if we do the bathing in proper consciousness. And by thus imbibing th...,
Upadesamrta, we will eventually go back to Godhead. And we will return to the
shelter of Srimati Radharani. And we will serve under her supervision to be
eternally happy in love with Krishna.

Thank you very much. Sri Upadesamrta ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura premanande hari haribol. Hare Krishna.
