Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3RQ0hSFPk6Q
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_027_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_2_Part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=3RQ0hSFPk6Q&redir_token=H81_nWI_D043fSvTtdercSO7g1V8MTU0MDY1ODczOEAxNTQwNTcyMzM4&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to our Nectar of Instruction course. We are discussing currently
mantra two, text two here. So we discussed the first two parts of this verse,
atyahara and prayasa. Now, we will describe, discuss the remaining parts. So
here we have the slide, which was, now, we are going to discuss prajalpa,
niyamagrahah, jana-sangah, and laulyam.

So, prajalpa. Prajalpa. Jalpa means talk. Prajalpa means useless talk. Prajalpa.
So, the point is not that we have to become silent, but we have to know how, what is
the most productive talk for us as spiritualists.

So, we may wonder what is the relationship between the first part and the second
part. That means the first verse talked about certain aspects which a person has
to give up. And now this verse is talking about some other aspects which ... (?,
01:08) can harm us also spiritually. So is there a relationship? In one sense,
"vacho vega" may seem very similiar to prajalpa. And here, Prabhupada also used
the example of a frog, which also seems similar.

So, essentially, they may be similar, but the frame of analysis is different.
The first is talking from the perspective of the body. The body, the mind, the
urges, which, the va..., which can harm a person on the spiritual path. But the
focus there is on the bodily urges. Here, the focus is more from the spiritual
perspective.

Now, if we look at the previous verse, my verse, essentially controlling those
vegas is important for all transcendentalists. It is a generic description that
is given. Whereas, here it is described, it is from a devotional perspective,
that these six activities will harm the bhakti-lata-bija.

        sadbhir bhaktir vinasyati

So of course there can be coincidences, that certain things which can be
materially harmful, and spiritually harmful also. For example, intoxication. You
know, it is spiritually detrimental. It is materially also detrimental. Or we
can have also nowadays eating non-vegetarian food, is being increasingly
recognised to be materially also unhealthy, and it is spiritually, it is
extremely undesirable. So there can be co..., overlaps. But then the
perspectives are different.

From the material perspective, some people may say certain things are good, but
from the spiritual perspective, they may not necessarily be good. So the point
here is that there can be overlap, but the focus in both the analyses is
different. That here the focus is on the bhakti, what is anikul to bhakti, and
what is pratikul to bhakti. So let us look at prajalpa. So I said, jalpa means
speech. Prajalpa means actually speech that is harmful, that is detrimental. So,
it is similar to "vacho vega".

Now, it is interesting that Vishvapitamaha in his instructions talks about
speech to Yudishtira. That is one of the longest sections in the whole
Mahabharata. Just like there are eighteen chapters in the Bhagavad Gita,
similarly there are eighteen Parvas in the Mahabharata. And the longest among
the Parvas, there is the, there is Bhishma Parva which at the start of the,
start of the war takes places, where long description is there. Similarly the
long conversation that we see, one long conversation is the conversation between
Dharma and Yudishtira, very long conversation.

Similarly the long conversation between Yudistir and Bhishma. So there, when
Bhishma is instruction, instructing Yudishtira in raja dharma, he explains that
how should a person speak. And he gives a hierarchy. So he says, this is an
adaptation of what he is speaking for our analysis. So he says that the best
speech is about the Lord, the glorification of the Lord. Then, he says is
pleasing speech. The he says is truthful speech. Then below that he says is
useless speech. And then is blasphemous speech.

So, there is five ways of analysing. Like that there can be different ways, but
here, speak about the Absolute Truth, speech, sweet speech, truthful speech,
useless speech, and blasphemous speech.

So, anything that is blasphemous, anything that is useless, that will all come
under prajalpa. Now, it is interesting that he places sweet speech above
truthful speech. Now, Krishna also when he is describing in the Bhagavad Gita,
in the seventeenth chapter, he talks about austerity of speech. And there He
says:

        anudvega-karam vakyam
        satyam priya-hitam ca yat
        svadhyayabhyasanam caiva
        van-mayam tapa ucyate

So He describes "anudvega-karam vakyam", "anudvega-karam", that "vakya" which
does not agitate others. "satyam priya-hitam ca yat", that is which is truthful,
that is which is pleasing, that is beneficial. And then "svadhyayabhyasanam
caiva", reciting of the Vedic scriptures, all these are "van-mayam tapa ucyate",
they are austerities of the speech. That this means that all these are
austerities by which one can spiritualise one's speaking power.

By doing these activities, our speaking power will not get dissipated, but we
will have the opportunity to uti.., utilise it more and more for Krishna's sake.
So, in general, those speeches which are detrimental to our spiritual life,
those we should avoid. Now what are the speeches that are detrimental?
So, certainly, blasphemous speech is detrimental. So, we discussed earlier what
"vacho vegam", where people want to talk about all sorts of, hundreds of, there
are so many channels. There are so many chat rooms. There are so many messaging
systems and there is so much unproductive talk that is happening.

But in this context, because we focus on bhakti, we will talk something more
specific here. We will talk about how devotees can engage in talks that can be
detrimental to one's bhakti. So these can be of two gra..., broad categories.

One is those which are blasphemous, and those which are rumor based. See,
blasphemous means that there is, we are speaking bad about devotees and the
whole purpose is to malign the devotee by that. Now, the important point is not
that whether it is true or false. The, if the intention is to malign the
devotee, that can be offensive to our spiritual life. It can be injurious, very
very injurious. So, it is the mad elephant offense coming. And it can destroy
our bhakti-lata-bija.

So, there is, beyond that, rumor based speak, speech. Rumor based speech means
we hear. Say, as devotees, we have certain moral standards all of us are
expected to follow. And anybody can have difficulties in following those moral
standards. Now, when somebody has some difficulties and somebody falls at that
time, then they need our help. At the very least, we can offer a prayers. If you
can offer any practical help to them, we need, they need help from us.

Now, imagine if a warrior is going on a war field, and that wa..., warrior gets
wounded. And when that person is wounded, the person should be sent to the
hospital. But imagine if a warrior is wounded, and because of that, the person
swa..., because of getting wounded in the war, the warrior is sent to a jail.

What happens? Now, if we send to the jail, those who need the hospital, are we
being compassionate? Actually, we are being violent in a way. So, all devotees,
no matter who externally in a position advanced they may be, they all have their
challenges in the practice of spiritual life. And if somebody has some
difficulties. Somebody has some slips, some falls, then they need a hospital.
There are a very few devotees who actually come with the intention to be
hypocritical.

Generally, while Srila Prabhupada's mercy, we have such high standards, that if
a person just wants to enjoy, then the material world offers better prospects for
enjoyment than the disciplines of Krishna Consciousness and subsequent
enjoyment, that a person may get, after following those disciplines.

So, there are people who are sincere, who try to practice, but for whatever
reasons, they fall. Now, when they fall, if we can help, that is well and good.
If we cannot help them, then best is not to talk about it. Because what are we
doing by it? Are we maki..., are we going to make any spiritual advancement by
talking about the fall of some devotee? No, we are not going to make any. Only,
if it is generally in the mood, in a way of trying to learn what was wrong in
it. Then, maybe something can be learnt.

But even then, especially when an event has happened, then after that the
emotional impact of the event is far greater than the rational analysis. And so,
we cannot learn much if some devotee had that some problem. Ok, at lea..., at
the very least, we should not be a part of the rumor mongering group that goes
around talking about those things. If somebody has that problem, yes, now it is
between that person and Krishna, that person and the authority over there who is
aware of this.

Now, I have not come to Krishna Consciousness movement to gossip about people.
So, we have to understand that there will be many devotees, unfortunately, who
succumb to this tendency of gossipping. You know, this person, this happened,
and you know, that person, that happened, that person, that happened. Now, it
may have happened. And now, actually, technology has made the, has given this
gossip an international reach and flavor. You know, one person can write
something. And one person posts a mail. And it goes to thousands of people all
over the world. And most of these people have no way to confirm.

So, generally, if we hear something negative about someone, that just sticks in
the mind. That may stay for a long time in our mind. So, this simply contaminates
our consciousness and others' consciousness. So we have come to Krishna
Consciousness movement for a purpose. And that purpose is to become Krishna
conscious. So, once we keep that goal in mind, then it becomes very clear what
we should talk with other devotees.

You know, we should not assume that senior devotees are perfect. Even if they
fall, or when they talk about other devotees who fall. Now, even seniors may,
our seniors may succumb to this. If that is happening, then we sho..., we
should, we should, at that time, move away from there.

So now sometimes, for an educational purpose, or for a protection purpose, some
authorities may speak about somebody. That is different. That is the situation
when a person is authorised and that time also, how one should speak is, in a
way, that does not make it difficult for that devotee to become integrated, to
continue in devotional service.

There was a disciple of Srila Prabhupada, who, he was a sannyasi, a dynamic
leader. But somehow, he had some difficulties. He fell. And then he felt that
now I have fallen from the standards, so he gave up his sannyasi. And his
sannyasis danda, he sent by courier back to Srila Prabhupada. And then,
Prabhupada's servant was over there who received, who received Prabhupada's
letters. And when he saw, he read the letter, and he saw that. And he has spread
the news among everyone, you know what happened to this person, what happened to
this person, what happened to this person.

And then, this just spread in the whole devotee community, and when Prabhupada
came to know about it, Prabhupada was more angry with the devotee who spread the
news about the other devotee's problems than the devotee who had the probems.
Prabhupada told him, now you have made almost impossible for him to come back to
the association of devotees.

Now, we may say that, oh no, if that person has fallen, why should that person
have false ego. He can come in. Be humble. No, there is the concept of false ego
is one thing. But all of us are human beings. And there has to be some basic
human sensitivity. You know, what are the human needs of a person, we should not
snap them by calling them as egoistic needs. No, everybody needs, in a
community, everybody needs a basic level of respect.

If our dirty linen, if the dirty things in our house are displayed for the whole
world to see, we feel bad. So, now, this is not to say that we, we sweep all the
problems that anybody has under the carpet, and we pretend that everything is
nice. That is not the point. You know, if somebody has problem, we have
standards to follow. Those who cannot follow the standards. They have to make
some changes, whatever the changes may be.

But the point is that just by talking about these things to others, we do not
help anyone. We do not need ourselves. We do not help others. When we even hurt
those people who are having those problems. So this is a very common form of
prajalpa that is becoming more and more increasing.

And now with the internet available, and there are many devotees who have
grievances with their local authorities, with the ISKCON, with the ISKCON GBC,
or whatever. And then, they went out with their grievances is by opening
websites, and sending emails, in which they tell people that this is wrong, that
is wrong, that is wrong, and this person did this, and that person did that.

One thing we have to understand that, you know, I came to Krishna conscious
movement to become Krishna conscious. And I have seen in my life that if I
practice Krishna consciousness, I do become purified. If I chant Hare Krishna,
if I associate with devotees, then my lust decreases, my greed decreases, my
anger decreases, my attraction to Krishna increases.

So if we practice the process of Krishna Consciousness at even a basic level of
sincerity and diligence, we will see that this process works. So if the process
is working for me, then let it work, and let me help it work for others also. If
some people have some difficulties, yes, it is between them and Krishna. They
will deal with it. Just talking about the problems of devotees does not really
lead to any good towards anyone.

Now, of course, there are two different issues here. Both of them have to be
balanced. One is that we want to have proper standards and those who cannot
stick to the standards, you know, we cannot let them compromise the standards.
But at the same time, we also want to be compassionate. And we want to encourage
everyone in the practice of devotional service.

So those who are leaders, it is their responsibility that if somebody has a
problem, how to deal with that problem in a way that is sensitive. At the same
time, that is also faithful to the tradition and sympathetic to the person. This
is a balance which is not easy to achieve. But certainly, talking behind the
back about what happened to anyone, there is... There are a few things which
hurt the whole community's spiritual atmosphere as much as this.

So, the Krishna conscious movement is very big. And because there are different
people from different parts of the world, who have come, with the different
conditionings, something will be always happening somewhere in the movement. So,
you know, we have come here to become conscious of Krishna. We have not come
here to become conscious of the false of different people in different parts of
the world.

You know, if we, see, ultimately, Krishna is like a kalpataru. Kalpataru means
desire tree. What we want from Krishna, we will get from Krishna. And to a large
extent, that applies to ISKCON also. That when we come to ISKCON, what we want,
we will get from ISKCON. Now, if I come to ISKCON, to become proud, then I can
get so much of my pride from, you know, in which organisation you go, and as
soon as you enter, people offer obeisances to you. You know, I just have to stay
around for a few years, five years, ten years, fifteen years, and what happens?
I become a senior devotee. People start offering obeisances to me. So, if I want
to be become proud, if I want, if I want pride, I can get more pride than at
other places.

If I want power, you know, the way devotees submit to their authorities, you
know, even in companies, bosses, subordinates may not submit like that at times.
So I may get that also.

If I want wealth, Krishna can give that to me. You know, if I get into
fundraising, Krishna can import me, and I will have so much in my hands. I am
meant to use it for Krishna's service, but I can misappropriate it if I want.
But I come for wealth, I get wealth.

So just as somebody can get respect, somebody can get power, somebody can get
wealth. You know, if I want controversy, I will get more controversy in ISKCON
than in the material world also, the rest of the material world. So if my kalpa
is controversy, then ISKCON will be my controversy kalpataru. If my desire is
controversy, Krishna, ISKCON is going to give me so many controversies. You
know, this happened here. That happened there. There that happened, and
then I will be in the Krishna consciousness movement, but I will be controversy
concious, not Krishna conscious. And I will be defeating the purpose for which I
came here.

So therefore, prajalpa means that when we talk about things that are not anukul
for our bhakti, that do not nourish our bhakta-lata-bija, then they, now we are
talking not about material subject matters, we discussed earlier about how
whatever material subject matters are required for our functioning in life and
in the broader society, we have to discuss them. We do not get too much caught
into them, but we discuss them at a basic level.

Now, we are talking about within devotee community. When we come, there is so
much Krishna katha that we can discuss. Now, we hear classes, we read books, and we
can discuss what we have heard or read, and we can inqui..., deepen our mutual
understanding. And we can discuss about services and how we can improve our
services. So that way, we do not have to talk about all these things.

And generally, if we have to talk for some reason or the other, then it is best
to be very prayerful and very cautious. That means, if some devotee has had
some problems, and we, somebody asks us about it, and we have to tell about it.
Then, we should tell it in a pro..., give proper background. Tell them the
proper consciousness and have that devotee to understand it properly. Otherwise,
we can injure that devotee's devotion, we will injure our devotion and we
pollute the whole atmosphere within the devotee community.

So, prajalpa can just sap away our spiritual energy. You know, what... what does
it mean sap away our spiritual energy? You know, the spiritual energy is not
some like, some fluid that flows to the body. The spiritual energy is the
basically the enthusiasm of practicing devotional service.

But when we find that actually people are, that, this person has that problem,
that person has that problem, that person has that problem, and we just talk
about all these things with the different people, then all these things sap away
our spiritual energy.

And actually speaking, we should not think that this is something new. As long
as the material world is there, there is the possibility of having difficulties.
There is the possibility of having faults. So it is nothing new. Srila
Prabhupada said that "do not be surprised that who states, be su..., do not be
surprised that who falls, be surprised that who stays.".

Krishna also says "manushyanam sahasreshu", and not only that, if we look at
post Caitanya Mahaprabhu times also. I gave a series of lectures on history of
Gaudiya Vaishnavism. So I talk about pre Caitanya Mahaprabhu Vaishnavism, then
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's times, and post Caitanya Mahaprabhu Vaishnavism,
pre Bhaktivinoda Thakur Vaishnavism, then Bhaktivinoda Thakur's times,
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur's times, Srila Prabhupada's times and post
Prabhupada ISKCON times.

So, if we look at it throughout the history of Gaudiya Vaishnavism. There have
been difficulties. We read in Caitanya Caritamrta that Advaita acharya's sons
became mayavadis. Now, Advaita acharya is mahavishnu, and he is an intimate
associate of the Lord, he is incarnation of the Lord. And his own son became
mayavadi. Now, we may say, how is it possible? He said it is possible. The soul
has free will. And the soul can use free will in whatever way that free will
we want.

Now, of course, their mayavadi was peculiar version. They thought that, they had
the whole idea that Advaita acharya himself is Krishna in all senses, and not
only that, their idea was that because Advaita acharya called Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and Caitanya Mahaprabhu descended. So their was that Advaita acharya
is greater than Caitanya Mahaprabhu because by his command, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
descended. And their idea was Advaita acharya and Caitanya Mahaprabhu, both are
God, but Advaita acharya is greater God.

So, Advaita acharya himself was upset by this notion, and so were other people,
other vaishnavas at that time. So this is what Krishna Das Kaviraja Goswami is
calling as mayavadi.

So, now, the point is, it is so people having difficulties, and even big people
having difficulties is not new. It has happened throughout. And the process is
potent. Process is, those who want to make it work, those who want to get
purified, they will get purified. But those who want to, those who are careless
in following the process, they will have difficulties, and those who want to
talk about others having difficulties, they can keep talking about it.

So, a very good analogy for understanding this is the disease metaphor. The
disease metaphor means this whole world is like an epidemic, afflicted area. And
the germs that are causing the epidemic are lust, anger, greed, envy, pride,
illusion, especially lust. Lust, greed, even anger is there, pride is there, but
these are the germs that are there. And actually, these germs can affect anyone.

Now, Krishna Conscious offers us immunity. It raises our immune strength and as
we discussed in the Isopanisad, "apāpa-viddham" and "śuddham", Prabhupada uses
the words that they are Krishna Con..., the remembrance of Krishna, profileptic
and antiseptic, prevents infection and cures infection. So that is Krishna.

But if there is a some, if there is an infected area, then anybody can get the
infection. They get the infection, they have to take the precautions to prevent
the infection, and if they get the infection, they have to take the medication,
then they will get cured.

If somebody does not take precaution. If somebody does not take medication. What
is going to happen? That person is going to get infected. Now, it may ... now,
who can get infected? You know, a new compounder who has just joined the
hospital, where the epidemic afflicted people are there, that person can get
infected, and the top surgent who has one, say, the Bharat Ratna award, for
curing, for doing ten thousand surgeries, and has saved the life of lakhs of
people, that person can get infected.

So, as far as the germs are concerned, the germs are there. And if one is
neglectful of the vacc.., for the vaccination or the medication, then anybody
can get infected, and any people can ..., even a top doctor can get infected
mortally, can fatally, the person can die also.

So, now, of course, the epidemic is capable of being countered. Those who take
precautions, they will counter it. Now, the disease metaphor has a limitation in
the sense that, the germs come without our invitation. Whereas that is with
lust, anger, greed, often we, we act actively to get them into us. You know, we,
when we become lusty, we try to provoke ourselves, imagine, ok, to imagine
things, and then we succumb to lust, or we succumb to greed.

So in that sense, our free will's misuse is also involved. So, we ho... when,
when a person becomes sick, we do not consider that person be morally responsible
for the sickness. That person is a victim of sickness. Whereas when a person
falls, we consider that person morally responsible because we all have free
will and we are expected to follow certain moral standards. So it is a moral
lapse, no doubt. That is true. So there is a difference between infection and
this example.

But the point here is, the universality that anybody can have difficulties. And
the potency of the Krishna Conscious process is not by the, by the fact anybody
can stay immune, if that, no matter what the person does. The potency of the
process is that no matter who the person is, if that person adopts the process,
then that person remains immune, and if that person neglects the process, that
person's immunity is lost. So that person may be a top person or bottom person.
Then, if that person neglects being Krishna Conscious, then infection will come.

        kṛṣṇa—sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra
        yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa, tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra

So, where there is Krishna, there cannot be maya, but the converse is also true.
Where there is no Krishna, where there is no light, darkness will be there. The
darkness will inevitebly creep in, creep in, and then it will pervade. So:

        tamas tadāsīd gahanaṁ gabhīraṁ
        yas tasya pāre ’bhivirājate vibhuḥ

So Gajendra prays in the Eighth Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, in Third Chapter, I
think, verse six, he says that my dear Lord when everything is restored in this
world, "tamas tadāsīd gahanaṁ gabhīraṁ", there is just complete darkness, there
is such darkness that one cannot see anything, "gahanaṁ gabhīraṁ", complete
pitch darkness. "yas tasya rāja", "yas tasya rājate vibhuḥ", "yas tasya pāre",
so one is beyond you stay, you stay effulgent my Lord. You are the source of
light and you give illumination. So he is referring to the time when the whole
universe is destroyed, everything is dark in the area of material existence.
But still, the transcendental abode is effulgent. And there "yas tasya pāre
’bhivirājate vibhuḥ", the Lord splendorously resides over there.

So, similarly, in this world, there, this is the world of maya. That is
darkness. But beyond the darkness, Krishna is there. Those who turn towards
Krishna, they see light. Those who turn towards maya, they see darkness. Not
only when we see, we get sucked into the darkness or we get attracted towards
the light.

So those who have failed to practice the process of Krishna Consciousness, they
have fallen. But when we also talk about how they have fallen, what are we
doing? In many ways, we are simply actually doing nothing more than being
Krishna Unconcious. And in a way, we are, we may not fall down grossly at that
time by talking such things, but we are being Krishna Unconcious.

So, prajalpa, how do we avoid that? We have to see what other subjects that
nourish me in devotional service. And I talk those things. And I find that
devotee association which helps me to discuss these things. If there are
devotees who talk about certain things which damage my faith, then ok, I offer
them my respects from a distance and I move away from there.

There is no point in talking about controversies. Now, for, as I said, for
educational purpose if I have heard about something from somewhere, if I have
some chance to read something on the net, then I can go and ask some responsible
senior devotee. What happened? I heard that this, this has happened. What
has exactly happened? Can you help me understand this? So, we can get these
things resolved by asking that way.

But they will provide some answer, and as usual, we have to be careful whom we
ask these things because some devotees may just, do not talk about these things.
These things keep happening. And they may, they may not give a responsible
answer. We have to know also whom we should ask that sort of question. And we
will get an answer.

And the important point is that even if somebody falls, that does not prove that
the process is wrong. In fact, conversely, we could say that the fall of that
person also proves the truth of the process. The person is so big, that if the
person, but still the person is not Krishna Conscious, that person will also
have difficulties.

So if I am clear for what I have come to the devotee assocation, then I will not
succumb to prajalpa. So to summarise this point about prajalpa, I have to be
clear my objective is to become Krishna Conscious. And the topics that help me
to become Krishna Conscious, I will discuss those topics. Those topics do not
he... which do not help me to become Krishna Conscious, I avoid them. And if I
have some doubts about what happened to someone, things like that, then we
discuss with those particular devotees who can give us answers and move forward,
and get the answers. But if you do not get the answers, then there is no point
in discussing these things with uninformed people, trying to get sound ti...,
some tidbits of information. They will not be tidbits of information. They will
be tidbits of poison for us.

We will hear a little bit in that, they spark our imagination in negative
effort. And we hear a little bit there, they spark our imagination further.

So, it is so unfortunate that we come to the society of Krishna Consciousness
and then we forget that we have come for being Krishna Conscious, and we become
conscious of so many other things.

        kivi basaya atmika budhi
        ekeha kurnandana

We are clear about the goal for which we have come, then we will find that
Krishna and ISKCON are like kalpataru. If we come here to be Krishna Conscious,
we will get Krishna Consciousness. We will find a devotee association where pure
Krishna Consciousness being discussed. There may not be many devotees, but in
every temple, every community, there are devotees who are seriously Krishna
Conscious, and we can associate with them and grow in their association.

So prajalpa, now, I have talked more from, you can read Srila Prabhupada's
purport over here. I have focused more on the current situation, in which we
find ourselves, so elaborated on that, based on what Srila Prabhupada has given us in
his purport. So let us look at Jalbo Niyamāgraha.

So Niyamāgraha means to follow the rules and regulations. Niyam is rule. Agraha
means to neglect. And āgraha is to insist on, but without understanding the
purpose. So here is the defining metaphor for this analysis. So rules are like
roles. Principles are like compass. Rules are like roles. Principles are like
compass.

So, generally speaking, the rules are the best to follow the principles. Just
like if I want to go to the north, the compass is showing that, is station, this
is north side, and then I find the road to go in that direction. Then the road,
if it is going north, then that is the best way to go in the northern direction.

So to give an example of what we mean by rule and the principle. What is the
difference the two? So, Krishna Purana says that:

        smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇur
        vismartavyo na jātucit
        sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur
        etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ

That all rules and regulations are subordinate to this one principle, always
remember Krishna, and never forget Krishna. So this is the rule. Now, is this
the rule or is this the principle? This is the principle. The principle is
always remember Krishna. Now, what is the rule? Srila Prabhupada has given us
the rule in ISKCON that chant sixteen rounds of the Hare Krishna maha mantra.
This is the rule.

Now, chanting sixteen rounds, Prabhupada said, on beads audibly. That is the,
not in the mind, but audibly. That is the rule.

Now, let us consider some pro..., situations, suppose I am going north. To go
north is the, my compass is pointing to the direction. There is a road. But
there is a landslide. And the road is blocked. Then what do I do? Then, I have
to, if I, if I decide I single-handedly will try to remove the whole landslide,
and then I will move. Now, I will get, I may be stuck there for the rest of my
life. What I do is, ok, I look around, find some other road, or I may even have
to go cross-country at that time, but then I make sure that I move towards the
destination.

Similarly, suppose, somebody gets a serious throat problem, by which that person
just does not have the energy to speak. And just speaking one round exhausts the
person so much that after that that person cannot do anything only. So then that
person may be told. That person has to consult some senior devotees. Senior
devotees say, ok, you do not have to chant loudly. You can chant softly. You can
chant to function:

        Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
        Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare

So this is just an adjustment. Rule is chant loudly, but in that situation, the
person cannot chant loudly. Suppose somebody becomes dumber because of some
problem. What will that person do? Is it that the person is initiated, and cannot
chant sixteen rounds, you know, is that person breaking the initiation vow? No,
the person can chant in the mind. So in that situation, there can be exceptions.

So the rule and the principle, they are both important, but the principle is more
important than the rule. The rule will vary depending on time, place,
circumstance. So, just like a temple is a place. What is the principle of having
a temple? The temple is a place where we can glorify the Lord and share the
glories of the Lord with others. So, Srila Prabhupada wrote in the missions of
ISKCON, among the seven purposes of ISKCON, he said, to build a place dedicated
to the Supreme Lord, build place dedicated to the Supreme Lord.

So, now, traditionally in India, there are strict rules for how temples had to
be made. Now, there has to be a shikhar on top and the deities had to be in a
particular direction. And all these different rules are there. Now, they are
important because they all contribute to creating a spiritual, a spiritually
potent atmosphere over there. But they are not of paramount importance.

When Srila Prabhupada made storefronts into temples. So, they were just
storefronts over there. So, there was no chance of, it is just a part of the
already constructed building, there was no chance of having any kind of tower on
top of it, nor was the possibility to necessarily have the deities in the
direction facing east, whatever. So, the idea of the deities, direction facing
east is when the Sun God rises, Sun God offers obeisances to the Lord, and the
Lord sees the Sun God, and blesses the Sun God. That is how the day starts with
the auspicious..., the Sun gets the darshan of the Lord, and the Lord gets
the darshan... the Lord is pleased by seeing the rising Sun. There are multiple
reasons. This is one of the reasons.

So the point is there are the rules, but those rules are not inflexible. So,
Srila Prabhupada was not a stickler for this kind of rules. He adjusted things.
You know, storefront is a place primarily where glorifications of the Lord
can happen very accessibly for those who are interested. The hippies were
interested. They would not come uptown in New York, or San Francisco, or
wherever. They were living in downtown. And the storefront was a place where
they could easily come along. So, Prabhupada invited them there and got them all
to glorify Krishna. And they glorified Krishna wonderfully over there.

So "niyamagraha" would mean, we see such temples, where such a vibrant
glorification of the Lord is happening and one says, what is this? Ah, the
deities are not in this direction. This is not like this. That is not like that.
So what are we doing over there? We are insisting on rules without
understanding the purpose. So "niyamagrahah" can be very detrimental because we
become judgemental about others without understanding the facts of the
situation. But what are the facts of the situation?

So, different places, "desa-kala-vibhagavit ". This phrase comes twice in the
Bhagavatam, in significant places. First is it comes in the Bisupitana section,
where Bisu Pitamaa is in an arrow bed, now all these great sages come. So, now,
normally, when sages come to a King's palace, the sages, the sages are
worshipable for the king, and the king is expected to offer obeisances. And
because Bisu Pitama was so weak, he could not offer obeisances at that time.

So what happened? It is said that because he was dharma jna, he was, he knew the
principles of dharma, so he offered obeisances mentally. And this decision was
also understood and accepted. Similarly, when Dru Maharaja went to the forest,
you know, he was supposed to do worship of the Supreme Lord, but because he was
alone in the forest, he could not have proper deities. So he improvised based on
situation and that was accepted. And when, and Prabhupada in the purports, that
are elaborated in the purports, he explains that actually things have to be
adjusted according to time, place, circumstance, and the acharya knows how to
adjust these things.

So that is what is being done over here, by Srila Prabhupada when is building
temples in this particular way. So "niyamagraha", in terms of insistence on the
letter of the rules without understanding the principle can be very detrimental.
And that is what happened in traditional culture. The brahmanas, they
claimed superiority based on birth. Now, respecting brahmanas is a very very
important part of the Vedic culture, vitally important. Because the brahmanas
are connected with Krishna in the sense that "brahmajanati di brahmana", they
situate themselves in spiritual culture, in spiritual consciousness. They have
spiritual knowledge, and they share that spiritual knowledge with the rest of
the society.

So, respecting them is a very important part of brahmanical culture, of
Vedic culture in general. But why do they need to be respected? Because they are
connected with Krishna, because they are representing Krishna. But when the
brahmanas insisted it, oh, we need, we deserve respect, because we are
brahmanas. And they did not exhibit brahmanical qualities, they neither had
brahmanical knowledge, nor did they practice brahmanical culture themselves
very strictly. And they demanded respect based on birth rights.

So, actually, birth right made everything wrong in Vedic culture. The idea that
all of one's privileges are determined by birth rights. That made, messed up
Vedic culture. So, if we see traditionally, in bha..., in the bhakti tradition,
many of the topmost saints have been from non-brahmanical backgrounds.

Some of them may be from lokas background, and some of them from outside the
varnashram fold also. But they were recognised as saints because of their ex...
very exalted respectibility in terms of attraction to the Lord, devotion to the
Lord, and capacity to share that devotion with others. Now, when they were doing
this, often they face prosecution. So, Srila Prabhupada also writes about this
that the brahmanas did not care.

In India, so many people were getting converted to different religions, and
while they were getting converted, the low... especially the lower cast people
who anyway felt neglected, they were getting converted. And the brahmanis said,
anyway, they are lower cast people, they used to say. They want to get
converted, let them get converted. So, it is the brahmanas' responsibility to
share spiritual knowledge. It is not that the brahmana is meant, meant to sit in
an ivory tower, which is constructed by everyone else using their, they had the
charity, and their respect, and the brahmana sits enjoying the rest of it. No,
brahmana is supposed to be active.

When the brahmana is lazy in the sense that he is not doing the brahmanical duty,
Prabhupada says that, the brahmana is supposed to take food, but along with
that, he is supposed to give knowledge also. If the brahmana takes food, but
does not give knowledge, and that is irresponsible brahmana.

So, as devotees, how can we do niyamagraha? We are looking at the first part
now, that we are insisting on the letter of the law without understanding its
spirit. So there are many ways in which we can do it. One is by imposing on
others things without understanding their time, place, circumstance. You know,
we have been, say, brought up in Krishna Conscious in a particular way.

So, for example, now some devo..., now we have the Bhagavatam. So, can we mark
on the Bhagavatam, can we underline on the Bhagavatam, the Bhaga...? Can we
underline Prabhupada's books? Now, there are two different views among the
devotees. Some devotees say that the Bhagavatam is like a deity, every word is
trancendental. What do you need to underline anything for that? So somebody says
that, no, no, you cannot do it.

And there are other devotees, who say, you know, actually, as the bra..., the
Bhagavatam is like a deity, but so vast also. You know, I need to read it. I
need to remember it. I need recollect it. And if I have something underlining,
have something marked, it makes everything more accessible for me. Therefore, I
want to mark it. So, should I do it or should I not do it? Now, go to one set of
devotees, these are like deities. You cannot mark them. How can you mark them?
Another group says, oh, these are deities, but we are not marking the deities,
we are decorating the deities. Now, who is right?

There is no absolute standard of rightness over here. Some devotees may feel
this way, some devotees may feel that way. And you know, there are matters of
principle, and there are matters of preference. When we make matters of
preference as absolute, then we become fanatic. What does it mean matters of
preference? This is matter of preference, whether I mark the Bhagavatam or I do
not mark the Bhagavatam. This is matter of preference. You know, there is a lot
of, in the Bha...,  in the Mahabharata, Krishna tells Arjuna, "nahi sarvatra
vidhiyate". There is not a rule for everything. You know, there are many things
which one has to decide based on one's individual situation.

So, Krishna has given us intelligence, and we get the intelligence from
guru-sadhu-sastra, and based on that, we have to make our decisions. So when we
make matters of preference into as Absolute and as inflexible as matters of
principle, then we become fanatics. So, there can be many like this with respect
to matters of preference.

For example, now, with the respect to the se..., with respect to the temple
deities. So now, of course, ISKCON is having certain standards, and all temples
follow the standards, for deity worship, how many, how much, how to move the
chamar, how to move the til..., how to move the aarti pla..., the aarti
paraphernalia and things like that. But if somebody comes to a temple and
thinks, in my temple, this was not like that. Your temple is unlike that. What
is this? You know, you do not know how to do things. Things can be different
according to time, place, circumstance.

The important point is that the deities are there, the Lord is there, and Lord
is being worshipped. So, of course, we may want standardisation over the
institution, and if we have the authority to standardise, and if we had been
given the authorisation to do that, then we can do that in a sensitive way, but
beyond that, if we make matters of preference into matters of absolute
imposition, then we become fanatical.

So, for example, now, there were gurukulas, and Prabhupada was asked that, ok,
the gurukulas, Prabhupada's children are there, how much, how much food should
they eat? Prabhupada said, oh, you can, the children ask more, how much they can
eat. They can, you can give them three chapatis. Something like that. And then
some devotee has made it into rule. Children three chapatis. You know, not one
chapateri more. Prabhupada said three chapatis.

Now, so, different children are different. They have different levels of
activity. They have different sizes of build. And now they need more food. It
is... No, three chapatis, otherwise atyahara you are doing. This is silly.
Different people have different needs. So we cannot absolutise things like that.
There is matters of principle and matters of preference. So when we rigidly
impose things on people not understanding the changing time, place,
circumstance, then we make a mess of things.

You see, every tradition has a central core and a, and a periphery. The core has
to be unchanging. But the periphery has to change. The periphery has to change,
otherwise the tradition cannot survive. And Srila Prabhupada in that matter was
remarkably flexible. The way he adapted Krishna Consciousness. There is, we have
to be adept. Adept means expert. Adept to know what to adopt and what to adapt.
What to adopt means take it as it is and present it as it is. And what to adapt,
what to present according to time, place, circumstance.

Now, if you look at the, just the life of Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur and
Srila Prabhupada, there are so many things that Srila Prabhupada did, which were
distinctly to the way Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur functioned. So, Srila
Prabhupada, even when he went to the west, he always wore traditional dress, he
wore dhoti kurta. But Bhaktisiddhanta Thakur, many times, even when he was in
India, he would wear western dress, he may wear shirt, pants sometimes, and what
to speak of an India in capital cities, like Calc..., in major cities like
Calcutta, westernised cities. He would sometimes wear shirt, pant and shoes and
everything, and go to Radha Kunda in that.

So now, does that mean Prabhupada was not following Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakur? Obviously not. These are externals. You know, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakur knew that in that particular atmosphere, that was the best way he could
command respect of people. You know, when people had a particular stereotype
notion of sadhus, when they saw that, oh, this person is so modern, and this
person is still teaching the same siddhanta, then that caught their attention.

When Prabhupada went to America, you know, shirt, pant, would have just got him
to jail with the west, and no one even would have noticed, practically speaking.
But his dress was so distinctive. And the hippies wanted to do all kinds, sorts
of strange things. So, Prabhupada's dress was radical, while externally
attractive for them. And they were not only attracted to that dress. They
started adopting that dress also.

So like that, we can see that, there are many things which Srila Prabhupada did
differently. But Srila Prabhupada said I have not changed anything. What does it
mean I have not changed? He has not changed anything in the essential message.
The essence remains the same, but the, the core will always remain the same, but
the periphery will have to change because circumstances change. When
circumstances change, then presentation has to change accordingly.

For example, in the Bhagavad Gita, we will not find any elaborate arguments for
the existence of God, or for the existence of law of karma. Why? Because in the
cultural context, in which Arjuna, Arjuna is asking questions to Krishna, these
are implied truths. But today, when we teach, when we have to, say, teach a
Bhagavad Gita course. You know, first thing we have to tell is that God exists,
soul exists, karma exists, scriptures are the word of God, and then after all
that, each of these will require sometimes, one session, more than one session
sometimes, a lot of question, answers, and then after that we can go, one starts
talking about Bhagavad Gita.

So often, if we see most of the Bhagavad Gita courses that we have, conduct,
what we do is, actually just discuss concepts which prepare people to understand
Bhagavad Gita. When we start studying Bhakti Sastri, then we will understand
that actually how little we have understood Bhagavad Gita and how much we still
have to understand in Bhagavad Gita. And that is essential because there is a,
Bhagavad Gita was spoken in a particular cultural context. And now the cultural
context is different.

Same way with different situations, we are now talking acharyas over there, but
in our situations also, we cannot impose our own standards on others. Certainly,
Prabhupada has given certain standards, and we should follow them faithfully. At
the same time, different devotees are at different areas, they are trying their
best to preach and according to our situation, and without understanding the
specifics of that particular situation, if one tries to impose, then it can
create a lot of problems.

Now, for example now, say that, a normal devotee etiquette is that whenever we
see somebody, we offer obeisances. We bow down, offer obeisances. Now, in some
parts of the world, there was slavery in the past. And when slavery was there,
the idea was that whenever the slave sees the master, the slave has to bow down.
So now, when people see devotees bowing down to some senior devotee, if in that
culture, people get a memory of slaves. Now, people become slaves when going
into this cult. Who wants to become slaves? So now in that case to avoid some
negative perception, certain things may have to be changed in front of public.

So now, that is something which Krishna and his advanced devotees will decide.
We cannot have niyamagraha with respect to this. Imposing such things without
understanding the situation, we can create unnecessary conflict in the devotee
community. So, with respect to ourselves also, we have to be strict in following
the rules. But strict, there is a difference between strictness and fanaticism.
And what is the difference? The difference is that when we make the matters of
preference into a matter of principle.

When, the what, there is adequate room for individual choice. And anyway, if we
do not recognise that there is room for individual choice within the broad
principles of Krishna Consciousness, then we become fanatical. And fanaticism
can terribly ruin Krishna Consciousness for ourselves and for others also. So,
Srila Prabhupada himself was very understanding on many occasions, whenever he
would talk about Krishna Consciousness, you know, the very fact that Srila
Prabhupada was able to take in devotees from all over the world, and attract
them to Krishna's lotus feet.

That indicates that he had a potency by which he could adjust things according
to time, place, circumstance, and present. And gradually, he moved them towards
the purity, and they did become cured, thousands of people from all over the
world. By Srila Prabhupada's mercy, coming through his books, coming through
direct, through his lectures, through his followers, they are getting purified.

So one is niyamagraha, fanatical adherence to rules. And the other is
"niyamāgrahaḥ", "agraha", "graha" means to accept, "āgraha" means not accept. It
is to whimsically reject the rules. Ah, this is not important. Why do you bother
about such things? This is so, very often, whenever any rule is difficult for us
to follow, we can say, this is impractical, you know, this is irrelevant, this
is unimportant and we can just dismiss practically most of Krishna Consciousness
that way. That is also not Krishna Consciousness at all. The rules are important
and they have to be followed.

So "niyamāgrahaḥ", whimsically giving up the rules and regulations is not at all
recommended. So the, Srila Prabhupada said, that actually speaking, you know,
the core of Krishna Consciousness has to continue, so we may have differe...,
different devotees with different levels of commitment. And it is fine. But the
core has to be clear. So "niyamāgrahaḥ" would mean that we neglect the rules and
regulations, because we just find for some reason, we do not, we do not like
them, or we do not find them convenient, so we just neglect the rules and
regulations.

So, Srila Prabhupada was in many ways very broad. At the same time, he was also
quite particular about certain things. We discussed yesterday how when Srila
Prabhupada went to the west, he preferred Indian cousine. He had taught his
western disciples to learn Indian cooking. And he got them to wear, brought them
good quality Indian dress. It is not Indian dress. It is the dress of the
spiritual world, but from the relative poi..., relative typology of this world,
it was bengali dress or Indian dress, saari, and dhoti, kurta. And he expected
devotees to wear this, now, as much as possible, devotees should try to wear
this.

So now of course, in today's cultural scenario, people may not be able to wear
this when they go to a professional jobs. But within the devotee community, as
much as possible, one can try to wear a devotee dress. And that way, one will be
steady. One will be able to follow the principles nicely. So just rejecting
these rules as irrelevant is not good. So now some people may say that, you
know, ultimately devotion is a matter of the heart. Whether I wear saari or
whether I wear jeans, it does not matter. Ultimately, if my heart has devoted,
what is the problem? Whether I, what kind of dress I wear, does not matter.

Well, certainly devotion is a matter of the heart, but, you know, the heart is
affected by what is around it. The heart does not exist in a vacuum and
isolation from everything else. So there are certain dresses which increase our
bodily consciousness, and certain dresses which decrease our bodily
consciousness and therefore, they are more conducive to Krishna Consciousness.

So, you know, the traditional dresses, the dhoti, kurta, the saari, you know,
they are, they are simple, they are chaste, and they are conducive to devotional
consciousness. On the other hand, there are other kinds of dresses, which expose
the body, which highlight the body's contours and they make us as well as others
more bodily conscious. So then, yes, it is not somebody ca..., a person can wear
shorts, or jeans, or whatever they want to wear, and they can chant Hare
Krishna. Nobody, whatever, just because of their dress, can stop them from
chanting Hare Krishna. But if somebody wants to be serious devotee, then serious
devotee should wear dresses which are conducive for the growth of, which are
conducive for spiritual consciousness for oneself and for others.

So, now, this is generally speaking, something which we need to follow to
realise the benefit. So wha..., when we wear a devotional dress, does it affect
our consciousness? Yes, it definitely does, because essentially the externals
affect the internals, like I exa..., explained earlier. You know, our posture
affects our emotions. You know, if I lay down, but I can raise my legs up. And
point to some, Prabhu, I am feeling very humble now. You know, I am making a
mockery. You know, if I sit like this, I cannot be humble. I might be able to
stretch myself and feel a bit humility, but by posture immediately affects my
psychology. Just as our posture affects our psychology, similarly our dress
affects our psychology.

So as much as possible, we try to wear a dress which is conducive to our
devotional consciousness. If we just neglect this, then, then that does not help
us because we simply become bodily conscious more and more. So I answer question
on our website. So one time, somebody asked the question that, you know, you
said that actually the best interest is our scanty, and they reveal the body,
but even the saari reveals the body. You know, in the saari, the whole middle
part of the body is revealed. So how is that chaste? So then I told that
actually we should not think Bollywood is our teacher for learning how to wear a
saari. You know, people have, what do they mean by saari? They say Bollywood
actors are wearing saari, then they think this is the way saari is to be worn.
So Bollywood is so expert that it can make a dress of chastity into a dress of
vulgarity.

So, actually speaking, there is a Vedic culture, and everything within that
culture has a particular purpose. So, the purpose, when it is known, then
everything will be adapted for that purpose. But if that purpose is not known,
that purpose is neglected or rejected, then everything can be abused. So, yes,
somebody can be flashy, and goody, you know, even within, with the chas..,
chaste dress. That is possible. And somebody can wear very flashy and goody
dress, and still be having a very devotional consciousness. But these are
exceptions.

But the general pattern is, certain dresses encourage certain consciousness. So
"niyamāgrahaḥ" means rejecting the rules entirely just because one has a
particular idea that rules are not important. Rules are important because they
are the best way by which we can follow the principles. Just like I said, going
back to the starting example, that there are roads. If I decide that I do not
follow the road, and I decide to go cross-country. When there is a road, now,
in the cross-country, there will be stones, there will be ditches, there may be
streams, there may be rivers, there may be snakes. So, all kind of dangers will
be there. And I have to go through all those dangers and all those dangers may,
not only dama.., hurt me, they will slow me down, and I make my journey tougher,
slower, and I will, I may not even to reach the destination.

So the roads are the best way, but at sometimes, the roads may not be the best
way. So that exceptions are there and the exceptions have to be noted down, but
in general, we follow the rules. So "niyamāgrahaḥ", we understand the rules are
important and we understand the principles are more important. And we also
understand the rules are normally the best way to follow the principles. But in
certain situations, things may have to be adjusted. So generalist adjustment has
to be done very thoughtfully in consideration with senior devotees according to
time, place, circumstance. But in general, we try to follow the rules, and these
rules help us to make spiritual advancement. Krishna says that:

        abhyāsa-yogena tato
        mām icchāptuḿ dhanañ-jaya

In the twelweth chapter, when He is talking about various levels of bhakti. So
then He says, 12.18 is talking about pure devotional service. Then when He says
that is not possible:

        atha cittam samadhatum
        na saknosi mayi sthiram
        abhyasa-yogena tato
        mam icchaptum dhananjaya

In 12.9 He says that if we follow the rules of bihas yoga, if we follow the
rules of sadhana bhakti, then by that, what happens? "mam icchaptum dhananjaya",
You will get the desire to obtain Me. That means our desire for Krishna, our
attraction to Krishna will increase.

So, this is what happens when we follow in the "niyamasa", by following the
rules that the scriptures have given us, our attraction to Krishna increases.
And that is the essence of bhakti. So, neglecting the rules means our attraction
to Krishna will not increase, in fact, it will decrease also, it may get
distracted, and then that is "sadbhir bhaktir vinasyati".

So today, we discussed about "niyamagraha", and before that, we discussed about
"prajalpa". So, we will continue about the other two in next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
