Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J9l7004Gh_Q
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=F5Z33U9yBV466VCQQaai7tTerOp8MTU0MTgzMDc1MEAxNTQxNzQ0MzUw&event=video_description&v=J9l7004Gh_Q&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_036_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_6_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction series which we are doing in the
Bhakti Sastri. Now, we will go deeper into our discussion and association. In
previous two verses, texts, we discussed first of all the six full exchanges,
"dadāti pratigṛhṇāti", and then after that we discussed about respecting
different devotees, or at different levels of con... spiritual, advancement. And
now, we will discuss about the advanced devotee, especially. How such a devotee
should not be seen with material vision. So, let us look at the, the text over
here. So, it is:

        dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś ca doṣair
        na prākṛtatvam iha bhakta janasya paśyet
        gaṅgāmbhasāṁ na khalu budbuda-phena-paṅkair
        brahma-dravatvam apagacchati nīra-dharmaiḥ

So, "dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś ca doṣair", so "dṛṣṭaiḥ" means when we see
with our eyes, "svabhāva-janitair", what is bound from the "svabhāva", from the
nature. "vapuṣaś ca doṣair", "vapuṣaś" is the body, so the "doṣair" is the
faults. So whatever difficulties are present in the body, "na prākṛtatvam iha
bhakta janasya paśyet", so they are "dṛṣṭaiḥ", they are visible, but "nasya
paśyet", one should not see them. "prākṛtatvam", because they are, they are
material. The devotee is essentially practicing spiritual life, especially the
acharya is teaching us spiritual life. So, "nasya paśyet", "iha bhakta janasya",
for such devotees, one should not see. Why no..., when the example is given how
one should not see.

"gaṅgāmbhasāṁ na khalu budbuda-phena-paṅkair", "gaṅgāmbhasāṁ", then the water of
the Ganga, "budbuda-phena-paṅkair", so there are bubbles, there is foam, there
is dirt, but these one does not see. One understands that the purity of the
Ganga is trancendental.

"brahma-dravatvam apagacchati nīra-dharmaiḥ", so what will happen, because of it
being watered, that will happen, "nīra-dharmaiḥ". But "brahma-dravatvam", its
trancendental nature is not affected. "apagacchati", so just as Ganga water
remains pure, inspite of the presence of impure things, like bubbles, and foam,
and dirt. Similarly, a pure devotee remains, advanced devotee remains
transcendental even if there are some bodily defects. So:

"Being situated in his original Krishna conscious position, a pure devotee does
not identify with the body. Such a devotee should not be seen from a
materialistic point of view. Indeed, one should overlook a devotee's having a
body born in a low family, a body with a bad complexion, a deformed body, or a
diseased or infirm body. According to ordinary vision, such imperfections may
seem prominent in the body of a pure devotee, but despite such seeming defects,
the body of a pure devotee cannot be polluted. It is exactly like the waters of
the Ganges, which sometimes during the rainy season are full of bubbles, foam
and mud. The Ganges waters do not become polluted. Those who are advanced in
spiritual understanding will bathe in the Ganges without considering the
condition of the water."

So, Srila Prabhupada actually integrates the purport in the translation, because
he gives multiple examples. Here, for example, this whole sentence, is, Srila
Prabhupada explicitly "prākṛtatvam iha bhakta janasya paśyet", so, the various
that cannot be, that may be seen, this especially, this sentence, "...one should
overlook...", what one should overlook? These specific examples are not there in
the text, but Srila Prabhupada is giving it to make it clear for us what "na
prākṛtatvam" means. Do not see from material point of view. So, born in a low
family, bad complexion, deformed body, or diseased or infirmed body. You know,
diffe.., different, difference between bad complexion, deformed and diseased,
it is that bad complexion means the looks are not very good. Deformed means the
body is shaped improperly, maybe some limbs are missing, some fingers are
missing, and diseased or infirmed body means maybe, you know, there is a lot of
cough, and mucus coming out, or there was pass because of some disease, as it
happened to Sanatan Goswami.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not see that until he embraced. So, these are all
points, distinctive, all of them. And in spite of that, a devotee remains
transcendental. Prabhupada says, these may be prominent, they may seem
prominent, but despite, and actually, they are not e..., Prabhupada said, they
are not even seeming defects. The body is not polluted. Why? Because it is used
for the service of Krishna. And in that sense, it remains always pure. So, let
us look at the purport. We will see over here, the overview. So, in the sixth
text over here, the offenses against a pure devotee. What are the possible
offenses?

Prabhupada explains criticism of bodily defects. So, what are the bodily defects
possible? Prabhupada gives a list of that. And Srila Prabhupada connects that
with "api cet su-durācāro". So, we may wonder why are the bodily defects present
in the body of someone? Now, sometimes, we may start thinking, oh, because that
person must have done some bad karma. Because of these, bodily defects are
present. See, first thing we have to understand is that the principle of karma
is not to be applied for postmortem. It is always to be applied for prognosis.
Postmortem means that, you know, when a person is suffering, we have no business
inquiring what bad karma that person did because of his, which that person is
suffering. It is, karma, the principle of karma is for us to understand that if
I do wrong activities, I will get wrong consequence. You know, if we start
applying karma for postmortem, then there is no limit. You know, when a mot...
mother is caring for a baby, and the baby starts crying, the mother starts
thinking, oh, baby is crying, must be feeling some pain. That pain has to be
because of past karma. So let the baby cry.

You know, we will just choke all love. And choke all humanity out of a
relationships if we start bringing past karma into our interaction with each
other. We need to interact with each other based on human culture and Indian
devotional culture, which is extremely sensitive. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did
not ever say to Sanatan Goswami, oh, these boys have come upon you, you know,
what sinful karma did you?

You know, he said, no. I am a sannyasi. And I should be able to see beyond such
externals. So, without, if I do not see beyond externals, to the essence, the
soul, then I am having it, there is a defect in my sannyasi. I am not truly
renounced. So, he did not focus on what that person's karma was. He focused on
what his dharma was. So, in all situations, when we are dealing with others. We
have to consider what is our dharma. You know, imagine if we start thinking that
people are suffering because of their bad karma, then, you know, a thief, goes
and robs in a person's house, and the person goes to the king. He says, I have
been robbed. He says it is your past karma that you have been robbed. The person
will just remain in that situation.

So, in, when we deal with people, we deal with them based on how, the, their
this life situation. Based on their this life situation. How, what is their
situation in this life. You know, if a person has earned money honestly, and
after that has been robbed. then, there is no way, no point for us, we have no
right to consider what the past karma of that person was because of it, that
person got robbed. From this point, this life's point of view, it is wrong, and
the king has to take the responsibility and make sure that the robber is
punished, and the stolen amount is written, returned. You know. When this, f...,
last year, there was a terrible gang rape in Delhi. So, I wrote an article about
that. So after that, I was asked a question on my website. You know, what was
the karma of that woman who was raped? So, this is not a question which we
should be asking at all.

When Draupadi was disrobed, nobody asked him, what was the karma because of
which you were disrobed. No. They all understood that this was a, this was a
monstrous injustice. And it had to be punished. So, when a person is suffering,
at that time, I, we should not be doing a postmortem, oh, this suffering has
come because of some past karma. We should be thinking, what is my dharma? How
can I help in such a situation? So, if we do not keep the philosophy of karma in
its proper perspective, its perspective is, it is a philosophy of
accountability that we are accountable for our actions. What I do, I will get
the consequences. And, therefore, I should act according to my dharma. So, if a
king, even if the king thinks philosophically, oh, this person has been robbed
because that person must have done some bad karma. But that is not the king's
business. What the king has to think, what is my dharma right now. My dharma is
to protect my citizens and to preve..., punish wrongdoers. I must do that. If I
fail in my dharma, then I will be doing bad karma. And I will bear consequences
for that. So, we are not meant to judge people based on their karma. We are
meant to decide our actions based on our dharma.

So, what is our dharma? The mother's dharma is to, to care for the child. She
has given birth to the child. It is her child. That infant depends on her. The
infant is crying, it is her dharma to care of the child. So, at that time, we
cannot bring past karma into the issue over there. Now, we also talked from
another perspective, that people are suffering because of their past karma. So,
what is the use of sometimes, devo..., some devotees, what is the use of
humanitarian help? So, when we say, what is the use of humanitarian help? It
just means that humanitarian life is incomplete. We should not get too
sentimental and think, oh, person is, people are starving, we should give them
food. Yes, we should help people starving. We can give them prasad, definitely.

But the point is that, if people's karmic wrongs are not corrected, then at a
material level, only helping will not lead to any lasting solution. So that does
not mean that, there is, all material help is banned. The point is, we recognise
material help is incomplete. But incomplete does not mean that it is useless.
You know, when the mother caresses for a crying child, cares for a crying child,
that does not solve the child's problem completely. But that does not mean
mother's caring for the child is useless. It has to be there. That care has to be
there. That is a part of the mother's dharma. But when we talk about Krishna
Consciousness, we say that, the dharma is not just to take care of the body. It
is also to take care of the soul. So, there is a complete social service. You
know, we should not become insensitive in the name of being spiritual.

So, now, this is with respect to even ordinary people. We cannot apply this
postmortem analysis. This person is suffering. Why is this person suffering?
Because of past bad karma. More than that, you also should think of further what
is my dharma, and more, all the more so with respect to devotees. If some
devotee is sincerely practicing devotional service, then even if that devotee
has some bodily defects. Now, those bodily defects might be because of some past
bad karma, but that is none of our business. So, why? Because we should consider
what is my dharma. Ok, this is serious devotee, advanced devotee, by serving
that devotee, I can make spiritual advancement. So let me serve that devotee.

I have nothing to know about that person's karma was. That is between that
person and Krishna. So, I do not have to bother about that. And Prabhupada says,
ok, even if we assume that somebody is in some bad karma. Prabhupada takes the
possibility and says over here, this verse from the Bhagavad Gita, 9.30-31.
These are very important verses. Krishna says:

        api cet su-durācāro
        bhajate mām ananya-bhāk
        sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ
        samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

So, even if my devotee commits the most sinful activity, "api cet su-durācāro",
"su-durācāro", "durācāro" is bad behavior, "su-durācāro" is extremely bad
behavior. "api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk", such a person stays
fixed in the practice of devotional service. Such a person is "sādhur eva sa
mantavyaḥ", so considered a sadhu. "samyag vyavasito hi saḥ", "samyag vyavasito
hi saḥ" means, he is fixed in one-pointed, you know, he should be considered a
sadhu because he is fixed in devotional service. So, now, we will discuss this
verse elaborately when we will study Bhagavad Gita, but in this context, even if
a devotee has committed some "su-durācāro" in the past, that is how Srila
Prabhupada is integrating it over here, even if the devotee has committed
something in the past, now, what is the situation? "bhajate mām ananya-bhāk",
now, the devotee is serving Krishna sincerely. When the devotee is serving
Krishna sincerely, then "sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ", such a person is to be
considered sadhu, considered saintly. "samyag vyavasito hi saḥ", when the
determination is properly si..., situated, we should not let the thoughts of
karma contaminate our vision. When we look at devotees, we should think that,
ok, whatever these defects are, they are peripheral. And the essential aspect of
a devotee is that, the devotee is serving Krishna. And because the devotee is
serving Krishna, that devotee is glorious.

Now, this actually applies to many things. You know, one time, His Holiness
Jayadvaita Maharaja, he was Jayadvaita Prabhu in his brahmacari days. So, he
asked Srila Prabhupada, Prabhupada, sometimes, we see that, the pure devotee
commits mistakes. So, how do we understand this? So, all the devotees became a
little intense, and they were going for a morning walk, and Prabhupada, you
know, we know that, there are four defects in the conditioned soul, and we say
that sastra is reliable because those four defects are not there in s..., in the
sastra. And also, we say those who su..., submit, those who teach sastra, so
that is the gene..., that was such, the background understanding. And devotees
were thinking, is this question offensive?

And then they said, no, this is, pure devotee, has commits, never commits any
mistakes. So, but Jayadvaita Maharaja insisted, insisted. He said, but
Prabhupada, we see that sometimes, there is, the pure devotee quotes some verses
wrong. You know, Prabhupada would often do that.

        janma karma ca me divyam
        evam yo vetti tattvatah
        tyaktva deham punar janma
        naiti mam eti so 'rjuna

Prabhupada sometimes: "naiti mam eti so pandava". Or Prabhupada sometimes would
quote some verses wrong. You know, we see that the, Prabhupada would quote some
verses wrong. So, Prabhupada said that is an incorrect un..., vision of
perfection. He says, what you mean? So, Pra..., so Swarup Maharaja was also
there. He asked, Prabhupada, what does it mean? That is external vision,
Prabhupada says. That means we have a wrong conception of perfection? Prabhupada
said yes. The perfection of a pure devotee is that, whatever the devotee does,
is for the service of Krishna, is for the pleasure of Krishna. So, when we are
talking about perfection here, it is spiritual perfection.

Spiritually, there is no mistake in the devotee's intention. The devotee's
intention is to serve Krishna. And for all of us, conditioned souls, we cannot
say that. For us, our intention is not always to serve Krishna. We have so many
other intentions. Ok, occasionally sometimes, we may have the intention to serve
Krishna. Most of the time, our intention, even while doing devotional services,
like that, I do not want to get into trouble. I do not want to get into the
miseries of material existence. Or I want to be considered a good devotee by
others. I want to be praised by others. That is why I am doing all this.

So, there is no mistake ever in the intention of a pure devotee. But when the
devotee is going to act through a physical body, the devote's intentions are
transcendental. The devote's intentions are not affected by the bodily covering
that is there around, body that the devotee is using for serving Krishna in this
world. But those intentions, when they are expressed in this world, there can be
some defects which come out because of the li..., because of the limitations of
the body. So, when we say that, a pure devotee's body should not be seen
materially. What it means is that it should not be seen to be only material.
That should not be reduced down to the material. A pure devotee has
transcendental mo..., intentions. And then, with those transcendental
intentions, when the pure devotee tries to serve Krishna, sometimes, there may
be some li..., limitations of the physical body because of which, certain
problems come out.

You know, Srila Prabhupada's English was not perfect. You know, English grammar,
when Prabhupada would dictate his purports, there would be a lot of grammatical
inconsistencies, and Jayadvaita Maharaja has written a whole series of articles,
explaining what editing he did, and why he did. So that he has given the title
of the "Editing the unchangeable truth". So, you know, that which is
unchangeable, how can that be edited? But Prabhupada himself told his editors.
And Prabhupada, in fact, told, Hayagriva Prabhu was first editor, that one
mistake in a book kills the book. Let there be not a single mistake in the book.

So, Jayadvaita Maharaja is my writing guru. He has taught me writing. So, he
told me that for every Bhagavatam volume that has come out, they would have,
almost like a sackful, sackful of its prints which were proofread. At that time,
the computers were not so common. So, whenever there, there was a type, then
there would be printout taken, printing would be read..., through a printer, it
would be read out, and so everybody has read a sackful of proofread material for
each volume of Bhagavatam. You know, they worked painstakingly hard. So, we
asked Jayadvaita Maharaja, you know, oh, generally, if we are wri..., publishing
a book, how many times should we proofread it? So, he said not more than 20-25
times. Not more than 20-25 times. So, I had a friend in my predevotional days,
whose hobby was to purchase popular books and read those books, and find out
mistakes in those books. And then pack that and send it to the writer. They are,
these are the mistakes that I have found in your book. So, he used to get some
kickout of that. You know, he tried to show how his English is better than the
English of the best author, most popular authors of the times.

So, he got Prabhupada's books, and he just read, read so many books. He just
could not find any mistake anywhere. So, that was because the devotees worked so
hard over there. So, in the early days, the devotees were thinking, so one
time, well, speaking, Srila Prabhupada had used a word that was not there in the
English language only. Now, from the context, we can make out, what is the
meaning, that Prabhupada intended. And the devotees understood there should
be a new word. So, the editors were discussing. They were all young and quite
naive at that time. They said, you know, pure devotee has used this word, then
rather than changing the word, we should change the dictionary. And we should
include this word in the dictionary. So, devotees started thinking. What should
we do? The sentiment is good. But then they decided we should ask Prabhupada
what to do. So, they went and asked Prabhupada. And Prabhupada said, no, change
the word.

So, Prabhupada was very practical. You know, Prabhupada was very practical in
the sense that he understood that, in fact, when Hayagriva offered to edit,
Prabhupada said make it perfect. Prabhupada himself admi..., admits in his, not,
not just in a conversation, or a lecture, or a letter, in his own Bhagavatam
purports. Prabhupada says that our attempt to present this great literature in a
foreign language will certainly be a failure. But since this is a science of
technical values, of transcendental values, we hope that, that essential message
will be accepted by intelligent people all over the world. So, Prabhupada wrote
his first Canto. He published his first Canto in India. And when he was
publishing in India, at that time, he was practically alone, poverty-stricken,
living in Vrindavan, somehow managing his finances as a sannyasi, as a
vanaprastha, and, in, for many years, for still he was vanaprasta, then he was a
sannyasi, but at that time, he had no assistance. Where he had no editor at all.
So, Prabhupada would himself write. Then he would himself type. Then he would
himself take to the printer. Then he would himself proofread. And then he would
himself collect the copies and se..., send them to the, to shopkeepers and
distributors. So, he was a one-man army at that time.

So, Prabhupada writes in the Bhagavatam purport that he was aware that his
English was not perfect. And there were defects in his English. But Prabhupada
said that, gives the example in the Bhagavatam purport. This is the purport,
which, there are two verses in the Bhagavatam in the fifth chapter of the first
Canto, which compare, you know, that literature which is glorifying Krishna,
that is perfect. And that:

        tad-vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo
        yasmin prati-slokam abaddhavaty api
        namany anantasya yaso 'nkitani yat
        srinvanti gayanti grinanti sadhavah

So, "tad-vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo", that wo..., those words,
"janatagha-viplavo", they will do a revolution in the sinful life of ordinary
people.

"yasmin prati-slokam abaddhavaty api", even if every sloka, now, this is not going to
talk about English translation, they are saying about even if the, that
literature, it does a sloka, it does a written sanskrit to glorify the Lord,
even if that has defects, and not just, you know, one or two defects,
"prati-slokam abaddhavaty api", even if there is a defect in each word, still,
because it is glorifying the Supreme Lord:

        namany anantasya yaso 'nkitani yat
        srinvanti gayanti grinanti sadhavah

That the wise people will hear, will accept it, relish it. They will
speak it. So, the, this is not just Prabhupada saying this. Prabhupada is com...,
elaborating his situation, his presentation, English language, but the original,
he is talking about the sanskrit slokas have no defects.

So, the point here is material defects do not affect the transcendental potency
of a pure devotee, or a pure devotee's words. So, now, why was the editing
required? Because when people approach a book, people do not realise the
transcendental potency immediately. So, if they see material defects, and they
will be just put off, they think, the grammar is not good, what will be use of
the message? And they will reject the message. Because people approach this
message with material vision, therefore for them, to assist them, and accessing
the message without any unnecessary negative perceptions, we remove the defects,
whatever defects are there, and in the terms of grammar, or, or punctuation, or
things like that.

So, these are peripheral. And we should be able to see beyond this to the
essential message. And the essential message is transcendental. Central message
is transcendental. So, we were discussing about "api cet su-durācāro". "api cet
su-durācāro", so even if a devotee has committed some terrible sinful activity,
in the past, that does not matter. And because of that, there is some
limitations now. Whatever the limitations have come now, it does not matter,
because now the devotee is serving Krishna. So, whatever defects we see in a
devotee's body. Even if the Ganga has some dirt in it, has some fain or in it,
still, Ganga remains the transcendental. Because the Ganga, there is a essence
of the Ganga that is coming from the spiri..., from the lotus feet of Lord
Vamanadeva. And that transcendental potency of the Ganga is there within its
water, and even if its water is materially contaminated.

So, of course, now, if the water is toxic, you know, because there is so much
pollution, you know, the water has almost become toxic. So, if we are, drink it,
we might event get poisoned by that. So then what will we do? We will just take
one drop, and we will, we will, may not drink it. We just sprinkle it. Then, we
have to see whatever is required. Because it is material, there will be material
reaction to it. If there is toxic, toxis substance in it, that may have a
reaction, top of, toxic effect on us. But irrespective of what happens at the
material level, the transcendental potency is there, and by bathing in the
Ganga, at the transcendental level, we will be purified. We will be elevated.
So, we should not mix the transcendental and material.

So, there are two possibilities of mixing. One is that, we mistake the material
to be everything and do not see the transcendental at all. That means we see the
defects in a pure devote's body, and we think, oh, it is, what, this person is,
person is suffering sinful reactions. What can I learn from such a person?

And the other is that the aspect of we seeing the transcendental and not paying
any attention to the material, especially if in certain forums, that is
required, like, say, editing. So, if a book has to be presented to the public,
then as per Prabhupada's instructions, it has to be adjusted. So, material
aspect has to be adjusted in whatever way is required so that the transcendental
can be accessed. So, we should not let the material block the transcendental
by either way, by thinking that there is no transcendental or making people to
see the material so prominently that they cannot perceive the transcendental.
So, that is why we do the editing. But we understand the essential message is
not required to be edited. So, editing the unchangeable truth was there was no
essential message that was edited. It was only the, ka..., it was only the
presentation, the style, the techniques that were edited, the, of presentation.
That is a to..., basically, language is a tool. It is a technology which is used
for communication. And editing that does not change anything.

Some people unnecessarily criticise this editing. You know, there are, and there,
actually, many of the mistakes came from Srila Prabhupada. They came because
the earlier days, the devotees who were hearing Prabhupada's books, who were
hearing Prabhupada's dictaphone, dictations, and typing them, they just had no
familiarity of what Prabhupada was telling. So, for example, in one of the early
editions of Bhagavad Gita, there was triloka. Now, where is triloka in the
spiritual w..., in the whole universe? Actually, there is no triloka. That was
just a devotee who had misheard pitraloka to be triloka. So, now, changing this
is not only essential, not changing it is violence to Prabhupada. It is violence
because we are so terribly misrepresenting Prabhupada, and saying that he has
talked about triloka. And there is triloka as per the Vedic cosmology. So, we
are living such blatant mistakes, within the books, would be violence to
Prabhupada. So, we have to remove that.

Now, moving forward, as a devotee now, editing is a specialised field with which
a few of us may have to interact. But most of us have to interact with devotees
at other times. So, Srila Prabhupada often talks about how there were problems
which his disciples faced because of they not being born in brahman families or
goswami families. So, when Srila Prabhupada brought his western disciples to
India, and at that time, several devo..., the general Indian community was
amazed to see these western devotees practicing. So, in a sense, actually, the
whole operation was often on the platform of false ego. So, the platform of
false ego, yes, our culture is so great that even western people started
practicing our culture. But then, this is our culture, so we are greater than
them. They should not be considered greater than us. We were born in this
culture. We are brahmins.

So, if people are, anyway, if people appeciate Krishna and Krishna's devotees.
That is good. But if we, that causes, if their platform of perception causes
them to fail to appreciate Krishna and Krishna's devotees. Then that is going to
be a problem in their spiritual prospects. So, therefore, Srila Prabhupada
clarified, you know, yes, these are, they were saying these people are born in
hippie families. How can they be devotees? And how can they be spiritual
teachers? So, Prabhupada quotes over here from this verse, he says that, yes,
being birth, born in a low family:

        distre sabhau janiter vapu sascya doser

It might be a fault of the body, but the body is external to the person, and the
essential person, the soul, is now devoted, become devoted to Krishna. So,
therefore, there is no need to stay obsessed with the externals. Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakur would talk about, and say, realistically, and told the naked
pancho, that you know, some woman, when she was, when some child, when he was
small, you know he may have been wandering around without clothes and his
friends saw him like that. And then that person grows and becomes a high court
judge. And that time, the person says, you know, that person is in high court
judge, very responsible position, very committed, very competent, very
respectable, and then as soon as the friend says, you know, I saw him unclothed.
He says, what does that, what to do with this now? You know, whatever that
person was, it does not matter, because that person is now in a very respectable
position. So, even if a devotee was born in a low family, that does not affect
the devotee now. Because the devotee has practiced devotional service and has
made spiritual advancement. So, "distre sabhau janiter vapu sascya doser", so
then "doser", the "vapu", one should not see it, "napascet".

And then, Prabhupada explains further that who is actually a goswami? So, there
are, see, who is the goswami? Actually, goswamis, it is not that, there is no
such thing as a, by birth. Prabhupada says that actually, Prabhupada is saying
very provocatively. The goswamis say that there are caste goswamis who are
descendents of the various formsas coming down to the goswamis. And they say
actually teaching Krishna Consciousness, giving diksha, is all our monopoly. So,
Prabhupada just turns the argument on his head, and he says that actually, the
title goswami is the monopoly of the pure devotees. So, he says, you are not
goswami at all because, what, he says, uses the example, that Rupa and Sanatan
Goswami, they had become converted to muslims almost because of the pressures of
Hussein Shah. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted them back, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
gave them that name, goswamis. And what is the basis for giving them the name?
If it was, if it had to be caste or birth, they had lost their caste. So, they
could not have been called goswamis. But the Sup..., Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the
Supreme Lord himself called them as goswamis, and on what basis? Because of
their pure devotion. So, Prabhupada says that the title goswami is the monopoly
of the pure devotees.

And actually, nobody else should have this title. But from a cultural, legal
point of view, some people may have the monopoly, to get a little, dynasty,
where the surname may be Goswami. But that itself does not make a person a
Goswami. Goswami means one who has conquered the senses. And who has conquered
the senses? Generally speaking, without the practicing bhakti, it is very
difficult to conquer the senses. So, one is devoted to oneself to Krishna will
be actually a goswami. And, then Prabhupada gives two possibilities. One is that
somebody is born in a devotee's family and has truly controlled the senses.
Then, such a person is a goswami. Other is, somebody is not born in a devotee's
family, you know, somebody is not born in a goswami family, he is born in a
vecha family also. But by practicing devotional service, one has become a
goswami. So, the fact that even western disciples of Srila Prabhupada were
following the four regulative principles indicates that they were advanced
devo..., that they were serious about the practice of devotional service. And
they kept practicing it for years and years and years to get there.

So, Prabhupada said, especially those who had taken sannyasi, they are advanced.
So, they should not be seen with material vision, vision and rejected because of
some peripheral considerations. So, "nasya paśyet", one should not see like
this.

And then, Prabhupada, after talking about this, he talks about the criticism
that happened on himself. Actually speaking, we discussed this briefly
yesterday. We have to understand the history of the Gaudiya Math to understand
the context of the criticism. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur had preached
vigorously, and he opened sixty-four Gaudiya Maths in India, and for the three
outside India, one was in Ramun. One was in Montreal. One was in London.
Actually, the Montreal, London, they were not exactly temples. They were
centers. There were deities over there. Centers were there. But basically, it
heated enormous outreach. And through that outreach, he got so many people to
take up Krishna Consciousness. And how would he do this? It was through his
disciples. You know, he was the word of inspiration. He was the leader. But his
disciples were also very dedicated. And they all came together under the
guidance of the spiritual master. And they preached vigorously. Now, when
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur departed, in 1937, so at that time, he told his
disciples to form a united body, a governing body commission, and work unitedly.
So, somehow, his disciples just could not digest the idea.

Now, to say that they disobeyed their spiritual master, is a, is true, but it is
also an oversimplification of a very complicated situation. See, the tradition
was that generally, every sin..., every sampradaya, every matha, every
organisation would have its madhadipati, its samprada acharya. So, who is like
one presiding head and that, un.., under the authority of that person, everybody
else would function. So, such a person's word is taken as final, and that, that
is the way to resolve all problems. But when they had the idea that, ok, we have
to form a committee. How will the committee work? Sometimes, they would have
discussions, debates, then whose opinion will be final? You know, if, if
a devotee believes, ok, this person, my spiritual master, my spiri..., he is a
pure devotee, and then actually, his connection, he comes in contact with Krishna
and then, and whatever is speaking actually the will of Krishna, then for the
disciple to follow it is very easy. This is Krishna's will coming through.

But then, can the disciple have this similar faith? If you know, there are body
of ten people, and before taking a decision, they take, they discuss, and they
debate, and they vote and after that, the decision comes out. You know, is that
a result of a political process? Or is that, the decision that has come out, is
that the result of a devotional process? So, is this, is a resolution that is
passed by a body of people, is this the will of God? And is that a binding
instruction for me the way instruction of my, of a pure devotee who has
connected me with Krishna will be?

So, actually, Krishna can manifest his will in any way. Krishna can, Krishna,
when a pure devotee instructs, this is how you should work, then by working in
that way, Krishna's will will become manifested. So, we can, cannot pigeon hole,
the ways in which Krishna will manifest his will to certain stereotypes. Krishna
can manifest in many ways. But the point is that this is difficult concept to
digest. We would like things to be simpler. Yes, I have one authority, and that
authority is a pure devotee and he has a connection with Krishna, whatever that
pure devotee speaks, is Krishna speaking. And it would make things simpler.

But that was not the way Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur wanted devotees,
devotees to work. So, they tried having a committee for a few days, but they
just felt, we will not be able to function like this. That is why they made one
of them as successor, and when that person, his authority could not be accepted
by others, and then there was a, some sort of split, and that person had some
problem in spiritual life, which aggravated the split, and then there were two
parties which were created, and then the parties fought in courts. And there
were many sincere disciples of Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur, who were
distressed, very stressed by this, fighting in the court, so, the fighting was,
who will have the control over the property of the Gaudiya Math, especially the
Vhag Bazaarment, which is very opulent. And then many sincere devotees of
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur, who just, you know, distanced themselves from
the conflict and made their own Matha, and tried to preach according to their
own capacity.

But the power that the united institute, Gaudiya Math had, was lost forever because
of these internalised conflicts, and then the isolated individual efforts. Then,
when Srila Prabhupada was trying to practice, practice, share Krishna
Consciousness as per instructions of Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur, you know,
Prabhupada, several times, tried to work with his godbrothers. Sometimes, he
tried, he is, for sometime, he would stay in his godbother's ashram editing
their magazines and trying to share Krishna Consciousness that way. But somehow,
their vision was superotial, they did not want the magazine to expand. So,
Prabhupada felt choke, when he said that. Then, Prabhupada tried to, at a vyasa
puja of his spiritual master, tried to inspire them all to become united, and
to preach unitedly. But they did not take him very seriously, just thought his
words are eloquented, eloquent poetry, nothing more.

And then, you know, Prabhupada himself tried to preach, but he was not offered
any assistance. And then finally, he himself went to America, all alone, without
any assistance, even when he wanted, even when he had, he got a sponsor who was
ready to offer donations so that Prabhupada could build a temple in America.
Prabhupada meet Simhaniya, he said he will help. But then, all that was needed
was the Indian government had to get clearance that Indian government had to
give clearance. And somebody had to go to the Indian government, apply, and tell
that this money, please clear it from the foreign exchange. So, one of
Prabhupada's godbrothers was very close to the president of India also. And he
could easily get permission, but he did not do that. And none of his godbrothers
actually came to help him at that time.

And Prabhupada had to single-handedly, so there is a chapter in lilamrta, crying
alone in the wilderness. That is talking about Srila Prabhupada's preaching in
India all alone, especially in Delhi, but there was some, Prabhupada, situation
even in America, when crying alone in the wild, there was nobody to help you.
And there is also a chapter that it will not be possible to assist you. That
chapter is, that chapter talks about how from all sides, he got the response,
no, we cannot help you, we cannot help you, we cannot help you. But Prabhupada
thus spread all this discouragement's continue to solitary and for
determination. And then with in..., im..., overcoming almost impossible
difficulties, he made people into devotees. And he inspired them to take to
Krishna Consciousness, brought them to India. And then he wanted to show them
the culture that he did introduce them to. And so, he brought them to Vrindavan,
to Mayapur, to Puri. And he introduced them to his godbrothers.

Now, because Prabhupada had gone to America, and he had become successful in
American preaching, so that brought him a lot of fame. And for many of his
godbrothers, the idea that a person who had just been a peripheral member when
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur was there, that person should not become a
mainstream leader, not just a mainstream leader, a mainstram leader, but the
mainstream leader. The primary most visible, most celebrated exponent of Gaudiya
Vaishnavism, during their times, and they themselves who had been leaders,
sannyasis, and very powerful speakers and preachers. They themselves had got
sidelined. So, several of them found it difficult to digest. Now, of course,
there was several of Prabhupada's godbrothers who publicly and lavishly
appreciated his efforts and his success, even say that, he was, he is the
senapati bhakta projected in Caitanya Bhagavat, he is saktyavesa avatar, he
has fulfilled the mandate of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He has fulfilled the desire of
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur. They appreciated him also, but often, there
were others who appreciation was actually a concealed form of renunciation.

For example, when Srila Prabhupada brought a bus, full of western devotees, to
Vrindavan. It created a sensation in Vrindavan. So, Prabhupada was, Prabhupada
was living in Vrindavan before, and at that time, Vrindavan was quite a small
place. So, Prabhupada was like a home town boy, you know, who had become
successful in a foreign country. Now, suppose there is a small village, and in that
village, there is some boy, who somehow gets, comes to the meritalist, and goes to a
very famous college, and in that college he goes and gets a degree, and then
becomes very famous, becomes popular, and then comes back. Then that child, that
boy is like the pride of the village and everybody comes to see and feed him,
and congratulate him. So, like that, the leaders, the political cultural leaders
of Maya..., of Vrindavan decided to organise a public festival to congratulate
Srila Prabhupada. To felicitate him for spreading the glories of Vraja all over
the world. And making people from all over the world, Krishna devotees.

So, at such a, at such a programme, at his programme, one of his godbrothers
came and he said, you know, and he said, what Bhaktisiddhanta Sara..., what
Bhaktivedanta Swami has done, it is extraordinary, but he said, we do not, we
have been sannyasis, and we have been preaching to elite class of people.
Bhaktisi..., Bhaktivedanta Swami was a, was a business man, and had material
skill of organisation, because of his vasya profession, and you know, he, as a
vasya, he had to deal with all kinds of people. That is why, because of his
material skills, and because of his, because of his experience in dealing with
all kinds of people, when we went to the west, he was able to preach to the low
class people and he made them into devotees, also. Prabhupada told. Anyway,
whatever he has done, is good, and we appreciate that.

So, actually, is this appreciation or is this minimisation? That means, you
know, we are very advanced. And we preach to high class people. People preach to
low class people. Ok, you did something good. We appreciate it. But actually,
what was Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's mercy? Caitanya Mahaprabhu is patita pavan.
He is not pavan pavan. You know, pavan pavan means, he is not a purifier of
pure. Caitanya Mahaprabhu does not say that one has to be living a pure
lifestyle before one gets His mercy. In fact, Nityananda Prabhu, when he heard
about the misdeeds of Jagai and Madhai, his eyes became big in excitement.
Because he thought that, oh, if these people can be delivered, then just as the
Puranas sing the glories of Lord Narayana for having delivered Ajamil, then in
the future, everybody will sing the glories of Gaura for having dese...,
delivered Jagai and Madhai. And he said, this is how I want to celebrate the
glories of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Proclaim it to the whole world by making
him do that which would be otherwise impossible to elevate these Jagai and
Madhai, and to purify them. So, that is adventure aspect of a devotee. So,
Prabhupada did that.

So, to actually take those who are at a very low level of Consciousness, and to
elevate them, that is, that is a sign of extraordinary potency. And that
ambition is indicative the, through heart of devotion. So, Prabhupada had that
ambition, which indicates he had intensely devoted heart, a heart devoted to
glorifying the Lord, And, offering to do it, he attempted to do it, he succeeded
in doing it. So after Prabhupada did all this, for his gr..., for some of his
godbrothers to minimise him, to criticise him was very unfortunate. When
Prabhupada himself was quite pained by this at times. You know.

So, here, we will see that they were jealous. Prabhupada said you cannot
advi..., you cannot take the similar action against a pure devotee. You cannot
advice. You cannot correct. Now, the effect of this will be that there will be
obstructive and dis.., dangerous for one's spiritual advancement. And what we
should focus on is that pure devotee serving the Lord. And what do such people
think? That, what is the origin of this extra image? They think that Krishna
Consciousness is limited to a certain section of people, a certain a section of
devotees, and a certain tract of land. So, certain section of people means, at a
global level, they may think that, oh, only people in India can become devotees.
Or they may think that, not only certain tract of land, but even certain section
of people. So, certain section of devotees, only goswamis can initiate.

So, misconceptions, that are actually against the spirit of bhakti. And we see
that, the spirit of bhakti has always been ac...,  opposed by the entrenched
interests. Entrenched interest means those who were in power, and they wanted to
stay in power, and because of their desire to stay in power, they wanted to put
aside anyone who did not have that power. So, historically, especially in the
middle periods, when bhakti spread rapidly all across India because of many
saints, so the saints were often from lower class. And they were opposed very
strongly, by, they were prosecuted often by the higher class people. So, those
higher class people could not see that the saints had devotion. They only saw,
oh, you are from a lower caste? How can you teach dharma? What right do you have
to worship the deity? What right do you have to do this, do that? So, they
basically condemned. So, there are many stories about different devotees, how,
despite their condemnation of being low caste, they were protected by the Lord,
and they were elevated. So, bhakti has been very inclusivist that bhakti
includes everyone in its fold.

So, we see Haridas Thakur, you know, the Navab would bet him, not in our,
used to have him beaten, not just because he was a muslim, who was chanting the
holy names of a hindu God. That was the perception of Navab. But actually, there
was so many hindus that time that the Navab would not even notice, Haridas
Thakur. But it was the hindus who went and complained to the Navab, what did the
hindus say? They just said actually, this person is spoiling, he is a low caste
person, he was actually muslim and now he has become a hindu, and he is teaching
hindu dharma to hindus. He is contaminating our religion. Check him.

It was at that time that Navab was saying, and should, took action, and he
called Haridas Thakur. And Haridas Thakur gave up excellent ideal, excellent
interfaith speech. He said that actually, the Purana and the Coran, both talk
about the same God. Only one God, and he said, if you think that I am punishment
worthy, then if a hindu became a muslim, whatever punishment you would give him,
you should give that punishment to me, because different people worship acco...,
the, the Lord, according to how he inspires them from the heart. So, he used, he
was quite impressed by the speech of Haridas Thakur. Now, I may have described
it very briefly, but the point is, it is elaborate speech. But then, his
assistances were there. And they were hardlined. And they said punish him. Whip
him to that. And then he was whipped, and whipped, and whipped, and he did not
die, and finally, his whipper said, if you do not die, then we will have to die
because the king will sentence us to death.

And Haridas Thakur said, please, there is no need for you to die, for my sin. If
you fe..., for your living, I have to die, that will make you happy, then I will
die, and just see how I die, and I enter samadhi. So, people thought that he
had died, and threw him to the water, through his body. The devotees got the
body back, and they would be inclined to get the body back, but Haridas Thakur,
actually, he just, he kept, stayed in samadhi for some time. His body kept
floating. When he came out of samadhi, he just came out, and he again came back
to the court of the Candalasi. And he said that, yes, here, I was chanting Hare
Krishna. So, so, so, so, the, so the ato..., authorities basically, they
realised, this person has some, has miraculous power. He is a saint. We could,
should not, we made a mistake by punishing him. And they, they forgave him. And
they said that there should be no any prosecution of Haridas Thakur anymore.

So, the point which I am making by all this is, seeing the internal visi...,
seeing the defective vision, seeing the mercy with material vision has affected
all traditions. You know, even Jesus, when he was crucified. Why was he
crucified? The Romans, they did not want to interfere with the religious fair of
the jews. Jesus was born in a jew family, but he was, he was overthrowing the
ritualism that had become the center piece of the jewish religion at that time,
of the religious culture at that time, when he was trying to bring some
spiritual vibrancy and return to the essence. So, at that time, he, when we say
he was betrayed, what happened? It was jews who opposed to Jesus, and they
complained to the Roman authorities. And the Roman athorities has decided to
heathen, tried, and in a mock trial, and they had sentenced to death, and he
was crucified.

So, the point is that those who have tried, thought, thought the time, honored
the time principle of devotion, they have faced prosecution. So, as devotees,
when Srila Prabhupada faced prosecution, that was not unexpected, but the
pro..., but what is the unexpected is? The source of that opposition. That was
what distressed Prabhupada very much. It should mean the mainstream society
criticising, that should not mean bad. But it was people who were fellow
vaishnavas like him, sometimes his own godbrothers, other Gaudiya Vaishnavas.
That they were acting in ways that was irreputable. And that was what distressed
Srila Prabhupada very much. Of course, Srila Prabhpada was never discouraged.
When we say distressed, you know, naturally, he had, he saw his godbrothers as
equals, he felt all disciples of Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur, and
Prabhupada even comes, comes to say that, you know, ultimately, we are doing his
work. If Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvari Thakur sees, sees it fit to work through me,
then who am I to stop him? And not only, who am I to stop him, you know, I am no
one, but even if my, if my godbrothers are truly devoted to Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakur, then they should see Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur acting
me. Then, they will make spiritual advancement.

So, now, Srila Prabhupada, he continued his sharing Krishna Consciousness, no
matter what the difficulties he faced. And that is how he built a Krishna
Consciousness movement, and not just a Krishna Consciousness movement. He
inspired many devotees to many things within the Krishna Consciousness movement.
And by that, he attracted many many people to Krishna's feet. Now, if you look
at a pure devotee, why should we not offend? Because we cannot be sure. Because
the defects are external, material. Because we are not here, our goal is not to
find out faults for others. Our goal is to serve Krishna and to return back to
Krishna. To the extent, for the sake of that purpose, if we have charge of
disciplining, regulating, overseeing the spiritual life of certain people, then
ww can do the whatever is required to help them in whatever way is possible. But
we cannot make that as a license, a justification for all lack of affection in
our relationships.

So, to advise, to correct a pure devotee, as some people try to do, they are all
offensive and they should all be avoided all times. And now we can see over
here, this circle, why the Prabhupada disciples did not ex..., Prabhupada said,
they did not appreciate the extract..., extraordinary activities of, of
spreading Krishna Consciousness world wide. And if empowered persons do not teach, then
who will? Then Prabhupada quotes that Krishna Bhaktivi Nahitar Pravar...,
Krishna Shakti Nahitar pavartam. So without the energy of Krishna, without the
empowerment of Krishna, one cannot bring about any change. The fact that
Prabhupada was able to bring about to change indicates that Krishna shakti was
there. And the fact Krishna shakti was there indicates that Radharani was there.

So, thank you very much. Sri Upadesamrta ki jaya. Hare Krishna.
