Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0HhhHUQ0iKg
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=sanL7VlbFl00AoSjuzbA1icJfmJ8MTU0MTgzMDcxOUAxNTQxNzQ0MzE5&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_035_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_5_Part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=0HhhHUQ0iKg&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction. We are continuing now with the text:

        dīkṣā...
        kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta

So, we will discuss a few points. There is a lot of important point that Srila
Prabhupada makes in his purport. So, I will discuss a few points. Let us look at
this powerpoint over here. So, we see, we discussed most of it, but here we will
see, the bottom. How a person interacts with uttama adikari. So, we go with
faith, and we inquire. When we inquire, we associate, and we serve. So, it is
said that there is, we inquire, and then when in the process of inquiry, we become
more close, we learn association. And then in the association, we serve. And
then serve, when we serve a person, our faith in that person increases again.
And greater faith, we make more, mo..., deeper, more intimate inquiries. And
then that deepens our relationship, the association becomes even deeper.

Then, so, it begi..., faith, inquiry, association, service. It goes on
cyclically like that. It is an ever deeping cycle. So, it is said that actually
when we associate with the mahabhagavata, you know, it is a true leader is one
who knows the way, goes the way, and shows the way. A true leader is who knows
the way. That means this is the way I should go. And not only knows the way, it
is, actually after doing the way, often going along the way is not easy. It
requires a lot of struggle. So, leader sets the example, and goes the way. And
then actually, tr..., goes to the journey, which one has to go through. And then
finally shows the way. Ok, this is how you should go. So, this is actually the
characteristic of a true leader and we see this in Srila Prabhupada, in the way
he lived and shared Krishna Consciousness with others.

So, a leader is one who knows the way. Now, Srila Prabhupada, he internalised
the Vedic scriptures based on hearing from his spiritual master, studying his
spiritual master's books, and studying the previous acharyas' books, in addition
of course to living right from his chil..., early childhood in a very devotional
atmosphere that was very carefully protected and cultivated by his devotee
father Gour Mohon Dev whom Srila Prabhupada called, calls in his Krishna book as
a pure devotee. And then, he is also talking about, he also learnt what he had
learnt in a cultural sense from his father. He learnt fro..., in a philosophical
sense from his spiritual father, his Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur. And then
with those, both those assets, Srila Prabhupada, he actually knew the way.

When he knew the, now, here, we are not talking about Srila Prabhupada as a
person who descended from the spiritual world. That is there definitely. Srila
Prabhupada has spoken that on intimate occasions to a f..., cer..., to a few of
his disciples that Krishna sent him from the spiritual world. But Srila
Prabhupada never claimed that that was the basis of his authority for preaching.
He said my authority for preaching is because my spiritual master has instructed
me to, and Caitanya Mahaprabhu's prophecy was already there. And fulfilling the
prophecy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the responsibility of every soul.

So, of every follower of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, ultimately every soul, because
every soul is a follower of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but at least those who have
accepted Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as their worshipable Lord, it is their
responsibility to fulfill the prophecy. And Srila Prabhupada would say that one
time at an intimate meeting with his godbrothers, his godbrothers were trying
to, one of his godbrothers was saying that, you know, this whole putri, maybe at
that time people thought putri was just India, and that is why all over India,
the holy name will be chanted and Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur has already
done that.

Prabhupada said no. Actually, putri means the whole world. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu said it will happen. So, at that time, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakur was healing and he was, he would not have lived for very long. So then,
the devotees said who will do that? So then, Srila Prabhupada became grave and
he said, some fool will do it. Some fool will do it. What does that mean? You
know, Prabhupada said that, you know, if we just have too much faith in our
rational intelligence, how will this happen? How will that happen? How will that
happen? Then, our rational intelligence makes us think that sharing Krishna
Consciousness in this Kali Yuga is mission impossible. It is not possible. Who
is going to hear? But when we base our thinking, not just on our logic, but on
faith in Krishna, and on the transcendental logic that with Krishna, everything
is possible. And whoever k..., chooses to become an instrument of Krishna,
Krishna can empower that person. So, with this faith, when we work, then we
understand that sharing Krishna Consciousness and the subsequence spread of
Krishna Consciousness all over the world is not mission possible. Actually, it
is mission unstoppable. It is mission unstoppable. Because who can stop Krishna?
Krishna is all powerful. And it is his mission. And it will be spread all over
the world.

So, Srila Prabhupada said that some fool will do it. So, what he meant by that
fool was, one does, does not have too much faith in one's own logic and
rationality of how it will be possible. One just does what one can and then
Krishna makes the arrangements. So, we see it is said that there are various
definitions of faith. One general understanding of faith is faith is to take one
step up a staircase when we cannot see the full staircase. Take one step at a
time, one step at a time, one step at a time. Along the direction that Krishna
wants us to go. Just keep taking one step, one step, one step. And then Krishna
will reveal the way to us. So, Srila Prabhupada knew the way means it was not
that he knew exactly when he will, when he will go to New York, what will happen
when he will go to New York, and how he will meet different devotees, and they
will become devotees, and how he will send them all over the world.

Srila Prabhupada had a vision, in the sense that, not a mystical vision, but a
vision in the sense that, our deep faith which also led to visualisation within
his heart, that actually there are temples, there are devotees, just time which
is separating us from them. So, of course, we call the mystical vision also. But
the point was Srila Prabhupada was, he knew the way, not in the details, but in the
broad principle of faith. What Caitanya Mahaprabhu was saying has to happen. So,
he knew the way. And then, not only that he knew the way, as so a devotee can be
passive. Oh, it is Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's prophecy. He is Supreme Lord. He
will fulfill it. No. A devotee does not think like that. A devotee thinks, I
have to do it.

You know, if I love my Lord, then his words, making them true is my
responsibility. You know, that is what a devotee, that is the meaning of
surrender. That is the meaning of dedication. That is the meaning of commitment.
You know, that is what Krishna tells Arjuna that you fight. And what does Arjuna
say?

       kariṣhye vachanaṁ tava

Srila Prabhupada says in a lecture that, Kr... Arjuna does not say, oh, Krishna,
you are God. That you kill all the enemies. I will just sit by your side and I
need bang.  I will be doing bang. Prabhupada is making a caricature of pseudo
spiritualists over there. He says that the devotee takes responsibility for
Krishna's mission. So, Prabhupada had that sense of responsibility. That Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's prophecy is my responsibility. And Srila Prabhupada went
the way. He led. He knows the way in the sense that he had the faith that it
will happen, and he knew that the Lord's, nothing can stop the Lord's will from
actualising. But he himself took the responsibility. He goes the way.

So, Srila Prabhupada, you know, himself physically all over, traveled in an
extraordinary way for so ma..., such a long time in his life. You know, at a,
such a long, so vigorously, at such an advanced age, you know, and for long long
time. Srila Prabhupada went around the world fourteen times almost, in the last
ten, eleven years of his life. Even from a material point of view, that is a
remarkable feet. And it is not that Srila Prabhupada was traveling and
sightseeing. He was constantly busy. He was barely sleeping for a few hours at
night, and sharing Krishna Consciousness with enormous vigor. So, actually, he
went, he we..., worked harder than anyone else. You know, we sometimes say
that pure devotees are empowered, is, empowerment is there. But empowerment does
not mean that there are no obstacles. You know, empowerment means even when
there are obstacles, the devotee perseveres.

And that, in one sense, the determination to go on is the empowerment. And, you
know, sometimes, maybe in old movies, you might have seen in a Rama..., Ramayana
on television was there, so there is a rakshasa which shoots an arrow and the,
and the some Lord Rama or Lakshman, somebody will shoot on arrow. And both
arrows together, and one arrow falls off, one arrow just falls off. So, like
that, most often what happens is, when we have some determination to serve
Krishna and when some obstacle comes, so two arrows collide, our determination
falls off. It is, I cannot do it. Leave it. It is too complex, too, too
difficult.

But with Srila Prabhupada, no matter how many big obstacles came, tuck, tuck,
everything just fell off and Srila Prabhupada went on, went on, went on. So, he
went the way. The kind of difficulty that Srila Prabhupada was, faced was
unbelievable. The difficulties were multiple. It was at one level that the
difficulties were that he was, his own body was aging, and he was wake, he was
all alone, and when later on he got very dedicated devotees, but even they
had difficulties in following the spiritual standards, their difficulties in
interrelating with each other. They had difficulties in presenting Krishna
Consciousness for the world properly. They misrepresented sometimes. They, then,
there were difficulties of being in a foreign country where devotees were
labeled as cultists. And then they had to fight court cases. Sometimes, the
devotees were abducted, and brainwashed.

So, sometimes, devotees were arrested and put in jail. So, there were actually
multiple difficulties for Srila Prabhupada. But he just went own and
unaffectedly, tirelessly preaching. So, he goes the way and then he shows the way.
Srila Prabhupada not only went on heroically preaching, but he also shared how
you should do it. He says do as I have done and share Krishna Consciousness with
the world. So, he went the way and he showed the way. He actually, Srila
Prabhupada in one lecture says that, not just one lecture, several places he
said, actually, this Krishna Conciousness movement is practically invented by
me. You know, invented by me does not mean that it was concocted, but invented
in the sense that how people with wes..., with cultural upbringing, that was a
radically different from the traditional cultural upbringing, how they could be
engaged in devotional service.

How people who have never heard about Krishna, how they could be inspired and
engaged in such a way that they could give their life to Krishna. Srila
Prabhupada used to mean this devotional creativity for them. The way Srila
Prabhupada started Ratha Yatra, we discussed that earlier, how, you know, the
hippies like to do outlandish things, and Srila Prabhupada started Ratha Yatra,
whichwas the most outlandish thing that they could think of, you know, dancing
in the streets and not only that, Srila Prabhupada started book distribution.
Now, the tradition was that brahmacaris go and beg. But Srila Prabhupada said
begging is not respectable, so you go and give something, and then ask for
charity. And book distribution become such a tremendous phenomenal means of not
only sharing of wisdom, but also increasing the lakshmi in the service of
Krishna.

So, Srila Prabhu..., in India, he came and he made life membership. So, Srila
Prabhupada came off with many different schemes and plans by which not only to
share Krishna Consciousness, but also to engage the devotees. So, he kept the
principles the same, the sambadya jnani kept the same, but abidheya, Prabhupada
was tremendously innovative, in terms of how to get devotees to practice
devotional service. Sambadha is the philosophical understanding that I am a
servant of Krishna, the basic philosophical knowledge. Srila Prabhupada did not
change sambadha. That is, he kept the points very clear that I am the, I am the
Lor..., err, I am the servant of Krishna. That he did not cha..., change any
way. But abidheya, how we should be fo..., connected with Krishna. So, amanda,
vidheya, prayojana, these are three primary aspects, of actually of any process.
You know, if a person wants to say, says the advertisement. And then, ok, there
is a car advertisement. Then, the person sees the car advertisement and the
person thinks, oh, I want that car. That car advertisement says, pu..., purchase
them, enjoy this car, purchase this car, and enjoy the envy in your neighbor's
eyes.

So, it is, it is such a degraded standard, you know, we are thinking my
enjoyment will be the envy in others' eyes, but whatever. Person sees the car
and sambandhana is established. Oh, I want that car. So, first we und..., there
is, we look at that object, we come to know about that object, and then we want
to develop a relationship with that object. Then after that, there is avidheya.
There is a process. Ok, how do I develop? Now, I understood this is the object
with which I want to develop a relationship. How do I develop that relationship?
So, that is, a process for that. So, I, I withdraw money from my bank, and go to
the car show room, and purchase the car. If I do not dive that, then I worked my
plan to get a loan. If I cannot get a loan, then I will do savings, and then
based on, mortgage something, then I go to the car show room, and then I decide
to purchase the car.

So, so, avidheya is the process by which we develop the sambandha. Sambandha is
basically knowledge.

        sambandha kṛṣṇa bhakti abhidheya prema prayojana

In Caitanya Caritamrta says. And then what happens when I ride in the car and ride
in the car and then we go right by my nu..., neighbor's house, I am about to
enjoy the envy in the neighbor's eyes, and I find that he is riding in a more
modern car than what I have got. And then instead of enjoying the envy in his
eyes, he enjoys the envy in my eyes. So, it is a distressing and devastating
anticlimax for me. So, generally, the prayojana, in terms of happiness, it is
al..., almost always an anticlimax in material life. So, but the principle is
that in everything, this is how you work, sambandhana, abhidheya, prayojana. The
movies, they show that there is a boy and a girl, and somehow, they are
traveling through a building and both of them get trapped with the same lift at
the same time, and the lift, lift electricity goes off, and they look at each
other, and when they touch with the some, they feel that the electric current
flows through their body, and they think we want to develop sambandhana.

And then, after that, the whole movie, where maybe the girl's parents suppose,
the boy's parents suppose, and then there is fighting, there is
misunderstanding, and there are all kinds of complexities, that is the whole
thing is abhidheya. And then, the prayojana that they show is, and they lived
happily ever after. Now, that prayojana is not true. Because actually nobody
lives happily ever after. We discussed how, when we say, happily ever after,
this is exactly the opposite of what Bhagavad Gita teaches. Bhagavad Gita
teaches "duhkhalayam asasvatam". So, nobody lives ever after is "asasvatam", And
this "duhkhalayam", nobody lives happily.

But the point is, this sambandha, abhidheya, prayojana is there everywhere. So,
now, sambandha, we, Prabhupada gives the philosophical knowledge to explain how
Krishna is the all attractive supreme Lord. And we have to develop a
relationship with him. So, that is sambandha. Then, abhidheya is how do I
develop my relationship? That is by the process of bhakti. So, how is the
process of bhakti to be practiced in the modern times. That Prabhupada explains,
is process invention, so many different ways he came up by which he could engage
devotees. And the prayojana here is truly fulfilling. It is love for Krishna
which is a lasting and fulfilling asset which just keeps floo..., filling and
flooding our heart with happiness for all of eternity.

So, Srila Prabhupada showed the show how to engage devotees in Krishna's
service. Srila Prabhupada in many ways was very creative, although he was very
faithful to the tradition, but at the same time, in terms of engaging devotees
was extremely innovative. And he encouraged devotees to come up with different
ideas how you can share Krishna Consciousness. So, when the devotees were going
to organise a pandal, a big pandal programme in Mumbai. So, at that time, they
did a lot of publicity blitz, and then they made a big helium balloon. And near
si..., vis.., viti, siesta station, that was viti at that time, they put the
balloons, they were the balloons, huge balloon suspended, so that practically
from any part of Mumbai, people could see it. Look at the sky, and they will see
a balloon, and another balloon was written, Hare Krishna.

So, at that time, the propaganda was such people already knew what Hare Krishna
meant. There was a Hare Krishna festival and the subsidized advertisement of
that. And Prabhupada appreciated it. So, a leader is one who knows the way,
goes the way, and shows the way. This was Srila Prabhupada. And it is such an
advanced devotee:

        śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam ananyam anya-
        nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā
        
That we should aspire for those who are such an advanced devotee, who
"bhajana-vijñam", "bhajana-vijñam" is expert in bhajan. Expert in bhajan does
not just mean expert in remembering the esoteric pastimes of Radha and Krishna.
That is there. But the expertise that is relevant for a person who wants to
fulfill Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhup's prophecy is how to expertly attract people to
Krishna's lotus feet and not just to attract people, but subsequently engage
people in Krishna's service. So, that was Srila Prabhupada's "bhajana-vijñam".
"ananyam", and he was purely devoted to Krishna, to nothing else. That was how
Prabhupada is in that category, where devotees even today, they che..., they
long for his association. And those who got his association for a few moments of
Srila Prabhupada, they, that has become their permanent life-long asset. It is a
par..., it is a perineal treasure, which they can draw back on and relish and
cherish in their hearts, and drive in..., drive inspiration from it.

There is a devotee who met Srila Prabhupada and the only interaction he had was
Prabhupada just looked at, Prabhupada was coming down to go for morning walk,
and he was going to morning walk. Prabhupada looked and said jaya. And that is
all. And this devotee felt, oh, Prabhupada was appreciating, encouraging and
giving confidence, jaya. You know, that you have become a devotee, jaya.
You know, whatever discouragement you have, you know, that Krishna is supreme,
and visits as full, jaya. So he says, through that, one expression, jaya, this
devotee can draw unlimited purports and keep getting inspiration. So, this is:

        nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā

it is, cherish the association. Bhagavatam says that, you know, how a devotee
relishes to association of advanced devotees, that just as when the peacock sees
that the clouds are coming, then what happens? The peacock feather just blo...,
rises up in a beautiful blossom. It starts dancing in joy. So, like that, when
we get the association of devotees, our, we also become jubilant. So, that is
how the advanced devotees, when they speak words, they go into our heart, and
then we become purified by that. And we make swift spiritual advancement. When
our hearts are attracted to such devotees, we want to serve them, and then,
because they want us to serve Krishna, when we serve them essentially, we
are serving Krishna. And that way, we make rapid spiritual advancement.

Now, if we forward and think about what are the characteristics of such advanced
devotee, so Prabhupada says, Prabhupada, as we discussed, Bhaktivinoda Thakur
says that, Prabhupada quotes this, a vaishnava is known by how many other
vaishnavas such a person makes. So, yes.

"Is preaching success a sign of spiritual advancement? Yes, it is, provided it
is a result of, not a substitute for, inner fulfillment."

What does this mean? Inner fulfillment means that when we are practicing Krishna
Consciousness, we feel happy. We feel satisfied. You know, we feel that I am
very fortunate that I have come to know about the purpose of life that ha...,
connected with Krishna, and now, I am on my way back to Krishna after lo...,
losing myself in material existence throughout this life and for so many earlier
lives. So, when we feel fulfilled internally, it is not that we have no
struggles. We always have struggles as long as we are in the sadhaka stage. But
actually, this world is like a hospital. And we are all like patients. But we
are all like patients who had been diagnosed correctly and now being treated
correctly. So, it is not that once the treatment starts, automatically all pain
goes away. But certainly, the pain decreases. And not only does the pain
decrease, along with that, the health also returns. So, a patient who has taken
the treatment for some time can clearly see, I may still have some pains, but as
compared to earlier, my suffering is much lesser. I am healthier now. And that
gives the patient the faith that this treatment works. If I keep following this
treatment, then it will work more. And I will become healthier and healthier
until I become completely disease free.

So, like that, by the practice of devotional service, we will all become disease
free. What is our disease? It is our material attachment. So, it is bhavaroga as
the Bhavagavatam calls it, the disease of material existence, which is caused by
our material desires. So, this causes not only the miseries of birth, old age,
disease and death, not only the adhya atnika bhodikari devidhyat, but it also
causes the torment of sadvika, lust, anger, greed, envy, pride, and illusion.
And by the practice of Krishna Consciousness. This is what we see, the lust,
anger, greed, envy, pride and illusion start decreasing, decreasing, decreasing.
We gain levels of self-mastery which we have thought would have been impossible
for us. And then as we learn to live a life according to scriptures, then
"adhya atmika bhodikati deviklesa" also decrease because we learn how not to
maximise conflicts, but how to live harmoniously.

So, we see that this process works, we become more peaceful, we become more
joyful, our life becomes more purposeful and meaningful. So, just as when a
person is sick, and as found a, the cure for the disease, then whenever that
person sees anybody else with that disease, that person feels, oh, why are you
suffering? Please take this medicine. It works. It will cure you. So, when a
person understands that, naturally, the person wants to practice the method,
practice the process. So, similarly, when we are sharing Krishna Consciousness,
we are, we have experience, we have relished the transformational potency, the
curative power of Krishna Consciousness. And we see, others are also suffering
similarly. So, we want them also to relish them, power. And that is why we
talk about Krishna Consciousness. We share Krishna Consciousness with others.
So, when this is the motive, then naturally, our genuine conviction comes out.
And when a person speaks sincerely from the heart, and also, touches and
transforms the heart, then the preaching success is growing out of one's inner
fulfillment. It is a result of one's inner fulfillment. And then naturally, such
a convinced person attracts many other people. And when a person attracts many
other people, then the Krishna Consciousness movements spreads. So, Srila
Prabhupada was like that, sa..., satisfied. He did not need anything, completely
satisfied in chating Hare Krishna and share Krishna Consciousness. And he
attracted others, so many others.

So, ideally, preaching success should be a result of our inner fulfillment. But
in some cases, preaching success can be a substitute for our inner fulfillment.
And that can be dangerous. Then, it is not a sign of spiritual advancement. See,
when we are getting inner fulfillment, that itself means we are advancing
spiritually. Because what is spiritual advancement? It means we are returning to
our original nature as sat-cid-ananda. Atma is sat-cid-ananda. But the atma
cannot experience ananda as long as the atma is identifying with the
asit-acid-nirananda body. So, to make to spiritual advancement means to ge...,
distance ourselves from the bodily misidentification, and to realise ourselves
as sat-cid-ananda. And, of course, we do not realise, we are not just
spiritualists who just want to understand ourselves as souls. We are devotees.
So, devotees means, we do not, we are not satisfied with just atma means
sat-cid-ananda. We want to understand the atma has a loving relationships
with Krishna. And in that loving relationship, there is life's great fulfllment.
So, we want to realise this.

So, if we make spiritual advancement, that means, we relish the spiri.., joyful
nature of the atma, and we relish the joy of loving of Krishna, and naturally,
we are fulfilled by this. But in some cases, when the person is not following
the process properly, the person is not really remembering Krishna, and not get,
not striving for purification, not practicing Krishna Consciousness seriously,
then one may not get purified. You know, if one does not get purified,
then one does not experience higher happiness, one does not experience inner
fulfillment. And one needs happiness, so we, when we need happiness and we do
not get inner fulfillment, then we seek outer glorification as a substitute for
inner fulfillment. I need happiness somewhere. So, if I am not getting it
inside, then I will look for it outside. And then Krishna becomes a tool for me
to get external happiness.

Actually, you know, we should give up external happiness for Krishna's sake, but
we beco..., we use bhakti, and the knowledge that Krishna has given us, the
position that Krishna has given us, the tool for getting external happiness. So,
we want to, we want to speak eloquently and affectively so that not that people
become Krishna's devotees, yes, that may happen, but I should be praised, I
should have so many followers, I should be famous as a person who has made so
many devotees. And my joy does not come because others have become, so many have
become devotees. My joy has come because I made them devotees. And only I made
them devotees, they are serving me now. They treat me like the representative of
God. And they obey my word. So, this is very sad when it happens. Because then
the outer success is not coming as inner fulfillment. It is substitute for inner
fulfillment. And at the, such preaching success is not a sign of spiritual
advancement. This actually, it is a sign of spiritual danger. That means when
one wants to succeed externally for the sake of feeling a sense of self-worth,
and feeling the sense of fulfillment. You know, if, we just, if you, if our goal
is just to succeed externally, then we, we could have gone to material life to
succeed externally.

There, also one can succeed. And one can get, one get glorification from others.
One can get praise. One can get medals. But as devotees, wecome to Krishna
Consciousness not for external success primarily. We come primarily for internal
success, for developing our relationship with Krishna. Now, in Krishna
Consciousness, also there are many linemax of external success. Srila Prabhupada
would glorify the, those who distributed books very vigorously. And he would want
to hear the scores of whom, who distributed how many books. So, in that sense,
Prabhupada was a quite eager to hear about external success also. But at the
same time, when Prabhupada was asked, what will please you the most? The book
distributors were very, very confident. That Prabhupada would say book
distribution pleases us, you know, please, pleases me the most. But Prabhupada
was grave when he said, what will please me the most is when you love Krishna,
when you love Krishna, So, the books are all teaching us and everyone else that
why we should love Krishna and how we should love Krishna. So, ultimately, the
goal of life is not just to become a, the world's number one book distributor.
The goal of life is to love Krishna and to return to Krishna.

Now, because we love Krishna, we want to share Krishna's mission with the others.
And that is why we want to disitribute books. So, success in book distribution
should flow out of our inner fulfillment in Krishna Consciousness, and the same
applies to other projects also. This is not to say that external success is not
important and we should not have this vision. You know, if somebody is doing
wonderful service, you know, that person has distributed a lot of books, or
gives very nice class, or just that helped in building many big temples, we
should not think, oh, this person is just having external success, and that
person's external success is substitute for inner success, inner fulfillment. We
should not judge others like this. We should use this for ourselves. You know,
we do not know, what is happening in between a person's life, and, between that
person and Krishna. Even if that way true, are we in a position to help that
person? If we are not, then let us not bother about it. Let us focus on our
purification, and our connection with Krishna.

So, for ourselves, we can see that whether my spiritual advan..., whether I
am feeling spiritual advancement, and, ho..., how do I know I am feeling
spiritual advancement? Because I am internally satisfied in my relationship with
Krishna. And then I want to share that relationship. Now, preaching success is
one characteristic. Preaching does not necessarily mean we have to sit on a
vyasasana and we have to give classes. That is one kind of preaching. But
preaching essentially means that we remove the obstacles between the conditioned
soul and Krishna. Who is a preacher? Preacher is one who removes the obstacle
between the conditioned soul and Krishna. So, one obstacle is misconceptions.
It is ignorance and misconception. Ignorance means one does not know. And
misconception means one knows wrong things.

So, ignorance and misconceptions. This is one obstacle. And when we give
classes, when we speak the philosophy, we are removing that one obstacle. But
there can be many other obstacles. There can be other obstacles, say, there is
no culture where people can practice devotional service nicely. Today's
materialistic culture is so anti-devotional that it becomes extra..., it becomes
a war to just practice the basic principles in such a culture. So, if some
devotees are working very hard to build a community, where devotees can get
refuge from the materialistic culture, and have a safe zone where they can
practice spiritual life nicely, then building up that culture is also preaching.
So, they are also the obstacle of a hostile culture is being removed.

And when we are building up a culture, what are those that culture was? Most
importantly, culture was, the devotional culture is centered on the deities. So,
the pujaris may not be giving classes, but if they are serving the deities very
diligently, punctually, and they, they are decorating very beautifully, and
manifesting their all attractive beauty to the world, then they are preaching.
If the cooks are cooking prasadam nicely and through that, they are attracting
people to come for the programmes in the temple, they are also preaching. So,
actually speaking, the whole Krishna Conscious mission is essentially a mission
of preaching because ultimately, we are creating facilities and systems for
people to become Krishna Conscious, for people to come closer and closer to
Krishna. Now, different devotees will have different inclinations. Some devotees
may directly want to be in preaching, where they want to speak about Krishna.
They want to connect people with Krishna. They will, so, there can be preachers,
there can be wri..., there can be speakers, there can be writer, there can be
counselors, there can be community builders, there are all different kinds of
preachers. So, they are all working in bringing the conditioned souls towards
Krishna, or even aspiring devotees, sadhakas, to Krishna.

So, all this is within the ambient of preaching. And all of these will require
"bhajana-vijñam", expertise no..., not required just in giving classes.
Expertise is required in many other fields. "bhajana-vijñam, one has to be
expert in bhajana. Bhajana means, not just our own chanting, but in helping,
inspiring, and guiding others to chant. So, Srila Prabhupada was like that, and
many of Srila Prabhupada's followers are becoming like that, by his mercy, by
Krishna's mercy, by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's mercy. And when we associate with
such devotees and "īśam śuśrūṣayā", we serve them, then we make spiritual
advancement by that. So for our sake, what we should see is, although all
activities are preaching, are, but still, there is a special joy in giving
Krishna to others. Because there when we see the potency of Krishna
Consciousness coming out live. You know, if we share Krishna Consciousness with
somebody and then that person's life becomes transformed, the heart becomes
transformed, then by that, the person comes closer to Krishna. Then, there is a
great sense of fulfillment.

Actually, the journey of our life, one, one level of treating the journey of
life is, ok, there are so many thorns in my part, I will remove thorns from my
part, and I am busy. I have to solve. Remove this problem. Remove this
problem. Remove this problem. There are so many thoughts, thornes on my part,
life's path, and I am busy removing that. That is what we all have to do. But
there is a special joy in removing the thorns from the path of others. And not just
others who are directly connected with us, our family members, our relatives,
but those actually with whom we are only connected through Krishna. So, if
through the journey of our life, if due to the, our journey through life, if the
path of even one person through life becomes easier, becomes smoother, then that
gives a great fulfillment to us. Now, people may try to do it at a material
level, they may think, oh, I am, by my, sometimes people say that, I will
spo..., there is some starving child somewhere, and I will sponsor the education
and food and the living of the child. And that child's life will become happier.
So, that is a noble sentiment.

The same time, ultimately, everyone is spiritually starving, and if you try to
help other people, overall ultimately children of Krishna, they are lost
children of Krishna. They are all spiritually starving. And we ease their part
through the, through life, by giving them Krishna's message, in a loving and
caring way, then that gives a great sense of fulfillment to our life. So,
actually, what brings joy, selflessness. You know, if I am just concerned with
removing the obstacles, the thorns in my life path, I have to do that, but I am
basically being centered on myself. But, but only when I take my mind, off
myself, and think of something nobler, think of something loftier, then I get a
deeper fulfillment. Actually, happiness is always a byproduct. It is never a
product. Happiness is always a byproduct means that we do not become happy by
doing something to become happy, something to become happy. I think, oh, I will
watch this cricket match, and then I will become happy. Why am I watching this
cricket match? To become happy.

No, if I do that, then if my team loses, I will feel like breaking the TV. And
there is no clarity, you know. There is a fair programme in TV that my favorite
team will lose. So, we..., generally speaking, most of the time, if we try to do
something with the goal of becoming happy to do the thing, we will soon get
bored with it. Real happiness comes, it is not a product, it is a byproduct.
Byproduct means when we dedicate ourselves to a cause higher than ourselves,
when we commit ourselves to that, and in that commitment, in that selflessness,
in that dedication, we consume ourselves, then as a byproduct happiness comes
along.

So, happiness is always a byproduct. Now, there are many activities, somebody
can devote one..., oneself to the nation, to the so..., social welfare,
humani..., humanitarian level. Somebody can devote themselves to art, or music,
or scientific invention. In all these, there is some fulfillment, but it is
materially, it is temporary. But when we devote ourselves to Krishna, we are
devoting ourself to a cause that is eternal. Our relationship with Krishna is
eternal. And therefore the fulfillment, which will also come as a byproduct is
eternal. So, as sadhakas, when we try to ease others' journey through life, then
that selflessness, that it may not be easy to do that because others have
difficulties and trying to solve their difficulties puts us also in difficulties
sometimes. But when we try to do that, through that selflessness, happiness
comes as a byproduct.

So, we should all try to preach as much as possible. Srila Prabhupada wanted
that. You know, all devotees, try to preach as much as possible. Now, of course,
some of us may not be comfortable giving classes, may, then we can preach in
other ways. But basically, we have to find some service which we can do for
Krishna, in which we flourish in our spiritual life. And that service will be,
if it is contributing to Krishna's mission, that is also preaching.

So, now, Srila Prabhupada also talks in the purport about those who practice
spiritual life seriously. So, he talks about kanistha, madhyama, uttama. So, he
says that what is the nature of kanistha, madhyama and uttama? So, adhikara and
adhikari. So, there is, this classification is based on faith and knowledge. And
this is based on Caitanya Caritamrta which Prabhupada is quoting in the purport
over here. In the kanistha, the knowledge is very less and the faith is also
very less. And in the, in the madha..., in the case of a madhyama, the faith is
deep, but the knowledge is not so deep. And in the case of uttama, the faith
is also, faith is very deep and the knowledge is also very deep.

So, kanistha, at the level of kanistha, the practice is quite unsteady. You
know, one may follow it any time, because one is at a beginning stage. You know,
one, when, comes to madhyama stage, one has actually started practicing the
process of devotional service, and one has un..., seen the potency in one's
own life, how actually my heart gets purified, how I become happier. And because
of this internal assimilation, this internal realisation of the process of
bhakti, one comes to the madhyama level. One becomes advanced. That is why the
faith is unshakable. Now, although the faith is strong, faith is unshakable, one
may still not be very knowledge in terms of what, in pro..., in, heard Caitanya
Caritamrta, sastra yukti, in terms of argumentation based on scripture so as to
present scripture effectively and to, to infuse Krishna Consciousness in others
and refute their misconceptions.

So, here, it is not just talking about intellectual knowledge. It is talking
about applicational knowledge, by which we can transform people's heart. So,
madhyama adikari has faith. It is just like, you know, when a person starts
taking a treatment. That person does not know what is a treatment all about. And
the person also does not know whether the treatment works or not. He does not
have faith that the treatment will work. So, there is no knowledge, and there is no
faith. So, that is the kanistha stage, initially one is practicing. Then,
madhyama stage means one has started taking the treatment, one has started
taking the treatment, and see, this works. This works very well.

Then, at that time, one's faith increases. But still, it is not that the pa...,
that the patient, who has been cured, knows as much as the doctor does. Ok, the
patient may know, ok, this was, this was the disease, and this was the medicine,
and I will take the medicine, I will get cured. One has basic knowledge. But
that does not mean that the person is expert enough to be a doctor. But suppose,
that person gets cured, and the person feels, oh, this was such a potent process
that cured me from such a terrible disease, I want to be part of the treatment
process, not just as a recipient, but as a distributor. I want to be a doctor.
And I want to treat people. Then, the person studies very deeply.

And then, that person understands, ok, this is how the disease is diagnosed,
this is how the disease cure..., gets, disease gets cured when we take the
treatment. So at then, the person becomes expert. And then the person can give
new treatment. So, at that time, a doctor has faith in the medicine process,
then also has the knowledge of how all the medical process works, how all the
treatment cures the person. So, similarly in this case, madhyama is a person who
has seen the treatment working, and that is why the madhyama is happy because
the treatment works. But the madhyama also has doubts, does it, not doubts in
the sense that, the madhyama does not know in details how does a treatment work?
So, by logic, or by logical analysis, certainly, the broad philosophical
outline is definitely known, but there, if you study, go deep into philosophy,
there are so many different philosophies, that there are so many subtleties in
the philsophy, and it also requires a very, very sharp awareness to understand
what is to be applied where. You know, the doctor, it is not just that, that one
can just memorise the medical books and just replicate everything. According to
time, place, circumstance, the doctor has to improvise, especially if there is
complication along with the disease. So, what should we do now? And then the
doctor prescribes.

So, like that, "bhajana-vijñam", so the madhyama as keeps practicing, observing,
sharing Krishna Consciousness, then understands, ok, this person, we can bring
this person to Krishna like this, this person, we can bring this person to
Krishna like this, this person's spiritual melody can be cured in this way. That
is how the person becomes "bhajana-vijñam". So, generally speaking, we may say
that, actually knowledge comes before faith. It is very easy to acquire
knowledge. You know, you just read some books and there are so many scholars,
who has so much knowledge about Krishna, but they do not have any faith. So,
then, at an intellectual level, knowledge comes before faith, then why is it
saying that, here, knowledge comes after faith? So, the two, the two are talking
about different kinds of knowledge. When we talk about academic scholar, the
academic scholar's knowledge is theoretical. Theoretical basic knowledge, one
has to have. But, whereas the knowledge of a madhyama, and, of an uttama is not
just theoretical. It is transformational. Transformational, not just in terms of
how one's own life is transformed, but also, in ho..., in terms of how one can
transform others' life.

So, when one understands this. This is how others' life can also be transformed.
Then that is a "bhajana-vijñam". That is advanced devotee. So, normally, yes,
for us, in our spiritual life also, reading Prabhupada's books, and theoretical
will come before the realisation of the faith, but even after that knowledge has
come, and even after faith has come, actually it takes time to understand, how
should I speak in the situation? How should I speak? In this situation, how
should I deal with this devotee? What, how should I guide this person? That
takes years and years of experience, and not just years and years of experience,
it also requires spiritual advancement. It requires Krishna's mercy. That is a
"bhajana-vijñam" That is advanced stage.

Now, adhikara and adhikari, when we see, so the kanistha, if you keep, kan...,
if the kanistha devotee keeps practicing devotional service, then the shradda
will become strong, and then, then they come to the madhyama further, and keeps
practicing further, then the person will become more advanced, come to the
uttama stage gradually. And this is how spiritual progression takes place for
everyone. Now, Prabhupada explains in the purport that, he says, even the
characteristic of a person who wants to be initiated is that, person should not
be too interested in material life. Prabhupada says that, you know, one should
take a guru not for fasion. One should take a guru for transformation, not
fashion. That means some people, especially nowadays, the word guru has become
trendy and people have their idea. You know, ok, when they invite somebody to
their home, they say: see, this is my TV, this is my fridge, this is my sofa,
this is my kitchen, this is my dog, and this is my guru.

So, people think it is a fashion to have ano..., a guru. Now, this kind of
attitude is very detrimental. You know, a guru is not a show piece in our hall.
A guru is actually meant to show us the pieces in our heart. In our heart is
shattered by our anarthas, how the, how our love for Krishna is buried deep
amidst so many, below so many conditionings. And the guru is meant to bri...,
help us to bring that out. So, guru is actually like a heart surgent and he
cures the heart, that is why we say that. He cures the eyes, he gives us vision,
and then he purifies our heart:

      om ajnana-timirandhasya jnananjana-salakaya 

So, "jnananjana", so our eyes are closed by darkness, and by applying the
ointment of knowledge, and using the surgical instruments of purification, the
guru enables us to, "caksur unmilitam yena", he actually opens our eyes and he
helps us to see truly. "tasmai sri-gurave namah", and to that spiritual master,
I offer obeisances.

So, now, Prabhupada explains what is the quali.., what, what should be the
attitude when a disciple who goes to such a guru, or goes to seeking for a guru.
The disciple should be interested in spiritual inq..., inquiry. One should not
go to the spiritual just to, I have this problem in life, I have this problem in
life, I have this problem. How should I solve it? Yes, those problems are there
and we may need guidance for solving them. But the important point is the whole
material existence is problematic. And when we go to a doctor, we may tell the
symptoms, ok, this, I have this symptom, this symptom, this symptom. But the
doctor will, doctor will pay attention to the symptom, but the doctor will go to
the root. The doctor will say, this is the cause, and this is how you are going
to be treated. So, the guru may tell us some things. The spiritual master may
tell some things for the symptomatic problems also, but the treatment addressing
the root cause is forgetfulness of Krishna. What does the spiritual master
provides is the medicine for that.

We discussed earlier how all of us have forgotten Krishna. We are suffering from
amnesia. So, if a millionaire's child is fallen valley because of accident,
while going through a hill road, and he has now forgotten everything, and he is,
he is struggling breaking, ca..., breaking trees and carrying logs, as, working
as a wood cutter, slaving, and then the sufferings at that level are real. Yes,
that there is, there is pain in the back. There is excessive burden. There is
tiredness. But all those pains are superficial if the, billi..., billionaire
son just remembers, oh, I am the son of that wealthy father. 48:18
