Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SFhd4DDMlXA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_038_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_8_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=sol5MbQza5zc1F_hdh0jfBKO0G58MTU0MTgzMDgxM0AxNTQxNzQ0NDEz&v=SFhd4DDMlXA&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction. Today, now, we are entering deep into
the heart of Gaudiya Vaishnava teachings, where we will discuss about the
reside, residence in the holy dham and complete absorption in the advanced
teachings of devotion. So let us look at the verse and then we will move forward
and look at the purport.

        tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-
        smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya
        tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī
        kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

So, "tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-", that "tan-nāma", that Absolute Truth,
that Lord Krishna, he, his name, form, and character, one engages oneself in
"sukīrtanānu", nicely engaging oneself in doing glorification of that. And
"smṛtyoḥ", so "ānu-smṛtyoḥ" refers to systematically cultivating the
remembrance. And "krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya", so "krameṇa" means
progressively. One engages one's tongue and one engages one's mind, "niyojya"
engaging. And how should one do? "tiṣṭhan vraje", One situates oneself in
Vrindavan dham. "tad-anurāgi", "tad-anurāgi" means those who are having "anurāg"
for Lord Krishna, those are attached to Lord Krishna. "tad-anurāgi-janā", so
those people, those devotees, exalted devotees, who are attached to Lord
Krishna. "ānugāmī", one becomes their followers. And in this way, "kālaṁ nayed
akhilam", one should spend all of one's time, absorbed in engaging one's mind,
and one's tongue in the service in Krishna. "ity upadeśa-sāram", this is the
essence of all advice.

So, in essence, this verse completes the Upades of Upadesamrta. After this,
in, afterwards, it is almost like a, there is a fo..., follow shruti, not so
much sruti, but g..., the glorification of Vraja. So, it just talks about how
fortunate one is who can stay in Vraja. And then, it talks about Govardhan and
Radhakund, of, Vrindavan, Govardhan, Radhakund. We should discuss in future
classes. But the Upadesa of Upadesamrta more or less ends with this verse. And
that is why "upadeśa-sāram", the essence of all advices set to be this. So, let
us look at Srila Prabhupada's translation.

"The essence of all advice is that one should utilize one's full time -
twenty-four hours a day - in nicely chanting and remembering the Lord's divine
name, transcendental form, qualities and eternal pastimes, thereby gradually
engaging one's tongue and mind. In this way, one should reside in Vraja [Goloka
Vrndavan Dhama] and serve Krsna under the guidance of devotees. One should
follow in the footsteps of the Lord's beloved devotees, who are deeply attached
to his devotional service."

So, the essence of all advice, "upadeśa-sāram" translates that as full-time
engagement, twenty-four hours a day in devotional service, following in the
footsteps of a great Vrajavasi in Vrindavan. So, let us look at what Srila
Prabhupada says in his purport. So, he starts with the basics for us and helps
us move forward from those basics. So, first point, Srila Prabhupada starts
this purport is, he focuses "krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya", so "manasī", he
takes, he focuses a lot on the mind, and he explains that what do we have to do?
We have to train the mind. So if, thereby, there are two aspects to the
training. Why to train and how to train? And in the purport, Srila Prabhupaa
mentions that, the Krishna Consciousness movement is especially meant to train
the mind. So, this is a radical statement if we think about it. This does not
come in one of the seven purposes of ISKCON that we want to train the mind of
people. But then, whatever is to be achieved, whatever are the purposes of
ISKCON, to help, to recei..., teach people about God sys..., Krishna
systematically, to distribute literature, to erect a place for dedicated
transcendental pastimes of the Lord, to bring people together through a simple
life which is centered more on God.

So all that actually involves changing the way people think. And that is
training of the mind. So, the primary pro..., contribution to Krishna
Consciousness movement is not humanitarian. It is not, offering, say, food
relief, although that also, devotees do it through the ISKCON food relief
programme. But primarily, the focus is to train the mind. And the training of
the mind is what yoga is essentially supposed to do. When you say, yoga means to
connect, to connect the soul with Krishna. Now, how is the connection done? It
is not a physical connection that we use revets and screws to tighten. It is a
connection which is based on a reorientation of the mind. The mind is
disconne..., mind wants to stay disconnected from Krishna because it is
attracted to material things. But training the mind means that we get the mind
to again become connected with Krishna. And when we connect, we get to, get the
mind to become inclined to Krishna, attracted to Krishna, and once we are
attracted to Krishna, then naturally, the perfection of yoga is attained because
we will be able to connect ourselves with Krishna, Krish... So, 7.1, Krishna
also says:

        mayy asakta-manah partha
        yogam yunjan mad-asrayah

So, the purpose of yoga mentioned, the purpose of practicing yoga is "mayy
asakta-manah", to get the mind to become attached to Krishna. So, Srila
Prabhupada's purport focuses on the mind. And the special purpose of the Krishna
Consciousness is movement is to train mind. So, we can divide the purport in two
parts, why to train and how to train. So, we will focus largely on why to train
and we will discuss briefly about the, when we sp..., when Prabhupada talks
about training here, he talks a lot about, training at the advanced levels of
devotion, which we will discuss briefly, but we will also discuss at a practical
level, at our stage in spiritual advancement, what we can do to train the mind. 

So, why do we train? The first point is, Prabhupada explains that the mind can
be a friend or our enemy. So, because the mind can act in both ways, if we
want our own good, then we need to train the mind so that it will act as a
friend. Otherwise, the mind will make us do things which will lead to our own
ruination. So, many people often talk about their own demons. You know, some
sport star who has a lot of talent and lot of potential, but somehow at the key
movements chokes. That means he becomes nervous and he is not able to perform
right at the key movements. The sport star may say that, you know, I have a lot
of demons and the demons are tormenting me. Now, they are, they, they do not
really think, they are in terms of demons when they say, some creatures with
horns coming out of their head and teeth coming out of their mouth. They are,
they basically say that there is something within me, which is dragging me down.
What is that something? So, that something is actually the mind. And the anartha
is infecting the mind. So, the mind can often act as our enemy.

And why does it act as our enemy? It is because of the past impressions of
material enjoyment, that are impressed within it, and the mind has got
infatuated by those enjoyments. And then, not the just the enjo..., ex...,
experiences of enjoyment, but the experiences of trouble, of the experiences of
anxiety which make a person become very overwhelmingly emotional. So,
essentially, we can say that, the mind is affected by the modes. That the person is
too conditioned by the lower modes, then choking under pressure, or succumbing
to temptation. That will be more relevant to devotees. So the, all this,
self-defeating emotions that come up and sometimes overcome us, they all come
because the mind is infected by the lower modes, passion, ignorance.

So, what do we do? We have to get rid of those impressions. So, Prabhupada says
that the mind has many impressions. Sometimes, those impressions just come up.
And those impressions come up and one can get mislead in wrong directions. So,
we will see in our spiritual life as sadhakas that the temptations can overpower
us in two ways. One is that externally, a temptation, tempting object comes,
and it is so attractive that we get attracted to it and we may fall for it. The
other is that internally, suddenly, desires come up. And when the desires come
up, they catch us so strongly that although we want to resist:

        anicchann api varsneya
        balad iva niyojitah

Arjuna describes the subjective feeling of a seeker, o..., or of a tra...,
aspiring transcendentalist that at that time, it is, seeker is having a conflict
within the heart, and the seeker does not want to succumb, but still as if
against one's desires, one is engaged in sin. "balad iva niyojitah", so the past
impression overwhelm us. Now, of course, we can fight back, and we can resist,
but at certain times, the impression is so overwhelming that it is almost
impossible to resist it.

So, why does it happen and what can we deal with, how can we deal with it? So,
it happens because there is deep within, un..., in the s..., in the mind, there
are impression of our past indulgences. And just as sometimes deep within the
water, fomentation happens and then because of some chemical process,
fomentation or whatever, then the, suddenly, bubbles start coming up on the
surface. So, it is like that. There are desires deep in our mind and sometimes,
they suddenly come up. And when those impression come, they can be very contrary
to our moral and spiritual values. And they can impell us to act traumally.
That is why Prabhupada says that it can make, create a dangerous situation. And
ultimately, what we think of at the time of death is going to determine where we
will go. This is called as a law of last thought. And:

        yam yam vapi smaran bhavam
        tyajaty ante kalevaram

Whatever we think of at the time of death, that is what we attain. So, if at the
time of death, we suddenly think of something which is undesirable, then we may
go..., end up in auspicious destination. Of course, the mind, generally, at the
time of death, thinks of that object in which we got the greatest shelter during
our lifetime, custodian time. Death is a time of great devastation, great fear.
So, when there is devastation, fear, one instinctively reaches for shelter.
Where will one get the shelter? That varies according to person to person. But
whatever a person has experienced shelter in throughout one's life, that is what
the mind will go to instinctively at the time of death. So, if we have
cultivated practicing Krishna Consciousness throughout our life, then the mind
will go towards Krishna Consciousness. Otherwise, the mind will go in vain,
wrong directions.

So, how can the mind act as our enemy? Let us discuss that briefly over here.
So before we can seriously impell ourselves to train the mind. See, we need
conviction and we need commitment, we discussed in our previous class, to go
free from material pleasure to spiritual pleasure. So, conviction is required,
the mind is a..., can act as my enemy. The mind frequently acts as my enemy.
Therefore, I need to deal with the mind properly. So, to understand how the mind
may act as an enemy, we look at acronym, MIND. We discussed four ways in which
the mind can act in inimical ways.

So, look at the mind before you look with mind. So, treat the mind as a separate
person. And look at the mind before look with the mind. What this means is, we
will look at the acronym a little later. Let us look at the title over there.
This is, actually, a top title of a book which I hope to write in future. So,
look at the mind. So, basically this means treat the mind as a separate person.
And now for example, if I am speaking right now. So, you look at me and then
you evaluate, what is this person saying? Does this person's statement make
sense? You know, if I am saying, look at that direction, and normally if we know
that person, if we trust that person, we may understand to look in that
direction. But if we are driving a car, and there is a neighborhood, oh, look in
that, the, that person is sitting next to us in the side, say, hey, look over there.
Now, even if we trust that person, still, if I am at, at holding a steering
wheel, I just cannot look here and there. I have to look ahead. Then, I will, I
will think, I will look ahead at the road, and then afterwards cautiously, I
will look in that direction. And then if I do not know the person, if I am
driving a, if I am driving a, say a bus, and suddenly a person says, hey, look
there. Somebody just comes along. I do not know that person. Then, if I am doing
something important, I will, I will not really look at that thing. I will first
look at that person. Is this person trustworthy? Is this person, is it worth it
to listen to this person and look at that, whatever that person is saying?

So, like that, you know, when we hear per things from a particular person, like
and the person tells us to do something, first, we look at that person, e..,
c..., evaluate the credibility of that person, and then decide whether we should
do what the person is suggesting. So, similarly, look at the mind before you
look with the mind means when the mind speaks something, at that time, we
evaluate the credibility of the mind. Is this what it is saying making sense?
And the mind often speaks lies in four major ways. So, if we have to understand
which are the ways in which the mind can mislead us, so for that purpose, we
need to look at the mind carefully. So, by understanding, ok, these are the
kind of l..., lies that the mind speaks, then when the mind is speaking
something, then we can ela.., evaluate. Is it falling in these categories? It is
falling in these categories, then I hold, listen to it, then I will be cautious.
And I will evaluate whether it is lying right now. And then if it is lying, then
I will not listen. Otherwise, I can do what the mind is saying. So, let us look
at these four categories and then we will understand how the mind can trick us.
You know, not just in spiritual life, the mind troubles and tricks even in
material life.

In material life, as I said, a person who is a sport star, and can, I hit
the winning stroke at the last, in the final stages, has the capacity, has the
talent. But then if the person chokes, the mind, what is it, mind just
overwhelms the person with so much tension, so much anxiety, so much pressure
that the person chokes. And the person is not able to do at that time. So, the
mind can ruin us not just spiritually. The mind can ruin us also materially. And
managing the mind means not only managing it at a, managing it for, for staying
focused on our spiritual goals, but, say, people get addicted to things. What is
that addiction? That is the mi..., when they were in some trouble, or when they
were just wanting some pleasure, the mind misled them in a wrong direction, and
then the mind kept them going again and again in that direction, and then
trapped them. So, let us look at the four ways in which the mind can trouble us.

So, the first is, 'M' is, the mind magnifies problems. The mind magnifies
problems means that when there is a trouble, the mind makes the trouble bigger
than what it needs to be. How does this happen? That the mind, when it faces a
problem. Generally, now, the problem, it is there and we have to deal with the
problem. But thinking of the problem does not solve the problem. Thinking of the
problem, sometimes overthinking of the problem simply makes the problem bigger
and bigger, bigger than what it is, bigger than what it needs to be. And not
only when we think about a problem, the problem becomes bigger in our mind, but
we become smaller because we feel, oh, I cannot do anything. Oh, it is just,
this will not work. This will not work. This will not work. This will not work.
This will not work. And we become overwhelmed.

So, overthinking about a problem is like overcooking our rotten vegetable hoping
that it will become good. If I go to a market, and somehow I am sold, I, I, I am
go, I buy it, a rotten vegetable, somebody just gives me a raw deal, a bad deal,
and I buy a rotten vegetable. Now I will go, why did you give me this rotten
vegetable? So, then, what do I do? I take the rotten the vegetable and I put it
in my sito..., stove, or my cooker, on my s..., on some vessel and then I start
cooking. Normally, I cook vegetables for five minutes, but I think that, oh,
this is rotten vegetable, so I will cook it for twenty-five minutes. Now,
overcooking a rotten vegetable is not going to make it better. Similarly, if
there is a problem, overthinking about the problem is not going to be solved
the problem. Certainly, we need to think about it about how to deal with it. But
that thinking has to be done with a calm, collected, composed mind. If we, when
we are in hyper anxiety, that time, when we think about a problem, we just, the
mind just goes around, and round, and round, and then we go around, and round,
and round, and then all that happens is we end up with a big headache. Or we end
up with tension. And we do not really do anything constructive.

So, if some problem is there, something has gone wrong, say, we have to
understand what has gone, what has happened has happened. What has gone wrong
has gone wrong. What cannot be changed cannot be changed. But there is much that
can be changed. So, the present is there for me to do something constructive
about. The future is there for me to do constructive things about. Let me focus
on that. So, the mind magnifies problems in the sense that, the mind keeps our
thoughts glued to some problematic situation, and makes us, makes us worry,
makes us lament, makes us feel morrows, makes us feel depressed. And then, in
that way, it just drains away our energy. It sucks and saps our inner vigor, and
leaves us feelings very disempowered, and helpless, and rejected. So, we
should, so when a problem comes, and when we start thinking too much about the
problem, we should think, you know, this is the mind. It is magnifying the
problems. So just all of us have our own problems in life. We cannot deny those
problems. But we also have to recognise that they are there, whatever we can, we
will do to deal with them. But just thinking about them too much is not going to
solve the problems. We do not have to be problem conscious, we should be, stay
Krishna Conscious. And by being Krishna Conscious, then we think calm, then how
to deal with the problem. So, this is one way in which the mind can act as our
enemy.

So, do not, they said that, do not tell God how big your problems are. Tell your
problems how big God is. So, when we dwell on our problems, you know, then we go
to God, this problem is there, do something about it. Do something about it. Do
something about it. But when we are praying to God also, actually, our thoughts
are not about God. Our thoughts are about the problem. So, we are problem
conscious, not Krishna Conscious. Rather than that, we tell the problem how big
God is. That means, we stay Krishna Conscious and know that Krishna is on our
side and that the problem is there, I will deal with it. So, we should not let
the mind magnify problems. And you recognise, hey, this is the mind magnifiying
the problems, I will check it. No, no, I will not let you trick. I will not let
you fool me. I will not let you trap me.

Then, the mind imagines pleasures. Imagine pleasures means that the mind sees
some object and then it goes into fantasy land. It will give, oh, I will get
this object and then I will do this, and then I will enjoy. And I will do this.
I will do this. And it actually just saps so much of our energy. Many people
waste so much of their thought, and their time, and their energy day,
daydreaming. So, sometimes, we are going on a, traveling for some programme and
some young people are there. You know, they are just walking along the street,
and suddenly they imagine, you know, there are, as if, throwing a ball, or
swinging a bat. So, they are walking along the road, but they are imagining, oh,
I am, I am a famous cricketer, and it is the last ball of India's match against
Pakistan and then I get the ball, and I hit the sixer. And I become a national
hero by that. So, this is just daydreaming. So much of our time goes away on
daydreaming, and the daydreaming can often be about either waste things, waste
thoughts or it can be about even sinful and immoral thoughts. So, this sort of
fantasising is useless. And when we catch our mind doing this, then we
understand, hey, you are going to waste my time, you are going to waste my
energy. I will not let this happen. So whenever the mind starts imagining
pleasures. Now, why shouldn't we imagine pleasures? Because, it is not, because,
it is, not just because, if the pleasures are sinful, then even those thoughts
are going to contaminate us. And the thoughts may eventually gain a momentum
that should force us to do wrong those things also. But apart from that also,
even if the thoughts are not sinful. But the point is that they are just
distracting us towards things which are irrelevant to our essential interest.

Now, there is a difference from, daydreaming is actually a vision. You know, to
have a vision, like Srila Prabhupada said that there are temples. There are
devotees. Only time is separating us from, away, from them. So, that is actually
a vision, and that vision, even if, the mind ha..., when we have a vision, then
we are in control. The mind is not in control. That means, you know, we know,
this is the ultimate goal of my life and this is where I want to go. And I will
keep this vision so that I can, I have that as inspiration and as a lighthouse
for me to move in this direction. So, Prabhupada was not just having a vision of
there are temples. Prabhupada was working to the best of his capacity, with all,
whatever resources Prabhupada had. Even if the resources were very limited,
Prabhupada was working vigorously to use those resources and to share Krishna
Consciousness with others. So, like that, we have to be resourceful. And the
more resourceful we are, the more spiritual advancement we will make. So, vision
means, it is clearly well-thought out and then we are in control when we think
and shape the vision, and then we are doing tangible things to move towards the
vision. But most of the time, the mind just sees some sense object and then just
goes into a fantasy spin, thinking about how, how I will get this object and
I will enjoy. So, that is such a waste of mental energy.

And then actually, when the mind imagines pleasures, along with that, that, it
magnifies problems also. For example, I am going along. I have a car. And I am
going along with the car. And then suddenly, I see the latest car, that is car.
So, then, the mind says, oh, I want that car. And then we think, how can I get
that car. I will have to take a loan. It is so expensive. I will have to get a
loan. What do I do with this car? Should I sell it? How much will I get for it?
And when I purchase that car, then, yes, people will look at me, oh, people,
and I walk along, then mammuts will follow, open eyes will become wild. So nice.
But then, I think, oh, I have to take a loan. Should I take a loan? Oh, but if I
get a raise in my salary, it will be so good. Maybe, I should take some other
job. Or, maybe, I should take a lottery. If I just win the lottery, then I can
purchase the car without any attention of loan also. So, like that, the mind
just takes on so many thoughts which are useless. So, often, the point is that
we have to have our priorities clear.

My priority is to love and serve Krishna and return back to Krishna. That does
not mean that I have to live in poverty in this world. But by co...,
continuously fantasising about things which are not really important for me, I
get some passing thoughts and start fantasising about things. So much of my
mental energy gets wasted. And so, what happens is, when I have the kind of
fantasies, and then I do not get those objects. Then that weakens me,
disheartens me. Oh, I want that, but I do not get it. I want that, but I do not
get it. What should I do? What should I do? What should I do? And then we become
discouraged by that often. We become deenergised by that. We become irritated by
that sometimes. So, imagine things. So as soon as the mind starts going on
imagination drives, check it, stop it. You know, we do not have to become the
cheerleaders of our mind. Now, what are cheerleaders? That somebody else is
performing and there are cheerleaders dancing to cheer that. So, sometimes, the
mind just thinks, oh, I will do this, I will do this. And we say, very good,
very good, very good. you know, we do not have to be cheerleaders of the mind.
We have to be the controllers of the mind. And they decide, you go in this
direction. You do not go in this direction. So, the, when the mind goes on
fantasy drive, we just check it and bring it back. So, it is imagining things.

So, the third is, the mind neglects opportunities. So, 'M', 'I', 'N', 'D'. So
'N' is neglects opportunities. So, how does the mind neglect opportunities? The
present is all that we have and all that we will ever have. The present means
the moment right now. This is all that we have. Now, what has happened in the
past is gone. We cannot do anything about what has happened in the past. And
what is there in the future, that is not in our control right now. We cannot do
anything about what is in the future also. If we have to do anything in our
life, that will have to be done in the present. Yes, in the future, I said, I do
some things, but when I, when will I be able to do that in the future? When the
future becomes the present. So, the present is all that we have and all that we
will ever have. We will never have anything more than the present. So, the,
neg..., the mind neglects opportunities in many ways, but one of the primary
ways is that the mind distracts our thoughts towards the past or towards the
future. And thereby, the opportunity that is there, at hand, in the presence,
the mind neglects that. And not only that, we have, we have some things which we
can do right now. There are issues over which we can work and we can improve
ourselves. We can improve our situation. We can improve our prospects. But the
mind neglects that and goes into thinking, oh, this is wrong. That is wrong.
Only if this were like this. Only if this were like that. And in that way, the
mind neglects opportunities.

So, in our spiritual life also, with respect to this past, apart from this past
and future. So, now, we can learn from the past and we can prepare for the
future. But this should be done when we are in the mood of goodness. And we can,
when we are in control of our mind. Then, we take the mind behind and think. Ok,
what can I do, how can I learn from this? And similarly, when we are in control
of the mind, we go towards the future. Ok, in the future, I can do these, these
things. But if we are not in control. If the mind is in control. Then we just do
lamentation or we do fantasising. And neither of them are useful. So, we have to
be in control of the mind. The mind make feel, makes us neglect so many
opportunities. Generally, when the mind makes us live as if life is a practice
run for next time. That means I have to do something right now. This is just a
practice run, not very important. In future, what I do will be important. No.
The present moment is important. This is how, this is true even in material
life. We, actually, whatever we call as practice run, that prepares us for the
eventual run. But in spiritual life, actually, every moment is important.
Because every moment, Krishna is there in our heart, and every moment we have an
opportunity to remember Krishna. Every moment, we have an opportunity to go
closer to Krishna by the choices that we make. You know, whether we stay God
conscious, or we stay God unconscious. So, therefore, when we understand that
every moment is important, every moment is precious, then we ensure that we do
not let the mind neglect opportunities. And, the mind, even when in our practice
of spiritual life, we have to see what are our opportunities and focus on them.
Ok, this is what I can do. This is what I can do. Let me do these things. But
the mind mi..., always makes us think, oh, I cannot do that, I did not do that.

They say, how the mind tricks us is, if we are doing some service, the mind
says, oh, you are not studying scriptures, you are not chanting the holy names,
you are not doing things properly, what is the use of service? But then when we
are chanting, the mind makes us think, oh, you are not doing service, you are
just chanting. In chanting, you are saying, you should, oh, Krishna, please
engage me in your service. But when you get service, you do not do service for
Him. What is the use? And so, similarly, the, the nature of the mind is it
always thinks about what it does not have, and makes us dissatisfied. So, we
should not succumb this. So, when I am chanting, I just focus on chanting. Do
not bother about what all services that I have to do. Do not bother about what
other things. Just focus on chanting.

Similarly, when we are studying, see, how the mind troubles us, especially with
scriptural study is that often the mind says, oh, I do not get time to study. I
do not get time to study. I do not get time to study. But when we get time to
study, the mind says, hey, last night, we did not sleep enough. You know, you
should sleep now. So, what happens is the mind just does not want to work hard
at the thing that is there at head. So, rather than focusing on the thing that
is there at hand, the mind takes the path of least resistance, the easy way out
by complaining about the problems that are, the things that are wrong in my
life. Oh, I do not get time to study. I do not get time to study. Ok, you know,
whatever time I get to study scripture. Let me study scripture in that time. And
if I sh..., use that time properly, I show Krishna my sincerity, Krishna will
give me the intelligence to make more time. And Krishna may even change my
circumstances so that I will get more time. So, we want more time for our
various activities, but lamenting about that does not solve the problems. So,
whatever is at hand, we do that. And when we do that, and what happens is,
then whatever is not in our hand, Krishna takes care of that. So, neglects
opportunities means, that is, there are certain things which are in our control.
And there are certain things which are not in our control. So, when we focus on
what we can change, by that we show Krishna the sincerity of our intentions, and
then Krishna helps us face that which cannot be changed. Or Krishna may even
change that, that which we cannot change. But we should, if we just focus on
that which we cannot change, then we simply disempower ourselves. We simply
weaken ourselves. And then we lose the opportunity to change the things which we
could have changed.

So, I cannot make sure that I will chant all my sixteen rounds attentively. But
I can try my best to chant this mantra attentively. So, if we focus on what we
can change, that is an opportunity that is there for us at each moment. We do
that, and then in the future, other things also progressively will change. So,
rather than thinking, oh, I do not get time to study the philosophy. Ok, right
now, I am studying. Right now, I am hearing a class. Right now, me, let me hear
attentively. And if I keep hearing attentively like this, then gradually,
gradually, gradually, I will be able to build my understanding. And over a
period of months, and years, I will have a wonderful scriptural understanding,
deep, systematic, coherent. That is how it will all come. It all has to do, one
step a time, one step a time. So, we should not neglect the opportunity that we
have. So what does the mind do? Mind makes us think about all the things that
are wrong in our life, and does not allow us to focus on things which we can do,
which we can change.

And 'D' is, the mind denies realities. Denies realities means that the mind
refuses to acknowledge that the problem is with itself. The reality is that, the
mind may say, oh, Krishna does not care. Krishna is just happy performing
pastimes. I am struggling over here. Krishna does not help me. Or the mind comes
up with three kinds of falsities, where its denial of reality. One is, it says,
it blames Krishna. Oh, Krishna does not help. Or it may say, oh, this chanting
does not work. This process of bhakti, oh, is not powerful enough. I have been
chanting for so long, nothing happens. And third kind of denial is that, oh, I
am too fallen. I am so fallen that nothing is, there is no hope for me. So, all
these are falsities which the mind has, promote, which was inducing us to
believe and it is denying the reality. What is the reality? The reality is that
Krishna loves us. Krishna loves us so much that He is there in our heart waiting
for us to turn towards Him. And He has been bating, waiting for so many life
times. And the reality is that bhakti is supremely potent. We just have to
practice bhakti enthusiastically. And the reality also is that no being is so
fallen that bhakti cannot alo..., elevate them. To think that I am so fallen
that even Krishna cannot elevate me is actually his perverse false ego. See,
normal false ego is to think I am so great. Perverse false ego is to think that
I am so fallen. But either way, it is false ego only because it is I
centeredness. True ego is Krishna centeredness. I am servant of Krishna.
Let me serve Krishna.

So, I centeredness is I am like the, I am so good is one kind of false ego. And
I am so bad is perverse false ego. So, actually, we do not want any kind of
false ego. We want true ego. True ego is I am a servant of Krishna. And let me
serve Krishna. So, the mind denies reality. What is the reality? The reality is
that there is opportunity, I have to just take the opportunity and I can make
spiritual advancement. I can make, I can change myself. I can become a better
devotee. That is the reality. The reality is that the problem is in the mind.
The mind itself is the problem. You know, in the Srimad Bhagavatam, there is
the, there are two renounced brahmanas, there is one audutut brahmana is talked
about in seventh Canto, whose, whose teaching is talked about in the seventh
Canto. And then there is avanti brahmana, who is talked about by Lord Krishna in
his teachings to Dava, in the eleventh Canto. And in the, this avanti brahmana
he says that he faces a lot of problems in life and at the end, he says that,
ultimately, the cause of all my problems is my mind. So, the mind plays the
ga..., blame game and denies reality. Mind says, oh, God is a problem,
this process is a problem. I am myself the problem. I am, the mind is, I am, the
mind does not say I am the problem. He says you are the problem. Mind says you
are so fallen that you cannot be elevated. No. The problem is the mind is having
a discouragement. Mind is having disorientation, misdirection. So, if you purify
the mind, actually speaking, we can all make spiritual advancement. So deny
is ultimately, the ultimate denial is, the mind denies the reality that we are
suffering in material existence. Yes, there is this problem, this problem, this
problem. But the mind denies that the material existence itself is a problem.
That material existence itself is a state of misery. And one has to get out of
material existence. That the mind does not accept. The mind does not accept the
fact that we are all going to die. Although we under..., accept at one level that
life is temporary, and we are going to die. But somehow, the mind makes us
think, oh, that is not going to happen today or tomorrow. It is a long time away
for you. Until then, you have, you can do a lot of things. So, the mind denies
the reality death can come anytime and therefore, that which is most important
for us that should also be made the most urgent for us.

So, when we talk about the reality of death, that is not to make us paranoid.
Hey, I am walking along, some terrorists may explode a bomb, and I may die, oh,
oh, oh. Death is not meant to make us fearful, and trembling, and that is not the
purpose of thinking about death. The purpose of thinking about death is to make
us ra..., raise our consciousness from the material to the spiritual, and to
make us stro..., seriously practice the process of spiritual life, by which we
can raise to the spiritual level of consciousness. So, death is also reality,
and when we acknowledge it seriously, then we get an impetus to turn towards
Krishna through death. So, these are all the ways in which the mind can mislead
us. And in fact, not just can mislead us, the mind has been misleading us like
this for many life times. And when we ack..., recognise that the mind has been
acting as my enemy, then we get the conviction. No. No longer will I be cheated
by mind. No longer will I be fooled by mind. Enough is enough. Now, I am going
to be intelligent. I am going to be stood. And whenever the mind tries to trick
me, I will identify, and I will check the trick.

So, actually, the more we chant Hare Krishna attentively, the more we study the
philosophy, the more we raise to the goodness, the mode of goodness, and we
raise to transcendence, and then we can catch the mind. When the mind starts
playing its tricks, mind starts taking us in wrong directions. Then, now, hey,
this is the mind acting. I will not let it, let it trick me. So, in that way, we
can check the mind. So, it is extremely important for us, as sadhakas, to learn
to control the mind. And how do we control the mind? We control the mind, first
of all, it begins by recognising that the mind is going out of control. That the
mind is tricking me. When I understand that, then I can bring the mind under
control.

Now, moving forward, Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport that, so, he says
that, yes, we have to control the mind. The process of controling the mind is by
practicing devotional service. And while practicing devotional service, in this
purport, or in this verse also, Rupa Goswami recommends that we go to Vrindavan.
And in Vrindavan, practice devotional service under a Vrajavasi. So, at one
level, this is talking about raganuga bhakti. So, actually, there is raganuga
and ragatmika bhakti. We will discuss about this elaborately in
Bhakti-Rasamrta-Sindhu. This is also written by Rupa Goswami. So, here, what is
being talked about primarily is that we have to make spiritual advancement. In,
and how do we, we for making spiritual advancement, we need no..., we need
models. So, a devotee who is absorbed in love for Krishna, when we get the
example of that devotee, and model ourselves on that devotee, then we ca..., we
make tangible spiritual advancement. So, ideally, in there is, in
Bhakti-Rasamrta-Sindhu, we will discuss, this is being just referred to:

        tisthan vraje tad-anuragi-jananugami

What this means is that devotees are very advanced when they understand that, in
the spiritual svarupa, that, ok, actually, this is my svarupa. When they get
that understanding, then they understand that, ok, my lea..., spiritual leaders,
for example, say, somebo..., when somebody, the, when we have svarupa sidhya, at
the very advanced stage of spiritual life, then we will understand that, ok,
this is my svarupa and then I am, my leader is, say, Lalita Devi. Vithasakhi is
the leader of my guru. Then I am meant to serve under her. And then she has a
particular mood. And I want to assist in that mood. So, then:

        tisthan vraje tad-anuragi-jananugami

So, in the mood in which she is serving Krishna, one meditates on that and one
assimilates that mood, internalises that mood, and then serves Krishna in that
mood. So, these are very advanced stages of devotion. And although they are
described by racharas, and little, like, like, like say, in very many books
which are called as Jachadveta Comodellos Smarana Padmavati. So:

        gauranga...

        gaura smarana padmavati
        krsnas parana padmavati

Acharyas like, say, Gopal Gaur Goswami and others have described this. But from
the time of Bhaktivinoda Thakur, and especially from the time of Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakur, they have described that this ragha margha is very exalted.
And we should not, we cannot prematurely rush into ragha margha. So, we focus on
practicing vaidhi bhakti. So, we will discuss about all this in
Bhati-Rasamrta-Sindhu. But the point is, for us, "tad-anuragi-jananugami", that
is, refers to Srila Prabhupada. That Srila Prabhupada was attached to Krishna.
And Srila Prabhupada enabled all of us to become attracted to Krishna. So, some
devotees feel that, now, Srila Prabhupada did not talk too much about advanced
pastimes of Vrindavan, of Krishna and Radharani. So, has Srila Prabhupada
actually given us the esoteric Gaudiya teachings? Actually, Srila Prabhupada has
given us the process by which we can get all those esoteric Gaudiya teachings
also, in our spiritual, in our spiritual, gradual spiritual advancement.

But the esoteric Gaudiya teachings, the real Gaudiya mood is not just off
remembering Radharani and Krishna. It is, remembering Radha and Krishna is
important. But impo..., more important than just remembering Radha Krishna is
remembering Radha Krishna in a way that is pleasing to them, in a way that is
pleasing to them. You know, if we just prematurely meditate on the intimate
pastimes of Radha and Krishna, then that can degrade us. We will discuss about
this later. But Srila Prabhupada:

        tisthan vraje tad-anuragi-jananugami

In the sense that, he assimilated the mood of selfless service. The mood of
selfless service is what has, specialises the Vrajavasi, what is the
distinctive characterise of the Vrajava..., characteristic of the Vrajavasis. So,
the gopis were ready to go to hell for all of eternity just to relieve Krishna's
headache for one moment. That is the exalted nature of their love for Krishna.
And we see that mood of selfless sacrifice in service in Srila Prabhupada. That
Srila Prabhupada was happily living in Vrindavan as a sannyasi. That was a
perfection of life which most people aspire for. Most people, most people are
religiously inclined, they think, they know that going to retiring in Vrindavan,
and staying in Vrindavan is a, is a perf..., going to a pla..., holy place like
that, and staying there, is, is a way to perfect one's life. Because one stays
in the final days of one's life in a spiritual, vibrant atmosphere. By that, the
chances of one's remembering Krishna at the time of death increase. And if one
remembers Krishna at the time of death, one goes back to Krishna.

So, and actually, many pious hindus think of doing this, but they never get the
courage to do this only. So, vanaprastha and sannyasi, many people are not able
to practice that seriously also. So, Srila Prabhupada had already done that,
he had left his home, and gone to Vrindavan, and, and he could have attained
perfection there. But Srila Prabhupada gave it all up, just as the Vraja...,
just as the gopis, when Krishna called them. The gopis gave up their home.
A..., And they went to Krishna. Similarly, Srila Prabhupada took the instruction
of his spiritual master, preaching in the lan..., English language. Preach all
over the world. And taking that instruction, Srila Prabhupada traveled
everywhere. At the age of, advanced age of 65, he went to America, the last
twelwe years of his life, vigorously, tirelessly preaching. He, f..., so he
exhibited, through his actions, the mood of selfless sacrifice that is the
essence of Vrindanvan. And by that, he has attracted so many people to Krishna's
lotus feet. So, what we get from Srila Prabhupada is that mood of selfless
sacrifice. And if we can internalise that mood, we will make rapid spiritual
advancement. Srila Prabhupada said that you know, how do we enter into Radha
Krishna Bhakti? Ra..., into intimate mood of Radha Krishna, by being the
selfless servants. And that is why Srila Prabhupada that by assisting in the
Krishna Consciousness movement doing various different kinds of services, by
this, we are making spiritual advancement. And gradually, we will enter into the
advanced pastimes by this. So, first, we cannot, we can just by contemplating on
those advanced past times, we cannot enter into them. We have to cultivate the
right mood. And that right mood comes by purification.

And, Srila Prabhupada has given us preaching. He has given us sadhana. He has
given us a temple, us the sangha. By all this, we become purified. And the more
we become purified, the more we make spiritual advancement by that. So,
therefore, this is the process of purification that we aspire for. We, we
should aspire to follow. And if we follow, aspire to follow this process of
purification systematically, then, the advanced stages of devotion will, will
gradually progressively manifest. So, we focus on internalising what Srila
Prabhupada has given us. So, he is the "tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī", who is our
model. And he is the model for all ISKCON devotees. Now, for ISKCON devotees, we
have our spiritual master also. But we have to understand that our spiritual
master is not independent of Srila Prabhupada. Our spiritual master is
representing Srila Prabhupada to us. So, Prabhupada's mercy comes to us in many
ways. It comes to us, one way, it is through our spiritual master. Another
central way for all ISKCON devotees is that it comes through Srila Prabhupada's
books. So, another way is that, it comes through the ISKCON managerial
structure, through the GBC. So, all these three, the spiritual master, the books
of Srila Prabhupada, and the managerial insti..., institutional structure of
ISKCON, all, through all these, we are getting Srila Prabhupada's mercy. They
are all there by Srila Prabhupada's mercy. And Srila Prabhupada himself is
giving us the mercy of the previous acharyas, ultimately, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
and Krishna.

So, when we internalise Srila Prabhupada's teachings and follow them faithfully.
Then, "tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī", so all ISKCON devotees are actually following
the mood, following Srila Prabhupada. And that is how they has become
"tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī", they are internalising these instruction. And now,
"tiṣṭhan vraje", it is said one should live in Vrindavan. So, does this mean
that Rupa Goswami is saying everybody should leave everything else that they are
doing and come to live in Vrindavan. No, we see that Rupa Goswami, he himself
taught Jiva Goswami. And Jiva Goswami taught, now he had his siksha disciple,
Srinivas Acharya, and Narottama Das Thakur, and Shyamananda Pandit. Now, all
those three had ins..., they were, they had been mostly from Bengal, Odisha,
Bengal, Odisha area. And they had been sent by the disciples to be trained
through Jiva Goswami. So, when they were being trai..., they, trained by
Jiva Goswami. After training, what did Jiva Goswami tell them? Go back. Go back
to Bengal and Odisha, and preach. And actually, for them, they had come to
Vrindavan. They were studying under Jiva Goswami. And they were, they were so
satisfied in their part when they were told leave Vrindavan and go. They were at
one level sh..., acast. You know, when we will see again Vrindavan? When we will
see our, will our spiritual teacher? But that instruction led to the tremendous
expansion of Gaudiya Vaishnavism in Bengal and Odisha. Because all three were
very powerful preachers. And they created, not only preached themselves, but
they created a legacy of preachers.

So, the point is, Jiva Goswami is, was initiated by Rupa Goswami in many ways.
He was like a, the primary intellectual successor of the, of the Rupa Goswami,
and now he told his disciples, his si..., siksha disciples to leave Vrindavan.
So, is he defying it over here? "tiṣṭhan vraje", it is being said. So, he has,
one has to understand that Vraja is not a place. It is also a mood. So, Srila
Prabhupada, did he leave Vrindavan when in 1965, he went to, to America? Srila
Prabhupada did not leave Vrindavan. You know, actually speaking, Srila
Prabhupada carried Vrindavan in his heart. And wherever he established ISKCON
centers, he has ena..., he has given us, he replicated Vrindavan over there. And
he has given us the knowledge by which we can keep replicating Vrindavan. Then,
we can take a devotee out of Vrindavan. But we cannot take Vrindavan out of a
devotee. If you are not take Vrindavan out of a devotee, that means a devotee's
heart is always at Krishna's lotus feet, thinking about Krishna's message,
thinking about Krishna's mis..., mission, thinking about Krish..., these are
also ways in which we are thinking about Krishna only. And Srila Prabhupada was
always thinking about Krishna, Krishna's message, Krishna's mission and he was
fulfilling that. So, that fulfilling Krishna's mission is actually the essential
thing which all the vrajavasis are doing. So, that is what Srila Prabhupada has
taught us to do also.

So, the mission that the vrajavasis are fulfilling may be different from the
mission that we are fulfilling. The mission is that they are all participating
Krishna's pastimes and they want to fulfill Krishna's specific desires within His
pastimes. But the mission which we are fulfilling is also mission which Lord
Krishna has given through Caitanya Mahaprabhu, this, that you know, spread the
holy name in te..., every town and village. Become Krishna Conscious. Learn to
love Krishna. So, this is all the mission that the Lord has given and fulfilling
it is the way we will make spiritual advancement.

So, the way we live in Vraja is not necessarily by leaving home and going to
Vrindavan, or leaving our specific temple and going to Vrindavan, but it is by
internalising the mood of selfless service. And be..., dedicating ourselves to
fulfilling Krishna's mission, and internali..., and practicing and sharing
Krishna's message, through our own lives, and through our contributions. Our life
itself is the greatest contribution. But through our lives, and through our
services that we do, we, through our service is, that means, we live as an
exemplary devotee in our family, in our community, in the broader society, we
set a good example. And by that, we do not just restrict Vrindavan to a
particular place, but spread the mood of Vrindavan wherever we go. "tiṣṭhan
vraje tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī".

Now, this "krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya", it is described, "krameṇa",
progressively, one engages one's tongue and then one engages one's mind. And
then one becomes absorbed. So, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur in his purport,
in his writings quotes certain things which Srila Prabhupada also elaborates.
So, let us look at what Bhaktisiddhanta Sarvasvati Thakur says. He talks about
four stages basically.

There is sravana dasa. There is varana dasa. There is smarana dasa. And there is
samppati dasa. So what are these dasas? Sravana dasa refers to stage when we are
hearing the philosophy. So, first we hear the philosophy and by hearing the
philosophy, we gradually move forward. So, in the neophyte stage, one should
always engage in, this is called sravana-dasa, the stage of hearing. So, this is
what is most important for us to do. So, Srila Prabhupada has given us
Krishna Consciousness movement. And there are Bhagavatam classes. There are
outreach programmes. And now through internet, there is so much opportunity for
hearing, wherever we are. Then, gradually, one starts internalising. That is
called varana. By constantly hearing, one attains the varana-dasa. Varana means
then one, that one is internalising this. So, one is theoretically hear. The
second is to internalise, to assimilate it, so varana-dasa.

So, after varana, there is smarana. So, Prabhupada explains over there that,
what happens is when remembrance is uninterrupted, this called as anusmrti,
a..., when one attains smarana dasa. So, it becomes concentrated as meditation.
And then eventually, when this smarana improves, then at that stage, can
perfectly and clearly understand the relationship with Krishna, that is
sampatti-dasa. That is the perfection of life. So what does sampatti-dasa refer
to? Sampatti-dasa refers to actually our coming to know, what, who we are in the
spiritual world, attaining unnecess..,  svarupa and running back to the svarupa.
But all this is progressive. So, it all begins with svara..., sravana. So, when
we hear, we, we regularly, we have to give hearing, and adequately important
priority in our spiritual life. So, when we keep hearing regularly, then
gradually, our subtle body becomes Krishna used by that hearing. Because what we
hear goes inside, and stays inside. So, that is the varana dasa. When our
spiritual body starts getting spiritualised. When we keep thinking about Krishna
more and more. That is varana-dasa. And then after varana-dasa, then once we
accepted, we remember it more and more, then we go to actually smarana dasa. So,
at that, the remembrance becomes habitual. And then after that, there is
samppati. So, these are all progressive stages. And by this, we will all make
spiritual advancement.

So, what, what the process of Krishna Consciousness we have been given, if we
just practice it diligently, then all these exalteds levels of Consciousness
will be revealed to us. And that is how we will make steady spiritual
advancement. This is, what is the "upadeśa-sāram"? "krameṇa", progressively.
Progressively engage the tongue and engage the mind under the guidance of
exalted devotee and imbibing the mood of Vrindavan. And by that one can attain
perfection.

Thank you very much. Sri Upadesamrta ki jaya. Hare Krishna.
