Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OWtABv9LJhQ
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_033_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_4_Part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=ASuULIULR7lagevDsLZ4BDDIVAx8MTU0MTgzMDY1NkAxNTQxNzQ0MjU2&event=video_description&v=OWtABv9LJhQ

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction. We are discussing text four, and
among the six elements of text four, "dadāti pratigṛhṇāti", and "bhuṅkte
bhojayate caiva", these are the four that we have discussed. Now, we will
discuss "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati". that we, how we reveal our heart in
confidence and share our heart with confidence.

This is actually one of the most important aspects of devotional service. And
this will determine whether we will have deep relationships or superficial
relationships. So, we will discuss what it means to share our heart in
confidence. The sharing of the heart can be at multiple levels. At the level of
pure devotional service, at very advanced level of devotional service, both the
devotees' hearts are wedded to Krishna. And naturally they talk about Krishna.

So, we see this, you know, for example in the Caitanya Cairtamrta, when Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu would be with his intimate associates, Swarup Damodar
Goswami and Ramananda Ray. These were his two most intimate associates in the,
in the Gambhira, that was his place, in Jagannath Puri. And they would discuss
very confidential pastimes of Krishna. And they would sing verses, recite verses
on the Bhagavatam, sing songs and Caitanya Mahaprabhu would be in ecstasy.

So, this is a very intimate sharing of the heart. And that is the ultimate goal
of all devotees. If you want to:

        mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā
        bodhayantaḥ parasparam
        kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ
        tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca

That:

        bodhayantaḥ parasparam
        kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ

That we talk to each other about Krishna, and in that, we relish the supreme
happiness. In fact, it is said in the Bhagavatam that "parasparam kathayantaś",
that the joy of discussing Krishna Katha with every intimate devotee, it is the
highest pleasure that two human beings can have. At a material level, two people
come together, the highest pleasure that they can have is the pleasure of
ordinary relationship, sex. But higher than that is the pleasure when two human
beings come together as devotees, and discuss intimately about the common object
of their love. It is Krishna.

So, this is what we aspire for. Now, like-minded devotees come together, and
very intimately discuss about Krishna. So, we see this again and again in the
Caitanya Caritamrta. Isvara Puri did this kind of service for Madhavendra Puri,
not only did he take care of his body, but also he very intimately served his
spiritual master by speaking about Krishna at tho..., in his final days. So,
that is at the highest level, where in my heart, Krishna is there, and another
heart, another devotee's heart, Krishna is there, both of us come together, we
intimately discuss Krishna.

So, this is also what we do when we come together officially in classes. But it
may not be so much that in my heart Krishna is there. It may be that Krishna is
primarily in my head, little bit in my heart also. And in the case of the
audience also, little bit in their head, little, little bit in their heart. And
we try to intellectually understand, and relate, and try to develop our
relationship with Krishna in whatever way we can.

So, that is also quite nourishing for the heart. Because we are discussing about
Krishna. Anything centered on Krishna is good. So, at one level is, two devotees
discussing Krishna intimately. At another level is, two devotees discussing
their service to Krishna. So, the two are not necessarily different, but in some
cases, do, they do become different.

Now, for example Draupadi, and the queens of Dwarka, when they met together.
Then the queens of Dwarka asked Draupadi. You know, how do you serve your
husbands? You know, you have, you are one wife and you have five husbands. You
know, we are, we are so many and we all have to serve one husband. So we are in
a different predicament, but our service is the same. Please tell us how do you
serve. And then in Mahabharat, it is described, Draupadi tells, you know, how
she is the first to wake, she is last to rest, and she never ea..., she serves
all her husbands dutifully, she ensures that they all take food before she
takes. And she gives a lot of variety of ways in which she serves. And seeing
the sincerity with which she serves her husbands, all the queens of Dwarka, they
are very im..., impressed and inspired.

Now, in a sense, we could say in the hierarchy, Dwarka wasis are higher than
Hastinapur wasis. Dwarka wasis are considered more intimate associates. Dwarka
is a part of the spiritual world directly. So, but they have no hot inners that
we are superior to you. When they come together, they learn from each other how
can we serve better. So, similarly, when two devotees come together, then they
can learn, they can talk about their services. For example, there are two book
distributors who come together, and they share their experiences. Oh, you know,
while we were book distrbuting, we did like this, we did like this. This is
what happened. Or two people who have constructed temples in different places,
they come together. So service brings us together.

And then, because of services are inherent to Krishna, the talks are also
connected with Krishna, they focus on service to Krishna. So, now, Srila
Prabhupada would often say, when he would discuss about Krishna Conciousness, he
would either talk philosophy or many disciples would come to talk about the
services. You know, his, his way of interacting with his disciples when you, if
we see when he goes on morning walks, most of his morning walks, he would be
talking philosophy. And the morning walks emerged spontaneously. They emerged
spontaneously means that one day Srila Prabhupada said I want to go on morning
walk, those who want can come with me. And when they started going, they found
that Prabhupada was in a different mood, quite relaxed, observing nature, and
making some comments based on nature. And the devotees, they started seeing the
whole world with new eyes because of Prabhupada's Krishna Consciousness.

And this became among the most loved of all of Prabhupada's events. Now,
Prabhupada's classes were there when he was the acharya speaking formally. Srila
Prabhupada was the acharya even when he wanted to go on a morning walk, but the
mood was more intimate, more sweeter, Srila Prabhupada was equally intructive,
but much more relaxed, much more approachable in a sense. Devotees coud ask him
questions, and he would answer. And he would look at nature and by, from obvious
facts, he would derive extraordinary insights. And, so that was Srila Prabhupada
talking in the first level. "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati". Prabhupada was showing
the devotees Krishna, in nature, in the world, in the things that we day to day
see, but we do not see their Krishna connection.

Then Srila Prabhupada, when devotees would come, when devotees put their
service, and he would ask them, and he would guide them, he would say. Now,
devotees are going to say "prasya", and preaching, and they are trying to do
something. And Srila Prabhupada would say, ok, do this, do not do this. And
devotees, share the problems. And Prabhupada would respond to them. And
Prabhupada was as a manager. He was thunder, especially in India. He was right
on the f..., ground. He was, head was in Goloka Vrindavan. His heart was in
Goloka Vrindavan. But when Srila Prabhupada was taking of the affairs of ISKCON,
his hea..., his feet were firmly on the ground. And he was aware who was
cheating. Who was competent. Who was not competent. And his, Srila Prabhupada
has enormous trust in his disciples. At the same time was aware, that they were
unexperienced, and they could be, you know, fleeced by the Indians who would
take ten ti..., sometimes ten ti..., fives times more amount of which they
would normally get from other Indians. We, just because these people were
foreigners.

So, the point was, Srila Prabhupada would instruct devotees in service. You
know, the first days, when Srila Prabhupada started having, started receiving
guests. You know, Prabhupada would himself be on the ground. And when the bed
had to be laid. The cushions had to be laid. Prabhupada would him..., himself by
force, crumpling out the, removing all the crumples in the sheet. And showing
devotees how things should be set up for receiving it. Prabhupada would teach
his discples how to clean using a broom, and a mat, and a cloth, and a gloom, a
cloth, and Prabhupada would talk with devotees.

So, these were the moments when Srila Prabhupada brought Krishna alive in the
laboratory of the world for his disciples. He showed them that talking about
Krishna and working for Krishna is own not just only theoretical, something
practical. Some devotees would go to ask Srila Prabhupada for money. And the
way he would look in his pocket, early days, Prabhupada himself was the, like
the president of the temple, the commander of the temple, the treasurer of the
temple, and the counselor of the temple. Prabhupada was everything at that time,
the early days.

So, if somebody wanted money, they would go directly to Prabhupada. We are
talking about 1966-67. So, Srila Prabhupada, even when he would take out a
coin, you know, his ha..., hand would move like, it was for me an artistic
dance, you know. Gracefully, take out of coin, and normally a person take a coin,
toss it out. But Prabhupada would gracefully take it out. Mainly, he was handling
lakshmi, and he handed to the disciples. So, through all this, the devotees'
hearts could move closer and closer to Krishna.

So there can be "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati" with respect to services. When George
Harrison came to Srila Prabhupada, you know, one time, he asked, do you want me
to shave and join like everybody else? And Prabhupada said, no, you have been
given the talent to sing and you, and to compose music. You sing about Krishna.
And the whole world will be defeated by that. And he did that. And initially, he
became very popular, and later on, you know, when he tried to do a little bit
too much, from the public perception, too much, he tried to get people to chant
Hare Krishna, then the reaction was not very receptive. You know, he got
negative results for his songs, that people chipped, because, people did not
like it. Because when somebody becomes very big, you know, they have become big
because they are providing sense gratification to people. And suddenly, from
that top spot, somebody starts pro..., providing something else. So, they are
trying, trying to give Krishna. They can do it, but up to a particular limit.

People want them to fit in a particular mood. So then, he went fo..., he went
back and met Srila Prabhupada. This is not described in lilamrta. This actually,
it can come other books as an autobiography of George Harrison, called "Here
comes the Sun". So, that is written by Joshua Greene, from a Prabhupada
disciple, Yogeshwar Prabhu. So, there, he describes how he went and met Srila
Prabhupada, and he has belt his heart with, for Prabhupada. He said, Prabhupada,
as if, I feel as if, instead of bringing people to Krishna, I am causing people
to go away from Krishna. And I am losing people, losing my friends also. He says
I am taking one step forward, then I am feeling that I am taking ten steps
behind.

So, what should I do? And Prabhupada understood this. He said, we need an
eternal dilemma. You know, when a person tries to move towards God, often that
person needs to move away from the world. So, at that time, Prabhupada looked at
him sympathetically. And He said, Prabhupada told him, do not overdo it. Basically,
he said that, you know, do, you do whatever you can within your position. Do not
disturb yourself. And then after, certain, the, at that time, Prabhupada almost,
George Harrison, almost every song has been given to Krishna, but then after
that he toned down a little bit. And there again, his popularity went up.

So, Prabhupada was expert about how to guide somebody who was a pure devotee,
somebody who was aspiring for directly pure devotional service, serious
devotees, Prabhupada told him, Prabhupada told him, you know, just sing Hare
Krishna. We do not, we are not considered with musical styles, too much. We want
to have good music, but our goal is not to become musicians. Our goal is to be
singers for Krishna's pleasure. But somebody is a professional musician,
Prabhupada would instruct differently. So this is "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati".
When a devotee comes, now, we are coming from the second to the third part.

Second part is related with our ser..., service. Third is related with our own
challenges, our anarthas, our problems. And this actually is the most
challenging that we need help in fighting our private battles. "guhyam ākhyāti
pṛcchati". So, at one level, ultimately, we all have a relationship with
Krishna. But Krishna right now is not very easily accessible to us from within
our hearts. So, what do we do? We have to access Krishna in other ways. What are
those other ways? We have to access Krishna through guru-sadhu-sastra. And the
more we access Krishna through guru-sadhu-sastra, we follow those instructions
and by that, gradually, we start coming closer and closer to Krishna internally
also. So, Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport, about how we need to practice
Krishna Consciousness in the association of devotees.

So, this is, the movement of ISKCON has been created for the sake of nourishing
the six full exchanges between devotees. So, devotees are not just meant to be
physically together in the movement. But they are also meant to emotionally come
close to each other and closer to Krishna. That is one of the purposes among the
purposes of ISKCON. Srila Prabhupada said, so that being the case, how exactly
can this be implemented in our life? So when I have some anarthas, I, I feel
myself overcome by lust, or anger, or greed, or pride, or envy, or illusion,
then at such a time, what do I do? So in general, we may get guidance from
classes, we may hear something from senior devotees, and we can apply that and
try to learn, but there are times when that challenge becomes too much. And we
are fighting alone, and we feel overcome.

So at that time, we have to go and talk with some trustworthy senior devotee,
ideally if we have a counselor, with our counselor we discuss. And we get some
intimate guidance and by that, we learn. So, the most important thing here is
that, this sort of "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati", variantly mean a very intimate
devotee. If we do not have an intimate devotee, then we cannot share this. And
even if there is an intimate devotee, that devotee also has to be trustworthy.
Now, what we speak in the privacy of our closed room with that devotee, if that
goes broadcast with the world, then it can terribly embarrass us. And, you know,
we are certainly not pure devotees that we will not care for embarrassment. And
it is not just our embarrassment and our ego are getting hurt. In principle, if
something is spoken in private, it should not be spoken to others.

So, in many counseling sessions, you know, that is, the counselor is almost like
sworn to a code of secrecy. That what, the counseling, counselor, counselee
will be open, will to open up, only when the counselor maintains privacy. If the
counselor does not maintain privacy, then, the counselee cannot open up. So, in
general, when a devotee speaks, if we have to speak to some senior devotees.
Say, if there is a counselee and there is a counselor. If there is a person who
is being guided, and there is a guide. So, what they speak, that should never be
spoken to others. It has to be spoken, generally, it should be with the consent
of the subordinate, unless of course, if the issue is so serious, that involves
something, which involves breaking the, breaking the law of the state, and it
involves legal complications, then immediately, we may have to alert higher
authority. Or, if it involves other serious consequences. But it, everything has
to be done very cautiously, respectfully, and sensitively. So, how do we go
about this?

You know, we cannot expect this "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati", you know, it does not
first of all mean that, you know. We all come with our own baggage. And none of
us is problem free. All of us have had anarthas. Sometimes, when we see some
senior devotees, you know, they are happily chanting, dancing, singing, we start
thinking as if, you know, they are always like this, but nobody actually fell
from their mother's womb with a tilak on their head and a bead bag in their
hands. You know, everybody was born in the material world. And everybody has
their conditionings. And those conditionings actually create challenges for all
of us. Everyone has their challenges. And while we face those challenges, it is
important for us to know that things have to forward step by step by step. So
what does it mean move forward step by step?

That means that the relationships develop also as we are going along. Like when
two warriors go on a battle field together, two soldiers go together, two
generals go together, say, you know, they may not know each other so well, but
when they are facing the enemy bullets together. Then at that time, they
understand, I have to watch your back, you have to watch my back. You know, so,
actually, there is anecdote that when the American war for independence was
going on, it is, you know, they were a sm..., the Americans were a small group
of people, relatively speaking, as com..., they did not have much weapons, they
just scattered, and then the British army was there. So, fighting against them
was for them very difficult.

So, at that time, one of the American leaders, he made a speech, and he said
something which applies to us in devotee association also. He said all of us
have to hang together or we will all hung together. That means what? All of us
have to hang together. That we have to stay together with each other and we
have to fight, unitedly. Otherwise, if we all become separated, then all of us
will be individually shot down, or we will be arrested and then all of us will
hung together. That means we will be convicted and we will all hung. So, that is
true for all of us also. All of us have to hang together or we will hung
together.

So, what eventually, what will happen is if we do not have intimate relationship
with devotees, we do not share our heart, then one by one by one, everybody will
fall because internally we cannot keep fighting against the mind forever without
sometime or other getting discouraged by the fight. Because we start wondering,
how can I keep fighting like this? How long? How long? So, when that happens,
then when we start getting discouraged, at that time, we need someone to
encourage us. So, the mind can create so many illusions. When Sita was abducted
by Ravana. Ravana tried to win her over first by temptation. He took her and he
showed her his full palace, you know, those extraordinary opulent. Then he
showed her puspak. And he was hoping that a woman, that as woman, when she sees
such opulence there. And he told her, you can be my chief queen. And all my
other queens will be your maid servants. He thought she will get allured by
this. But she did not pay any attention to that.

So, first he tried temptation. That did not work. Then, she, he tried threats.
He told, you know, if you do not accept me, then I will have you cooked for my
breakfast. And I will eat you up. And he told, there were, ugly-looking, mon...,
monstrous as practically speaking, who were guarding Sita over there, and they
would threaten her constantly. So he tried threats. When that also did not work,
then he tried tricks. What did he do? He had a demon who was a sorcerer, and
that sor..., sorcerer means a magician, who can cu..., make all sorts of false
things. So he di..., he made a, conjured up a head, that looked like the head of
Rama. And then, he, Ravana took that head and he ran up. Now, he went to Sita's
asokavatika. You are not ready to accept me because of that poverty-stricken
weak mortal. I have killed him. And here is your, here is his head. And he
trimmed the head in front of Ra..., trimmed the head of Rama, apparently the
head of Rama in front of Sita.

And when Sita saw, she was shocked. She almost swooned. And actually, look at
the tears that started coming from her eyes. And she said, oh, alas, what has
happened? Alas, alas. You know that, the astrologer had said that, you know, I
would never be a, become a widow. Their influence will be wrong. Kaikeyi's wish
has been fulfilled. Now, her son will become the king. She was utterly
devastated. And she looked at Ravana. Oh, Ravana, she said, the same arrow that
you killed Rama, let that arrow pierce through my body also. Let me die with
him. And she was so heartbroken. This was not the reaction Ravana had expected.
Ravana had expected she would submit to him.

He was about to retort, at one, that time, suddenly his minister came there. And
his minister told him that actually you are called for urgent meeting in the
assembly hall. So, the vanara army had surrounded Lanka and they were about to
attack. So our preparation had to be made. So, he just left Sita and went away
from there. And, then, at that time, the Vibhishana's wife, she came there. She
had befriended Sita. And she consorted Sita. She told her. This is just an
illusion. This is just an illusion. Do not fall prey to this. And she told her,
can you not hear the cries of war? Can you not hear the thundering of the
footsteps? Can you not hear the blowing of the beagles? Actually, the war is
far from over.

Ravana had lied to her that while, the, after the vanaras, and Rama, and
Lakshman had to come, cross across the bridge they had been tied and they had
gone to sleep. And at night, they had been attacked by the rakshanas and all of
them had been killed. This, it is all a lie. Actually, the vanaras, they, the
vanaras were out and were about to attack, and Ravana was called out because the
army has to be prepared for fighting. So when she heard this, Sita became calm.
And her, she was reassured by that.

So, the point I am making is, Ravana is like our mind. And, the mind will create
so many illusions by which we will become discouraged. By which we will feel, as
if, oh, I cannot do anything. Maybe, my conditionings are so much, I will never
be able to practice. I cannot do this. I cannot do that. I cannot do that. And
that way, when we feel, then we will simply lose heart. We will not be able to
stay wholehearted. And once we become half-hearted, then maya, she always has her
ways, kashar. So, at such sometimes, we need others to encourage us. So, devotee
association, as with association where we can share our concerns, and get those
concerns addressed, are very important. That is "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati".

So, in by this kind of intimate association, we are able to move closer and
closer to Krishna through the practical difficulties of life. So, it is one
thing to hear classes, and think, oh, Krishna's pastimes are so sweet, so
nice. I like hearing about these. That is good. But then Krishna should not just
be a theoretical concept for them. We have to experience Krishna's shelter
amidst the daily battles of life. And that we can experience only if we are
steadily practicing devotional service. So, in this way, we move forward in our
spiritual life. And as we keep moving forward, we go closer and closer to
Krishna through the difficulties.

So, it takes time for us to find out with whom we can intimately associate, with
whom we can share their heart. So, we speak a few things, and a few small things
to some devotee and find out how things go forward, and then we speak something
more, and by that, we learn. And then, we see ok, this person is trustworthy, I
can share. And I can get some wife, useful guidance also from this devotee. And
then slowly, we move forward in our devotional life. And often, if you want good
friends, it is important that we hear, not just speak. Because often people just
want someone to hear. Then, by hearing sympathetically also, by being available
for others also, we serve a valuable purpose for them. We befriend them. And
then beyond that, there is a principle of also giving some "guhyam ākhyāti
pṛcchati", some devotee shares the heart, we hear, and then we offer the best
guidance whatever we can in that situation.

So, now, sharing the heart does not mean that we let others dump all their
emotional garbage on us. You know, everybody has so much emotional garbage which
has come from the past. We all have our conditionings. And it is not necessary
that we have to tell all the emotional garbage that we have gone through, that
is accumulated in our head, to share our heart. Actually, the past is the past.
And only that part of the past, which is troubling us right now, are which we
feel is likely to trouble us in the future, and that is why we are apprehensive
how to deal with it. That is what we have to talk about. We do not have to talk
about everything. So, our time with the devotees should, we should be spending
in such a way that at the end of that time, we both feel drawn closer to
Krishna.

If, by talking about our past, world that happens is that, you know, I review my
past degraded life, and I start getting memories which, which stimulate those
desires. And other people, the other person also hears, and the other person
also gets agitated. Oh, the other person also gets material desires by hearing
those things. Then, that is not "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati". That sort of
association can cause contamination, both of them. So, the important point is
we, it is not that we have to discuss the salty details of everything that we
did, but the important point is that whatever are the problems we are facing, we
should be deal with them, and we need whatever guidance is required for that.

So, Srila Prabhupada says that how when we take the association, we have to take
it very carefully. So, let us look at the purport here. Haribol. Let us look at
the purport. So, when we associate, Srila Prabhupada explains, that with whom,
like Prabhupada says devotee businessman, now where do we associate? That is in
IS..., in ISKCON. We have created life membership, another facility for six full
exchanges. Life members give donations. They invite to the houses, and they
inquire about Krishna Consciousness. So, here Srila Prabhupada is explaining the
six full exchanges not just within the devotee community, but with the life
members also. So, they are doing "dadāti". And what is the devotee doing in
return? "pratigṛhṇāti" is the devotee gives books and Back to Godhead magazine.
And at festival, they give prasadam. And they also explain the practice of
Krishna Consciousness.

This is also "pratigṛhṇāti", "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati". And then, why, what
happens by this? When the spiritual life is nourished, and the dormant Krishna
Consciousness is revived. So, in this way, there is six fu..., there is
the exchanges which enable the devotees to grow in their devotional life because
they are serving Krishna, and life members also to grow because they are also
learning more about Krishna. So, now, how is this to be done? So, Srila
Prabhupada quotes 2.62, "sangat sanjayate kamah", that in the association
desires develop. So, the kind of association we have, accordingly we will get
those desires. So, now, what Srila Prabhupada talks a lot about this in
"dadāti", one is that we give the holy name, and then, Caitanya Ma..., this is all
given in the purport, we can discuss that briefly here, so Siksastakam says that
by the holy name. What is the gift of the holy name? The holy name purifies the
heart.

And not just of those who consciously hear it and understand what is happening,
but even the lower beings, the animals, who do not even hear, understand it,
still they also get purified. Prabhupada quotes the conversation of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu with Haridas Thakur, about how the animal, how they get purified.
They will get purified by hearing about Lo..., about the holy names even if
they do not understand it. And by that, what happens? People can end animo...,
animo..., animosity. They, you know, people can have their different, but they
come together dancing, and they embrace the world by dancing. They forget their
animosity.

So, now, in "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati", so one has to understand that one what
she has done in the material world. We have discussed this earlier. And then we
inquire about Krishna Consciousness movement, how can I improve my Krishna
Consciousness. So, "bhuṅkte bhojayate", Prabhupada gives practical example,
"bhuṅkte" is, you know, we invite people, and they did, had, they have come for
Sunday feast. They invite us to their homes, and we take prasadam. So, now as
devotees, generally we try to avoid taking prasadam from non-devotees. But while
ta..., avoiding prasadam from non-devotees, if somebody is devotionally
inclined, then there is a six full of affection, exchange of affections that is
involved. And that feeling of affection cannot be neglected. So, if we go to
somebody's house, we may not take full prasadam, we can take fruits, or we can
take something like that. So that the exchange, the principle of exchange is
not lost. The principle of exchange continues. And at the same time, our
devotional principles are also maintained. So, this has to be done intelligently
and sensitively.

So, now, there is, "pratigṛhṇāti", we are willing to, ready and receive and to
give. This is how the whole process of bhakti processes. And what happens by
this? We get success in spiritual life. We feel peace in our heart. There is
tranquility and there is peace. There is friendship that results. So, all these
happen because actually, the quality of our spiritual life is ultimately based
on the quality of our relationships. Because spiritual life ultimately is a
relationship. It is a relationship with Krishna. And relationship with Krishna
is never in isolation. The relationship with Krishna is also related with our
relationship with everyone else. So, in our relationship with Krishna, in our
relationship with everyone else, we experience intimacy. And through that
intimacy, we move closer to Krishna and others.

So, now, let us look at, Srila Prabhupada makes an elaborate purport about with
whom we should not associate. So, we should not associate with, we should not
associate with the mayavadis and the atheists. So, why should we not associate
with the mayavadis and atheists? So, Srila Prabhupada explains that, that is
explained the la..., in this slide. Then the poisonous association, snake, and
milk, and bananas. So, any info..., so what will happen is, what is that? If
you, when we offer some food to snake, it will become "kevalam visha vardanam", 
its poison will increase all the more. So, therefore, we should not feed. So,
you know, what is this meaning exactly? We should not associate with mayavadis.

Be... There can be a, there can be an intelligent understanding of this, and
there can be a fanatical understanding of it. Fanatical understanding is that,
you know that, as soon as you see mayavadis, we have to start saying fools and
rascals. You know, Srila Prabhupada was not like that. That was not at all true.
You know, there are, there is many things that go on within the circle of
Krishna Conscoiusness also, which are actually myths. That means they are not
truths, but they just go around and around in, in the devotee circles because of
their sensationalist value.

So, there is this whole idea that Bhaksiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur, when he
would accost mayavadis, when mayavadis would be walking on one side of the
street, he would be walking on another side of the street, he would go there,
and he would catch their color and shake them. And tell them, you know, why are
you teaching this nonsense? And, you know, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur was
a cultured person. He never did such things. He confronted mayavada. But he
confronted that with philosophical arguments. And he was not compromising in
presenting philsophical presentations. But at the same time, he was cultured in
his presentation.

So, similarly, it is important that as devotees, we also present ourselves,
respectable way. So that means, you know, we do not have to go out of our way to
associate with mayavadis for having six full exchanges with them. That means the
important point is not that we associate with them for the sake of six full
reciprocations. But so..., in some occasions, it may be required. For example,
if there is some, especially in countries, where Krishna Consciousness is not
the majority religion. It is the minority religion, like in most western
countries. Then at that time, you know, if there is something to, some work to
be done with the government. Then, we, government will, not, it is unlikely to
care for just one organisation. They care for a community, which is a religion,
which, cause, an ancient tradition.

So, the hindus may have to come together. And, then we may have to make a common
petition. So, at that time, now, within the broad fold of what is called
hinduism today. There are impersonalists and there are personalists also. So,
devotees may have to work with personalists also to try to present Krishna
Consciousness properly. So, when that is done, when devotees are presenting
Krishna Consciousness along with impersonalists, or, who, also, in a sense,
are a part of the broad culture. So, our goal is pre..., protect Krishna
Conscious intere..., Krishna Consciousness. But for that, we have to work with
other community people. Other people who also belong to the same faith
community. Then, that is not necessarily considered bad association. See, bad
association is when there is transfer of desires. So, in general, we have to be
careful because if we are not careful, there is contamination possible. There is
a transfer of desires possible.

But the transfer of desires, if is, that is not, we are careful to ensure that
does not happen, and if we are also cautious enough to ensure we are therefore
doing a particular service, and not for any other service. Then, we can take
care of that situation. But for most devotees, it is safe to avoid mayavadi
association. You know, we should not think, if somebody, now, as we discussed
earlier, there are mayavadis and there are people under the mayavadi influence.
That means those people are not mayavadis. They just have some vague idea of
spirituality or philosophy and they think that the goal is to merge. But if they
are given proper philosophical education. The basic questions are answered.

Then, they, they actually have devotion in their heart, and that devotion will
be manifest. So if that is the case, then we should not, deprive them of the
Krishna Conscious opportunity by this, by labeling them mayavadis. They are
simply under the mayavadi influence. But there are some people who are, you
could say, in double quote, they know too much to be helped. "know" is in double
quotes. That means they already think. I know what the Vedas teach. I know what
the Upanishads teaches. I know what the, what all this is about. And they have
their own twisted logic, their own arguments, and they are not ready to listen
to anything or anyone. If that is the case, then we can keep a safe distance
from them. And we avoid their association.

So, the important point is that we make sure that our heart is going towards
Krishna and the others' heart is going towards Krishna. There are many examples
that when Sri..., some mayavadis would come to meet Srila Prabhupada. You know,
Prabhupada would be very cultured by dealing with them. Srila Prabhupada was,
sit for the first time and a major way. You know, in 1967-68, 1966 he started
ISKCON. Then, he was in New York, then he went to San Francisco. Then, after
that, his health suffered a severe, vehicle, almost had an attack, and he, and
it was almost as if he had died at that time. So, somehow, he recovered, and
then, at that time, a major came to meet him, to inquire about in the hea...,
inquire about his health and everything. Prabhupada was very surprised. And
Prabhupada has to..., told his disciple to get up and offer him the seat. And
Prabhupada himself got up and was lined on, he was very weak, but Prabhupada set
up and talk with him. And when, his, Prabhupada offered hi..., he offered some
fruits to Prabhupada. Prabhupada offered some fruits back to him. And then when
he was about to go, Prabhupada got up, to see him offe..., and he said, no, no,
no, Swamiji, you take rest. You are not well. See, it was, it was a precultured
dealing.

So, you know, that was a visit that Prabhu..., that Prabhupada got. Because,
although, they may be philosophically at logger aheads, you know, these sides,
they are both trying to present the same cu..., same spiritual culture, that
come from the Vedas. And it was a wa..., it was a call of courtesy. And when it
is a call, courtesy call, one has to respond properly. But Srila Prabhupada
himself was as far as the philsophy is concerned, he was uncompromising. And the
philosophical point is that if there is intimate association, there can be
contamination. But although there can be contamination, that does not mean that
we, we become uncultured in our dealings with them. Where it is required, if we,
if we have to do something together, and that is the only way things will move
forward. You know there are, in all situations there are ways in which we can
forward without having to associate intimately with them. But if that is not
possible in certain situations, we can move forward without, we can move forward
only with working in a common forum, then at that time, we may behave in a
cultured way with them. But apart from that, we do not associate with them.

So, the, whenever we talk about "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati", it is primarily with
the devotees. Because by associating with devotees, you know, the devotees'
hearts are connected with Krishna and by that connection, our heart will move
closer to Krishna. So, Prabhupada quotes from the Caitanya Caritamrta that:

        viṣayīra anna khāile duṣṭa haya mana

So, Prabhupada basically explained "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati", "dadāti
pratigṛhṇāti", "bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva", all these, we should not do with
mayavadis. So never give or accept food.

        viṣayīra anna khāile duṣṭa haya mana
        mana duṣṭa ha-ile nahe kṛṣṇera smaraṇa

So, "viṣayīra anna khāile", when we eat the food that is given, by, you know, by
materialistic people, then that contaminates our mind. And when that conta...,
when our mind gets contaminated, then we get dragged down by that. "nahe kṛṣṇera
smaraṇa", then remembering Krishna becomes very difficult.

Therefore, what is important is to be able to make sure that our Krishna
Consciousness is nourished and others' Krishna Consciosness is nourished. And,
as far as relationships are concerned, there are no rigid principles. In the
sense that we have broad understanding, but we cannot have a, ironclad code
of conduct of how everyone, how one should behave in all situations. Krishna has
given our intelligence. We use it the best we can and then after that, there are
certain situa..., interactions, certain situations, we look back and learn from
experience and then improve ourselves. So, how we, if we have to deal with
impersonalists, how we deal with it? That will depend on time, place and
circumstance. But in general, devotees should have relationship with other
devotees. By that, we move forward closer and closer to Krishna. And in this
way, all of us can happen in march towards Krishna Consciousness.

And Prabhupada gives the example how, with respect to charity. So, it is through
charity, he gives the example of "dadāti" principle means, Rupa Goswami gives,
Rupa Goswami, he retired and he gave fifty percent charity to Krishna,
twenty-five percent he kept for family, twenty-five for impersonal li...,
emergency purposes. So, now, so now, this may seem very difficult to practically
apply. So, in general, Srila Prabhupada and his books give us the ideal, and as
sadhakas, sometimes, the ideal may seem so impractical, so the important point
is not that we try to question the ideal, or justify the real. It is that we try
to move forward upwards. From wherever we are, we move forward, we move forward
gradually.

And, you know, the ideal is not there to make us feel bad about what we are
doing, whatever we are able to present. Nor is the real there so that we can
just stay stuck to it all the time. There is always, in every sadhaka's life,
there is a gap between the ideal and the real. The important point is that the
ideal shows us the pathway. So, it is said that in spiritual life, there are the
stars and there are the stairs. So, we look at the stars, and we move up the
stairs. That means the stars may seem very very high up. But the stairs are, one
step, one step, one step, like that we take steps upwards, upwards, and slowly by
that, we move upwards towards Krishna, and towards the Krishna Conscious
qualities that we want to develop.

So, as devotees, we discussed earlier that charity is something which we should
all give. And how much we are able to give, that will depend on our time, place,
circumstance. So, in general, we should be able to, when we talk about charity,
one is certainly giving some amount to Krishna. But along with that, our
devotional, devotional ac..., life also involves certain expenses. Going to the
temple, arranging programmes, and doing various Krishna Conscious activities.
So, all these have to be taken care of, along with, of course, our material
life.

So, how every devotee, each individual devotee adjusts this will depend on
time, place, circumstance. So, sometimes, some devotees feel that actually,
right now, my financial situation is so bad that I cannot give any charity. But
in the future, I will give charity. And when I have money, I will give him huge
amount of charity. But now I cannot give anything. In general, this attitude,
even if it is sincere, with, sincerely intends to give charity in the future,
it often has, such an attitude is, you know, at the very least harmful to our
spiritual life. And at some case, it can be fatal. Because we have to understand
charity is not just an act, charity is an attitude. Charity is not just an act,
it is an attitude. Act means I go and give some donation. Attitude means I
develop the ingrain understanding that whatever I am getting, is a gift from
Krishna, and a part of it must be offered back to Krishna.

So, to the extent that we develop the attitude of giving charity, to the extent,
I will make spiritual advancement. And to the extent I do not develop that
attitude, to that extent, I will not be making spiritual advancement. So,
charity is not so much about the amount, which I give, but the attitude that I
cultivate. So, it may be that because my financial situation is so bad that I
cannot give much charity right now. Fine. If I cannot give much, then give me a
li..., let me give little. But let me always try to stick to the principle that,
to the, that, I have to, I give a part of my earnings to Krishna. So by this
attitude, once this gets ingrained, then it will become a habit.

So, otherwise, you know, if we do not have the habit of giving, then even we get
a lot of money also, we wi..., we will not have the habit of giving, and at that
time, the mind will think of various reasons for we should not give now, we will
give in the future. Some devotees may argue that, you know, Rupa Goswami,
actually, he gave fifty percent, only when he retired. You know, it is not that
throughout his life, he has given fifty percent. Now, we do not know
specifically how much he was giving throughout his life, but the fact is when he
was living in Ramakeli, he was, he was sustaining the devotional culture over
there. You know, we know, he and Sanatan Goswami, they had built their own
Vrindavan over there, replica of Vrindavan, and they were pro..., they were
su..., supporting the brahmanas over there, and they were making sure that the
devotional culture went on. So, so, they were surely all that they could do,
with their position and influence to protect and promote the devotional culture.
And that is the essence. Bhakti is not about handling over figures. Bhakti is
about transforming the heart.

And we take inspiration from them. And then we move forward in our spiritual
life. So, again, here, these example we take in mind, so that we feel inspired.
So that we feel motivated to keep ourselves moving in spiritual life. And by
taking one step, one step, one step, we keep moving forward.

"dadāti pratigṛhṇāti", now "dadāti pratigṛhṇāti" means that we give something
and we get something in return. So, we, if we give charity, what is it that we get
in return? You know, in some cases, we may get some gifts. Sometimes, there is
also gives charity for the Sunday programme. They may get a picture of Krishna.
They may get some mahaprasad garland. That is fine. That is actually "dadāti
pratigṛhṇāti" at one level, but at a deeper level, you know, as I said, when we
give something that is very dear to us, to Krishna, then Krishna gets a place in
our heart, and move closer and closer to Krishna.

When we cannot give our heart to Krishna, we give what is in our heart to
Krishna and by that we give Krishna a place in our heart. So, in general, as
sadhakas, we practice "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati", and "dadāti pratigṛhṇāti",
"bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva" with devotees who are like-minded. So, we will discuss
about, four about devotee association and about how to relate with different
levels of devotees in our future classes.

Here, the summary is that, actually, these six exchanges lead, are the ways love
is reciprocated. And there are those with whom we want to increase our loving
relationships. And there are others with whom we have to be cautious. Because
those loving interactions may drag us down. So that is why, both sides, Srila
Prabhupada talks and gives a very balanced understanding in his purport of how
to move forward our spiritual life.

Thank you very much. Sri Upadesamrta ki jaya. Hare Krishna. 
