Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6d1YwmnlaM
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=90WKsG0JhpoTuCXbgUWfJrDDBEJ8MTU0MDY1ODU0N0AxNTQwNTcyMTQ3&event=video_description&v=h6d1YwmnlaM&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_023_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Preface_and_overview_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to the Bhakti Sastri course, where we start with the Isopanisad.

Now that we have completed that Isopanisad, we will start with the Nectar of
Instruction or the Upadesamrita by Srila Rupa Goswami.

So let us recap what we have discussed what we discussed at the start of the
Isopanisad, about the importance of the four books. Essentially, in spiritual
life, we need to know sadhya and sadhana. Sadhya is the goal, that which is to
be achieved. That is ultimately Krishna.

        vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

And sadhana is the means, the process by which we are supposed to achieve that.
So if I want to go, I need to know where do I want to go? Ok, I want to go to
Delhi, I want to go to Mayapur. So, if I want to go to Mayapur, then the next
destination is fixed, then the process, am I going by train, or plane, or ship,
whatever.

So that is the sadhya and sadhana. Now, the sadhya and sadhana, they are
established through Bhagavad Gita and Isopanisad. That means how among the
various sadhyas, bhakti is the highest, how among the various sadhanas,
Bhagavan, Krishna is the highest. That is established through Bhagavad Gita and
Isopanisad.

And how they are to be practiced, how, further knowledge, how bhakti is to be
practiced, and who Krishna actually is, as a person, is talked about in the
Nectar of Devotion, Nectar of Instruction.

Now, of course, this division, like any other division, is not water-proof. Even
in the Bhagavad Gita, we do get directions about how to practice bhakti when
Krishna says:

        mac-citta mad-gata-prana

In 10.11, or 10.9 when he says that, or when he says:

        satatam kirtayanto mam

9.14. So there is this description also, but the systematic delineation of
bhakti, the details of how it should be practiced, the way it is given in the
Nectar of Devotion, Nectar of Instruction, it is not given in Bhagavad Gita.
Bhagavad Gita analyses various processes and then establishes the supremacy of
bhakti.

Nectar of Instruction, we will see, it does not talk, mention much about
ashtanga yoga, jnana yoga or karma yoga because that is not its focus. It
assumes that the seeker has accepted the point that bhakti is the best way, and
now, how is bhakti to be practiced.

Now, Nectar of Devotion will compare bhakti a little bit with other processes.
It will glorify the supremacy of bhakti in the beginning, and then immediately
will start off by explaining the details of bhakti, and then describing 64
qualities of Bhagavan also.

So sadhya and sadhana, how they are established through Bhagavad Gita and
Isopanisad. Now, they are established preliminary through Isopanisad. Isopanisad
we saw that, it moved from a universalist understanding of Ishvaras, the
controller of the universe, to a personalist understanding, as a person who has
a ace, and who bestows mercy and removes obstacles, and who can be called to at
the moment of death.

Now, the mood of approach in the Isopanisad, the last four verses, five verses
especially, last four mantras, fifteen to eighteen, they were focusing on
prayers. That is essentially bhakti. So, the Isopanisad points towards Bhagavan
and bhakti, a personalist understanding and a prayerful attitude towards the
Absolute Truth. This will be elaborated further in the Bhagavad Gita. And we
will go to that gradually. Now we are focusing on the Nectar of Instruction
because it elaborates the process of bhakti, and it enables us to apply those
principles in our day-to-day life.

So, our process will be, first we will establish, then we will look at the
application. So, philosophical understanding through Isopanisad, then practical
application through Nectar of Instruction. Then again philosophical
understanding through Bhagavad Gita, and then practical application through
Nectar of Devotion. That is the way we are going to take these four books.

And in the first two books, that means the Bhagavad Gita, so that means the
Isopanisad and the Nectar of Instruction, we will be focusing on the purports of
Srila Prabhupada, analysing them, categorising them, and then based on that, we
will be understanding Srila Prabhupada's mood and mission and how he wanted us
to practice Krishna Consciousness. When we come to Bhagavad Gita, because the
book is so big, we will not be able to go through detailing the purports, and
analysing the purports. We will be focusing more on the flow of the Gita and the
way that flow is understood through Srila Prabhupada's purports as well as the
previous acharyas' purports.

When we look at the Isopanisad, we will discuss a few, so when we look at the
Nectar of Instruction, we will also look at the few points which Bhaktivinoda
Thakur makes in his book Bhaktyaloka occasionally, Bhaktisiddanta Sarasvati
Thakur also wrote a commentary on the Nectar of Instruction, called Anutri
commentary, which Srila Prabhupada quotes quite frequently in his own purports.
We will look at that also, but our primary focus will be on the bhaktivedanta
purports. We discussed this approach at the start of the Isopanisad also. We
want to go systematically, so first we build our philosophical fundamentals by
understanding the mood that Srila Prabhupada wanted and the message that Srila
Prabhupada delivered. So, once we understand that, then we can look at what the
previous acharyas are also saying to supplement our understanding.

In the Nectar of Instruction, the essence is actually the practice of bhakti.
So, let us look at the themes in the Nectar of Instruction. There are various
themes which are all related with practical life. It talks about mind and sense
control, in the practical, very important in the first three verses. Then it
talks about attitude, how we should have attitude in spiritual life and towards
devotees, and towards the process. Then, Srila Prabhupada also explains how
ISKCON is fulfilling the purpose of providing sadhu sangha. And ISKCON is also
providing, and ISKCON is basically a facility to apply Nectar of Instruction's
many instructions. Then, it talks also about the dynamic relationship between
guru and disciple, and very important aspect of the Nectar of Instruction is the
principle of sadhu sangha, the association of devotees, how we should associate
and how we should not associate with devotees. And when we talk about devotees,
not all devotees are at the same level, so devotees are on a hierarchy, some are
higher, some are lower. So, what are the different kinds of devotees? And how do
we know the kind of devotee that a particular person is? What is the behavior?
What are their qualifications?

And then based on that, we also talk further about bhakti. So, we understand
that devotees are at various levels, and what are the levels of devotion? That
will be more systematically elaborated in Nectar of Devotion, but here also it
is given. In bhakti, there is various stages of bhakti, and there is a gradual
development of bhakti. So, how all this happens will be the theme of Nectar of
Instruction.

So here is an overview of Nectar of Instruction from the point of view of the
nine stages of bhakti as explained by Srila Rupa Goswami, in his other book, the
Nectar of Devotion. So it is described that bhakti progresses in nine stages.
Shraddha is the first stage. When we come in the association of devotees, so
when we, preliminary inquisitive attitude, inqui... decide to investigate. Ok,
what is going on? What are these Hare Krishna? What is this Krishna business?
What is there beyond this life? What is the meaning and purpose of life? So,
Srila Prabhupada explains that this is basically a positive curiosity.

This is shraddha. And shraddha has to be expressed through action. When a person
has shraddha, at that time, a person does some things through that. So, if I
have faith, ok, I have a disease, I have to go to a doctor. And when I go to the
doctor, I talk with the doctor. So, that is talked about in the first stages.
So, we go and enquire. So, first three mantras basically talk about the
preliminaries which helps us to develop shraddha and which nourish shraddha.

Then after that, there is saddhu sangha. Saddhu sanghas mean the association of
devotees, "ado shraddha saddhu sangha", when we come in the association of
devotees, in that association, we learn to practice the process of devotional
service. So, this saddhu sangha is elaborate aspect of this process, of this
book, now, just as when we go to a doctor, and the doctor explains what is the
disease, we start taking the treatment.

So similarly, when there is saddhu sangha, after saddhu sangha comes bhajani
kriya, the practice of devotional service, which is like a spiritual treatment.
When we take a spiritual treatment, the next thing that happens is we start
getting cured. So especially, the prominent symptoms of sickness that are there,
they start subsiding.

So that is the stage of anartha nivritti. Anartha nivritti essentially means
that, nivritti means retirement, anartha is the undesirables, anartha, artha
means meaning, anartha means that has no meaning. Artha also means value or
money, and anartha means that which has no value, no money. So, our essential
desires based on lust, anger, greed, envy, pride and illusion, they have no
meaning and they have no value, but somehow, we assume that they have a lot of
meaning, and a lot of value. So anartha nivritti means that these, this
misconception of ascribing a meaning and value to that which is meaningless and
valueless, that stops, that this misconception retires from our consciousness.
And when the misconception retires, when we see how we are feeling and becoming
better by this, actually our faith increases. Just as when we take a treatment,
and the treatment cures us. Then, when we become cured by the treatment, we feel
that, oh, this is good. This treatment works. I want to take this treatment,
and become fully healthy.

So from, after anartha nivritti comes the stage of nistha. Nistha means the
faith has become very strong at that time. The faith has in fact become like a
banyan tree. At the stage of shraddha, the faith is like a banana tree. A banana
tree can be shaken, well, if it comes, it can just shake it and uproot it also.
But even if an elephant comes to a banyan tree, the elephant, it may put its
trunk around it, it may dash its head against it, and may try to pull with all
its strength, but the banyan tree is so deep rooted that it cannot be shaken. So
like that, we come to the stage of Nistha, when we do bhajani kriya and
experience anartha nivritti. So, this stage is also talked about in the seventh
verse, hinted at.

And then there is rucihi. Ruci means, so at that time, as we become spiritually
healthy, we start developing a taste for Krishna Consciousness. Right now, we
have a taste for worldly things, for sensual things. But we develop a taste for
spiritual things, for Krishna, and service to Krishna, and the paraphernalia
connected with Krishna at that stage. We may feel glimpses of the taste now
also. But that is, it is such a, it is far deeper and richer taste that we get
at ruci.

And from ruci comes asaktih. So, in asaktih, one goes much deeper and one is
getting a taste, but so the taste, when it develops, one gets attached, in
negative sense, when a person takes, when a person is given a free taste of
drugs initially. The person takes drugs, the person likes drugs, and then after
that, the person gets hooked to it, becomes attached to it, cannot sleep to it,
without it. That is in a negative sense, but similarly the positive sense,
when we get an experience of joy of the taste of devotion, then we become
attached, not just to devotion, but also to Krishna, the person around whom our
devotion is centered.

And after that comes bhava. Bhava is spiritual emotion. And it is just the
preliminary to prema, it is just, prema is just the next door, next stage.

So prema is the full development of love for Krishna, which is systematic, which
is comprehensive, which is all consuming of our being. So, it just fully floods
our heart with ocean of emotion, and then we feel that there is no need for us
to be attracted to anything worldly. And it is this stage of prema that the
devotees of Vrindavan live, the devotees in the spiritual world live. And this
stage of prema is our ultimate aspiration. And how do we come to this of prema?
By the steady practice of devotional service.

Now, Caitanya Mahaprabhu explains that, bhakti-lata-bija is like a creeper, it
is given by the spiritual master and then it has to be protected, protected in
two ways. One is that a fence has to be built so that no predators come and
damage or destroyed, and the second is that it has to be watered so that it will
grow. So, it has to be protected and nourished. And how it can be protected and
nourished? So that it will eventually grow and blossom, and give the fruit of
love of God, fruit of prema? That is what Nectar of Instruction talks about. So
in this way, Nectar of Instruction is a very important book which will guide us on
the path of devotion. Now let us look at the introduction of, the preface of
Nectar of Instruction, which Srila Prabhupada has given us. So in this preface,
Srila Prabhupada starts very strikingly. He explains that the Krishna
Consciousness movement is conducted under the supervision of Srila Rupa Goswami.

So this is a very deeply indicative of Srila Prabhupada's profound sense of
humility and connectedness with the acaryas and with the parampara. Srila
Prabhupada is not saying that this movement is conducted under my supervision.
He has started it for all practical purposes. Without him, there would have been
no Krishna Conscious movement in the west. And Srila Prabhupada was constantly
involved in preaching, guiding, overseeing and doing practically everything that
was necessary for the expansion of Krishna Consciousness movement. In the initial
days, he was a one-man army, and then later on, he was a commander of a fallible
army, many of his soldiers would fall, but he would go and raise them, and
inspire them again to fight and keep winning. And they won glorious victories,
the way the Krishna Conscious movement spread just within eleven years all over
the world, has few parallels in world history, few at all for that matter if any
parallels. It is extraordinary.

But Srila Prabhupada is so humble here. He is saying that this is under the
supervision of Srila Rupa Goswami. Now, initially when Srila Prabhupada
published this book, the devotees saw that ok, this is meant for devotees, and they
published very limited run. When Srila Prabhupada came to know, he said no,
distribute it widely. Although it is meant for devotees, we want eventually the
whole world to become devotees. And even new people can learn about those books,
and they can benefit from it. So, Srila Prabhupada's vision was not just limited
that only a small number of people are devotees. He saw the whole world as
filled with potential devotees.

Now, Srila Prabhupada then explains who is Rupa Goswami. So we have to
understand that there is a progression in the Vedic revelation. So the Vedic
scriptures give us the Bhagavatam, where the highest truth about Krishna's
Supremacy is given. However, that truth was not widely propagated in the
intermediate period after the start of Kali Yuga. Now, other processes gained
more prominence. Karma kanda was there, and other refutation of Karma kanda,
Buddhism came up. Jainism came up. And then as a refutation of that
impersonalism, as propagated by Sankaracharya came up. Then, Vishishtadvaita, by
Ramanujacharya, and then dvaita by Madhavacharya came up. So like that, bhakti
was reestablished. But when Caitanya Mahaprabhu came, he established the
conclusion of the Vedic literature, of pure devotional service to Lord Sri
Krishna.

And once this conclusion was established, then that became central to our
understanding, to the subsequent understanding of the Vedic literature in the
Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition, which Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu started. So Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Krishna himself who has come again, and he has come to
reveal the essence of his descent as Krishna five thousand years ago. When
Krishna came, he revealed the Bhagavad Gita, and he revealed his wonderful
pastimes. But the way to access those pastimes is through Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
So when Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared, the Lord can do everything himself, but he
always asks his associates, he always, to play part, and he makes various of his
associates play role in this world.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu got the six Goswamis, who were prominent respectable
intelligent and charismatic individuals in different parts of the country. And
he got, in a sense, recruited all of them when he was traveling to various parts
of the country, and he got all of them to go to Vrindavan. And there he gave
them four missions. First was to build temples to glorify the pastimes of Radha
and Krishna. Second is to rediscover the lost places of the pastimes of Radha and
Krishna. Third is to write literature establishing the supremacy of devotional
service as the ultimate teaching of the Vedic literature. And fourth is to
examplify and teach the practice of pure devotional service. And the Goswamis
did all these four missions. So, the first two are in terms of, say, finding
places and building places, and second two is in terms of books.

So, Srila Prabhupada would often say that these are the prominent signs of
success within our movement, within the movement. He said if somebody builds a
temple, somebody writes a book. So he says, it is like a part of the material
world has been offered back to Krishna. When places made into a temple, then
the material world is spiritualised over there. So, that is a significant
definition of, significant sign of success. Then once Srila Prabhupada said
every time a book is published, I feel as if empire is one. Why? Because the
book is an empire of thought. Just like there can be an empire which spans in
space. Similarly, a book can be an empire of thought. And when that book is read
by people, then that book's wisdom attracts and conquers the people's heart. And
in this way, the empire expands within. And of course, both, the building of
the temples, and the building of, writing of books, both are meant ultimately to
attract people.

So the third success sign, Srila Prabhupada said, is how many people are
becoming devotees? So how many books are distributed, and how many temples are
built, and how many people are becoming devotees? These are the ways in which we
can tangibly measure the success of the spread of Krishna Consciousness. So, in
Vrindavan, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave the goswamis these two missions. One is
write books about Vaishnava Siddhanta and Vaishnava Sadachar. Vaishnava
Siddhanta is Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the conclusion
of all Vedic teachings. And pure devotional service to Krishna is the ultimate
message of the Vedic teachings. And then, how to practice pure devotional
service? Teach that through books. These are two kinds of books that he told
them to write. And he, and of course, when you teach devotional service,
exemplify devotional service also. And then he also told them to build temples,
and also rediscover the lost places of the pastimes of Radha and Krishna. The
goswamis were important, critical representatives of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's
desire for spreading Krishna Consciousness.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in his later part of his life, last eighteen years, he
stayed in Puri, and he basically relished pure love of Krishna over there, in
the association of his intimate devotees. Basically, there he demonstrated the
spiritual world and the love for Krishna, that floods in the devotees' hearts in
the spiritual world. But at the same time, Caitanya Mahaprabhu had a mission.
And that was to share Krishna Consciousness with everyone else. So who is going
to do that? That was done primarily by the Goswamis. The Goswamis not only
preached to the various scholars who were in the Vrindavan area, but along with,
they laid the foundations for future generations of preaching. They especially
wrote book and through the writing of books, they systematised the teachings of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

All the books written by the other associates of Caitanya Mahaprabhu are mostly
pastime books. We had the bengali associates of Caitanya Mahaprabhu who wrote
pastime books. And those books are important, no doubt, but they do not
establish Siddhanta of that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave so thoroughly. Caitanya
Bhagavad, Caitanya Mangal, Caitanya Candrodaya Nataka, Caitanya Carit, these are
books written by Vrindavan Das Thakur, Lochana Das Thakur, Kavi Karanapura,
Murari Gupta. Now, these are very important books, but they focus primarily on
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes.

So what were Caitanya Mahaprabhu's teachings? They do not come so systematically
in those books. Therefore, those were, that was the role of the six Goswamis of
Vrindavan. They wrote the philosophical teachings and they established teachings
in a very systematic way, and then the two literary heritages, the bengali
literary heritage of pastimes, and the Vrindavan literary heritage of philosophy,
that was integrated into one book, the magnum opus of Krisna Das Kaviraja
Goswami. That was Sri Caitanya Caritamrta. So Caitanya Caritamrta was written by
a person, Krishna Das Kaviraja Goswami, who was born in Bengal, and who was
steep since childhood in the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. But then,
Nityananda Prabhu instructed him to go to Vrindavan, and there under Vrindavan
he got systematically trained, by the Goswamis. And after comprehensive
life-long training, under them, then he wrote the Caitanya Caritamrta.

So, the literary heritages of Gaudiya Vaishnavism are integrated into this one
book, which is extremely important, Caitanya Caritamrta. So the pastime heritage
and the philosophical heritage, both are integrated together in Caitanya
Caritamrta. Now, going backwards to the philosophical heritage, and the
practical heritage, that is there. In generally, the Goswamis in their books, do
not focus so much on pastimes. Even when they talk about pastimes, for example,
Rupa Goswami has written, Sanatan Goswami has written the book called Brihad
Bhagavamrita. So in that book, he describes the pastimes of Lord Krishna, and
his various incarnations, not in a comprehensive chronological sense of all the
pastimes. He described those pastimes to illustrate the Siddhanta. The Siddhanta
that Goloka Vrindavan is the highest among all the abodes of the Lord, and the
gopis are the highest among all devotees of the Lord.

So the Vaishnavas had a particular focus, the vaishnavas of Vrindavan, the
Goswamis had a particular focus. So just by hearing the pastimes of either Radha
Krishna or even Caitanya Mahaprabhu, we cannot understand their full glory. That
is why here Srila Prabhupada quotes Narottama Das Thakur. Narottama Das Thakur
was a prominent disciple of the Goswamis. So, Narottama Das Thakur was a siksha
disciple of Jiva Goswami.

        rupa-raghunatha-pade ha-ibe akuti
        kabe hama bujhaba se yugala-piriti

So only when I develop a taste for understanding the life and teachings of
the Goswamis, "pade", "rupa-raghunatha-pade ha-ibe akuti", "akuti" means great
attraction. So when I have, when I develop great attraction to the lotus feet of
Rupa and Raghunatha, to their feet, now the feet of Vaishnavas manifest through
their instructions, so we can go and touch the feet of the Vaishnavas. That is
very good if they allow us and we get the opportunity, but we cannot just force
ourselves on that. The way the lotus feet manifest in a much more accessible,
and transformational way is by the instructions, now, that they give. So their
instructions come, not just through the books that they write, but also the
lives that they live.

So here he is telling that when we read the books of the Goswamis, then we
understand what actually is devotion to Radha Krishna, because they are
exemplary devotees, and they are absorbed in the mood of selfless devotion to
Radha Krishna. So, the whole Krishna Consciousness movement which comes down
through the parampara, starting from Caitanya Mahaprabhu down. So Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is not the starter of the Vaishnava Sampradaya, but Gaudiya
Vaishnavism is primarily started by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

So in the Madhava Sampradaya, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu revealed a flavor that was
not there before. So, we are the Brahma Madhava Gaudiya Vaishnava Sampradaya, so
in that sense we come from Brahma, the knowledge comes from Brahmaji through
Madhavacharya, and the ultimately it comes down through Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
through Srila Prabhupada, and our spiritual to us. At the same time, it is also
important to understand that this whole process of devotion is enriched at a
particular historical moment by the incarnation of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

So when we talk about the Gaudiya Vaishnava Sampradaya, it is not a different
Sampradaya from the Brahma Madhava Sampradaya, but it is also different in the
sense that the revelation is richer. So, it is achintya beda abeda. So, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Srila Prabhupada writes, he appeared to in order to bestow
upon human society the benediction of the science of Krishna.

So, it is interesting, the benediction of the science of Krishna. Now, how do
we know that the science of Krishna? That is, by looking at the devotees, whoa
are the most vivid exemplars of that science. Those who exemplify that science
the most, that is the gopis. So, the most exalted of the Krishna's activities,
are the associated gopis, activities of the gopis. Now, at a deeper level, the
Goswamis are actually the associates of Radharani. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is
Krishna himself in the mood of Radharani. And the various of associates of
Radharani have manifested as the associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

So, Lalita Visakha Sakhi has manifested as through Swarup Damodar Goswami
Ramanandraya. So like that, along with the gopis, there are associates called
as manjaris. And these manjaris are assistances in the pastimes of Radha
Krishna. They are younger and they assist in the pastimes. So, Rupa Goswami is
Rupa Manjari in the spiritual world. That means Rupa Goswami knows the intimate
pastimes of Radha Krishna, not just by some intellectual analyses, or just by
scriptural study, but by personal experience. And he is manifesting in this age
and this incarnation, which Caitanya Mahaprabhu, not in the mood of, in the form
of a manjari, but in the mood and the form of a sannyasi. So, he exemplifies
renunciation. At the same time, while exemplifying renunciation, he also
exemplifies extraordinary devotion. He exemplifies, how renounced devotion can
be practiced.

So, now the example of renounced devotion is important because it is very easy
to misunderstand the pastimes of Radha and Krishna, and do at a material level
what they are doing at the spiritual level, imitate them, and they cause
self-destruction by that. Therefore the pastimes of Radha and Krishna can be
understood only through the teachings of the Goswamis and great saints like
them. Otherwise, we will get a thorough misunderstanding.

Now, Srila Prabhupada comes to what is the teaching after explaining that we
have to understand through them. So, the first point in the purport which Srila
Prabhupada makes is that, we have to have self-mastery. So, the necessity of
self-mastery on the spiritual path. It is explained in the scriptures that the
body and the soul are quite opposite to each other. The body is
asat-acid-nirananda, the soul is sat-cid-ananda. And the body being of opposite
nature, it is temporary, the soul is eternal, the body is dead and unconscious,
the soul is conscious, the body is prone to so many diseases, distresses and
miseries, whereas the soul is ananda, it is constantly blissful.

So because of this essential incompatibility between the body and the soul, the
soul cannot really enjoy the bodily endeavour. Although, there may be a few
pleasures here and there. Now, for the soul to become divorced from the body,
soul to become detached from the body and to experience spiritual reality,
requires a process of purification. And that process of purification is centered
on self-mastery. Because as long as we are engaging in bodily due pleasures, as
long as we are engaging in sense gratification, we are so caught up in bodily
consciousness that we cannot become detached from it. Just like a person who is
drinking cannot become sober. Now, just by stopping drinking, one does not
become sober. By stopping drinking and then finding some other constructive
activities, that free the person from the obsession about drinking. That is how
the person will become free from that drinking habit.

But the first thing that is required is one has to stop drinking. So as long as
the person is in a stupor because of alcohol thinking, oh, I am the king of the
world, the person cannot even begin the process of recovery. Similarly,
spiritual life means that we have to regain spiritual consciousness, and
regaining spiritual consciousness means that we have to give up bodily
consciousness. Now, bodily consciousness is caused largely by our uncontrolled
mind and senses. The senses want to enjoy. I want to get this. I want to get
that. I want to get that. And because of these, now, generally, as soon as our
sense objects come in front of us, they cause forgetfulness of our spiritual
identity.

Now, as soon as a, say, male sees a female, or female sees a male, both of them
become revetted to their bodies. And the male starts thinking, oh, this female,
how can I attract? She is so attractive, how can I attract her? And the female
starts thinking, oh, this person, this male looks so, looks quite well to do,
how can I attract him? So both of them basically become revetted to their bodily
identity. Now, as long as we are pandering to the senses, we remain revetted to
the bodily, revetted means, now sometimes when we have to fix something, we do
not just close it, we use revets and seal it shot, so like that soul's
consciousness becomes revetted to the body by the uncontrolled mind and senses,
and the material desires that come and the attachment that results when we act
on those material desires.

So when we want to become free from bodily consciousness, we have to begin its
self-mastery. So, may some people feel that spiritual life is all about
experiences. I go to the temple and I dance in front of the temple, oh, I feel
so nice. That is all what spiritual life is about. I feel so peaceful. That is
good if you feel peaceful when you go to the temple. But we just do not want an
occasional feeling of peace. We want a steady feeling of peace that can come
only through purification. So going to external may make me peaceful, but my
goal is not just to stay peaceful at those times, to be peaceful at other times
also, I have to become free from the desires that drove away my peace. And which
are the desires that drove away my peace? There is lust, anger, greed, envy,
pride and illusion.

Now, we may feel that I have so many anxieties in my life. Yes, there are
anxieties which drove away our peace, but those anxieties if we look deeply,
generally, they originate from lust, anger, greed, envy, pride and illusion,
either my lust, anger, greed, envy, pride and illusion, or others' lust, anger,
greed, envy, pride and illusion. So when suffer because of others' lust, anger,
greed, envy, pride and illusion, we are basically getting the karmic reactions
for our past misdeeds, but essentially the sufferings of this world are because
of the uncontrolled mind and senses of everyone. The more people's mind and
senses become controlled, they will become happy, and they will contribute to
the happiness of others, even in this life, what to speak of the next.

So that is why spiritual life requires self-control. Without self-control, there
cannot be any steady practice of spiritual life. One can practice, but one will
not be steady, one will practice spiritual life for some time, again one will be
dragged down, practice for some time, again dragged down. So, if you want
steadiness, we have to have a regular sadhana, a regular programme, which keeps
us detached from gross sensual enjoyments, and helps us progress further towards
spiritual advancement. Now, Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport that, that is
what he says: In all spiritual affairs, one's first duty is to control his mind
and senses. Unless one controls his mind and senses, one cannot make any
advancement in spiritual life.

Now, this sort of statement may be a little frightening for us. You may feel
that I am chanting Hare Krishna, but still I am not able to control my mind and
senses. Does this mean I make no spiritual advancement? To understand that it is
a serious matter, you know, if I am lighting a fire, actually the fire will give
illumination, but if at the same time, I put water on it, then the fire will not
be blazing forward. It will not give illumination. But it will get extinguish.
So the two efforts will almost cancel each other.

Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur gave the example of a person rowing a boat, but
if the person, a boatman, a boat person is rowing the boat throughout the night,
but that person forgot to remove the anchor, as long as the anchor is there,
then the person cannot really, the boat cannot really move. So the anchor is the
anchor of attachment. As long as we stay attached to material things, we may be
rowing. That means we may be making spiritual, we may do activities that lead to
spiritual advancement, but we will not lead to, we will not make so much
spiritual advancement. Those activities, no doubt, do not go waste. They will
accumulate to our spiritual credits at a subtle level, but eventually they will
become manifest when we get to resolve to stop pandering to our senses and break
free from the shackles of the senses.

That is why Prabhupada writes that one has to, one cannot make any advancement
in spiritual life. Now, when Srila Prabhupada asked this question, especially
when he was preaching in America, at that time, the idea of sense control was
radical. And then some people asked Prabhupada during one talk show. Swamiji,
why are you against sense? Prabhupada said, we are not against sex. We have our
students who get married. But then why are you against illicit sex? Prabhupada
said that for spiritual advancement, the mind should be focused on spiritual
truth, ultimately on Krishna, but if the mind is constantly thinking how can
get, I can get attracted to sexual partner, then how can the mind think of
God? So that person accepted. Srila Prabhupada gave a simple explanation.

Ultimately, if I want to become purified, I have to develop love for Krishna.
Love for Krishna development keep, find and fixed on Krishna, then the mind
becomes purified, and the natural attraction to Krishna awakens. But if I am
attached to so many worldly things, then how can my mind think of Krishna at all?
So even from practical point of view, we will see that our attraction to Krishna
increases only when we think about Krishna. And therefore, for that thinking, we
need some level of self-control. Then Srila Prabhupada explains very
significantly that we are all in passion and ignorance. And then he says: One
must promote himself to the platform of goodness, sattva-guna, by following the
instructions of Rupa Goswami, and then everything concerning how to make further
progress will be revealed.

Very striking point Prabhupada says over here that once we come to sattva-guna,
then we can sense Krishna's inner voice also, and:

        evaṁ prasanna-manaso
        bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ
        bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ
        mukta-saṅgasya jāyate

In the Second Chapter of the First Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam in the series of
verses, which have later become a part of dharma book, Srila Prabhupada has
explained the sequence very nicely, and there once a person comes to
sattva-guna, then one becomes joyful, "evaṁ prasanna-manaso
bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ", one practices bhakti, and by the practice of bhakti,
what happens is, "bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ", one gets knowledge of
"bhagavat-tattva", the spiritual knowledge. "mukta-saṅgasya jāyate", by that,
one becomes "mukta", one becomes liberated.

This is how further progress is made. So, we will get knowledge of Krishna
further, but at least by the practice of instructions of guru, sadhu-sastra, one
has to come to the mood of goodness. It is not that we give up the instructions
of guru-sadhu-sastra after we come to the mood of goodness, no, then also we
have to follow the instructions of guru-sadhu-sastra, but there are many
situations when the instructions of guru-sadhu-sastra will not be clear at a
particular time. So at that time, the, we have to decide based on our
discretion, and the inner voice will become much clearer to us about what we
should do, what should not do, when we are situated in the mood of goodness.

Then, Srila Prabhupada makes an admirable statement: Advancement in Krishna
Consciousness depends on the attitude of the follower.

It depends on the attitude of the follower. So attitude is a popular word in
today's world. Say, everything depends on attitude. The person has to have a
positive attitude. So attitude is important. But what does attitude, is Srila
Prabhupada referring to by attitude? Is he saying that by attitude, you know, we
should always think positive? Is he saying that we should think that we will,
that we will be able to achieve whatever we are dreaming of? Srila Prabhupada is
saying in specific context, if we look behind, and after what he said for the
statement, it is clear that Srila Prabhupada is talking about sense control and
mind control.

So sense control and mind control may seem to be a very difficult task. But if a
devotee is determined, that no, I will become sense controlled. I will become
mind controlled. Then that practice will eventually lead to sense control and
mind control. So Prabhupada talks about Goswamis in the purport, and he says
that the Goswamis are those who control the mind and senses: To achieve the
highest success in life by becoming a goswami and then a pure devotee of the
Lord, one must follow the instructions known as Upadesamrta.

So, Prabhupada says the highest success of life is to become a Goswami. Goswami
means, we can learn to control our senses and with the controlled senses, we
serve Krishna and thereby develop love for Krishna. The Bhagavatam says that the
Lord is conquered by the love of those who have conquered their senses. The Lord
is conquered by the love of those who have conquered their senses. Because those
who have conquered their sense, their love is pure. It is undistracted, and the
Lord is conquered by such love. So therefore, we also, I have to focus on both
these aspects. We want to develop devotion to Krishna, but at the same time, we
also have to control our mind and senses. And the Nectar of Instruction will
describe to us how we can control our mind and senses, and we can become
Goswamis.

Then Srila Prabhupada writes that those who can do like this, for them,
spiritual advancement will be easier. So, Srila Prabhupada writes: One should
follow these instructions very strictly. Then it will be easier to make one's
life successful.

Easier to make one's life successful. What does this mean? That actually,
spiritual advancement is not easy. When he says that this is easier, that means
that is tougher. So that means easier is, the word is used easier, when we talk
about something in comparison. So if we do not follow the instructions,
then spiritual advancement will be much tougher. Just as if I have to drive on
the road, if I do not follow the traffic rules, my driving will be much more
tougher. Temporarily, it may seem easier. Oh, I can turn wherever I want, I can
go wherever I want, but then there will be constant hazard, and the vehicle
should be on the other side, then the police chasing me to give me a ticket. Or
there may be, there may be the hazard in so many ways if I am not following the
rules.

So, when we follow the traffic rules, then we, then journey is relatively
easier. Of course, there are hazards even when we are following the rules. But
they are lesser because there is some amount of orderliness in our journey.
Similarly, when we are practicing spiritual life, if without considering
the instructions of guru-sadhu-sastra, we try to practice spiritual life, our
advancement will be very difficult. There will be lot of trouble because we will
be struggling on our own trying to find out in various institutions what to do
and how to go ahead. So the scriptural rules and regulations as given in books
like Rupa Goswami's Upadesemrta, they are like the road. And when we know the
road, we move along the road. And sometimes, the road may be blocked, sometimes
it may be congested, sometimes following certain rules may be difficult, and
accordingly we have to do time, place adjustments. That is also talked about in
Niamagraha by Rupa Goswami. But that is later, but the important point is when
there is a road, move along is easier, journey is easier, when there is no road,
then moving along is much more difficult.

Srila Prabhupada says that if you follow the rules that are given by the
acharyas, then our life will become successful more easily. So, we will discuss
this Upadesamrta more in detail in our next class. We will start with the first
in it.

Today, we discussed primarily about how the Nectar of Instruction takes us from
shraddha to prema. We discussed the nine stages in the, with the metaphor of a
sick person taking treatment and getting recovered. And then with the position
of Rupa Goswami, we discussed within our Canon, and then after that, we
discussed the necessity for sense control. Just as it is important not to put
pure water on a fire if you want it to blaze forward. And then lastly, we
discussed about how a devotee should have the attitude that I can and I will
become a sense controlled person.

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad. Sri Upadesamrta ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada
ki jaya. Gaura bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande hari haribol. Thank
you very much.

