Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yadqCnGfjV0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=yadqCnGfjV0&redir_token=T8ByUpjuo5YUPFf28lhDuiK8HUd8MTU0MTgzMDg3MEAxNTQxNzQ0NDcw&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_040_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_10_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to Bhakti Sastri, Nectar of Instruction.

Today, we will be discussing the tenth verse. So, this verse talks about the
hierarchy of various levels of people. Previous verse was about various levels
of places. Now, among the various levels of people, we will start right from the
sinful materialist to the topmost of all devotees, Radharani. So, the scope of
this verse is breathtaking. Let us look at the verse:

        karmibhyaḥ parito hareḥ priyatayā vyaktiṁ yayur jñāninas
        tebhyo jñāna-vimukta-bhakti-paramāḥ premaika-niṣṭhās tataḥ
        tebhyas tāḥ paśu-pāla-paṅkaja-dṛśas tābhyo ’pi sā rādhikā
        preṣṭhā tadvad iyaṁ tadīya-sarasī tāṁ nāśrayet kaḥ kṛtī

So, "karmibhyaḥ", better than "karmibhyaḥ parito", than the karpi, karmis then
in all respects. "hareḥ priyatayā", they have been pur..., favored by Lord Hari.
Who are those people, "vyaktiṁ", those people, "yayur", "vyaktiṁ yayur" as it is
mentioned in the sastras. "vyaktiṁ yayur jñāninas", the jnani people, so better
than the karmis are the jnanis.

"tebhyo jñāna-vimukta-bhakti-paramāḥ", now, beyond that, greater than that are
those who are v..., liberated by knowledge, "jñāna-vimukta-bhakti-paramāḥ", and
they have become engaged in devotional service. So better jnanis are devotees.
Then, "premaika-niṣṭhās tataḥ", and among the devotees, those who have actually
developed the love for Krishna, "prema", they are better.

"tebhyas tāḥ paśu-pāla-paṅkaja-dṛśas", so "paśu-pāla", Krishna is called as
gopal, similarly "paśu-pāla", he was taking care of the animals.
"paṅkaja-dṛśas", so the Lord who is the protector of the, you know, cows. So the
gopis, they are lotus eyes, and they are the beloved of that "paśu-pāla".
"tābhyo ’pi sā rādhikā", so that means about the devotees who have attained love
of God, are the gopis. And among them, about them, the highest is Radhika.

"preṣṭhā tadvad iyaṁ tadīya", and very dear to her, "tadīya-sarasī", her lake.
"tāṁ nāśrayet kaḥ kṛtī", who is there, who will not take shelter of that lake of
Radha-kund. Who is that person? "kaḥ kṛtī", that fortunate person. "su-kṛtī",
"kṛtī" means one who has done good work, one who is fortunate.

Let us look at the translation:

"In the sastra it is said of all types of fruitive workers, he who is advanced
in knowledge of the higher values of life is favored by the Supreme Lord Hari.
Our of many such people who are advanced in knowledge [jnanis], one who is
practically liberated by virtue of his knowledge may take to devotional service.
He is superior to the others. However, one who has actually attained prema, pure
love of Krishna, is superior to him. The gopis are exalted above all devotees
because they are always totally dependent upon Sri Krsna, the transcendental
cowherd boy. Among the gopis, Srimati Radharani is the most dear to Krsna. Her
kunda [lake] is as profoundly dear to Lord Krsna as this most beloved of the
gopis. Who, then, will not reside at Radha-kunda and, in a spiritual body
surcharged with ecstatic devotional feelings [aprakrtabhava], render loving
service to the divine couple Sri Sri Radha-Govinda, who perform Their
astakaliya-lila, Their eternal eightfold daily pastimes. Indeed those who
execute devotional service on the banks of Radha-kunda are the most fortunate
people in the universe."

So, here, we see the hierarchy being described in the verse. Let us look at it
in the powerpoint. So, here we see that, there are six levels talked about. We
start from vi-karmis, at one end, and then from there we come to karmis, jnanis,
bhaktas, and among the bhaktas, the gopis and among them, the highest is
Shrimati Radharani. So, let us look at each one of them. Now, vi-karmis. What
are their characteristics? They act without Vedic knowledge. And this side of
actions are not appreciated by saintly persons. And they take birth as animals,
trees, and plants, is what Srila Prabhupada says in the purport.

So, here, actually, Srila Prabhupada includes this level which is not talked
about in the translation. The translation is talking of the karmis. But
Prabhupada s..., extends the scope to include all, all people in Kali Yuga also,
especially in our modern times. So, here, we have vi-karmis. So, Rupa Goswami
starts hierarchy from the karmis, because, you know he is talking about devotion
and he wants to talk about the rarity of devotion. So, he is talking about
people who are within the dharmic fold. But most people Ka..., Kali Yuga, in the
modern times especially, are not in the dharmic fold, which is unfortunate. But,
so most people are vi-karmis. Today, most people do not be..., follow sastra. And
they live lives which are quite unfortunate. Not just from a spiritual
perspective, but even from a material perspective. The scriptures, they act like
a mother. Now, whe..., when the mother embraces a child, you know, the child may
see the embrace of the mother as a restriction, but the intention of the mother
is not restriction. It is protection. So, what the Vedic scriptures offer us is
restrict..., not restriction, it is, if there may be some form of restriction,
which we may feel, but actually, the intention is not restriction. The intention
is protection. So, only when the child does not understand the intention of the
mother. Then, the child mistakes that restrict..., that protection to be
restriction.

So, similarly, the scriptures offer us some guidelines of how we should act, and
how we should not act. You know, these are not meant for restriction. They are
meant for protection. When we go out of those bounds, then we create suffering
for ourselves. Just as when some..., when a person tells the child, you know,
do not, there is a ten-storey building, there is a terrace, do not lean too much
off the terrace. Hence the child leans too much off the terrace and slips, and
falls. Then, you know, we cannot break the law of gravity. We will only break
ourselves against the law of gravity. Similarly, there are God's laws. And we
cannot break the laws of God. When we break those laws, we end up breaking
ourselves. So, that is the misfortune of people today. That, in one sense, it is
very strange though way people reason. You know, we gove..., we kn..., we have
recognised more and more through science that nature is governed by laws. And
right from the microscopic to the macroscopic level, we find that nature is
governed by laws. And of course, there are some areas where, they say, there are,
there seems to be chaos, but even that chaos follows certain patterns. And many
scientists intrinsically feel that even when we are by our certain behavior
seem to be chaotic, there must be certain laws which we are not able to figure
out. So, the laws may be of extremely high levels of complexity.

So, certain laws, which are simple, of course, even our psychology and m*M/r2
are not very simple law. But it is relatively simple. It describes the force
with which two objects, two particles of matter, two objects attach each other
through as gravity. It is simple. Now, if you go, if you go deeper, then there
are much more complex laws. So, Schrodinger equation, say, describes how, the,
in quantum physics the way function collapses. Now, it is complex equation.
But the point is that science as it is researching more and more, it is
discovering that matter of all those laws at every level. So, rather, it is
peculiar that we see that matter follows laws everywhere and wherever we do not
see the laws, we, even scientifically when people believe that there are laws.
And scientists are researching to find out what are the laws that we have not
yet figured out.

But yet, well, we exhibit matter follows us, we assume that , consciousness,
there are no laws governing consciousness. How, a..., what we think about, how
we let our thoughts grow into actions, what actions we choose to do, what
actions we does not choose to do. How can we say that there are no laws
governing this? So, it is not reasonable to say that. And that is why the real
challenge that comes up is that we have moral relativism today. Moral relativism
means, people say morality is relative. You think that is right. So, it is right
for you. If you think that is wrong, then that is wrong for you. But do not
impose it on me. And, now, there is no relativity with respect to gravity. If
somebody jumps out from a ten-storey, moves from a ten-storey building off the
terrace. Now, it does not matter that if the person is a theist or an atheist,
whether the person is a scientist or a non-scientist, Gravity is going to act.
Similarly, there is a laws of God, which will act. The only thing is that, the
difference is that in the case of gravity, we see the action immediately. The
person just falls and breaks the limbs. In the case of law of karma, and other
laws of nature. And the actions will lead to consequences. And the consequences
will not be immediately visible to us. And how precisely the actions lead to
consequences, that is something which we may not be able to figure out with our
finite brains.

Essentially, it took us centuries and centuries of study to understand some of
the complex laws of matter, laws governing matter, so what to speak of laws
governing consciousness. That will be much more complex. Consciousness is far
more subtle than matter. And consciousness itself has not yet been understood by
science. And what to speak of laws governing consciousness? But the point is
that wherever we see in science, we say, assume that there are laws and we try
to discover the laws. And even chaotic phenomena also, we try to u..., find out
some pattern underlying them, which we say are like laws. So, the question comes
up where, where can we know about the laws governing consciousness? That is
where the scriptures are there. The scriptures tell us ways in which we can,
should act. If we act in contrary ways, that will lead to harm. And if we act in
favorable harmonious ways, that will lead to good for us. That is our choice how
we should act. Now, when we talk about scriptures. Scriptures are not a way of
frozen text. Scriptures are a living text. Living text means, they live in the
hearts of those who have imbibed that principles. And in one sense, if we see,
the Vedic scriptures, they are omniform. Omniform means that there are many many
rules given in those scriptures. And the acharyas understand which rules to
apply in our current context. And when we apply those rules, then we move
forward and by that we understand that, we are actually gaining deeper
understanding of the universe and are not able to harmonise with the universe.

So, just as those who do not follow the law of gravity will have to bear the
consequences. Similarly, when we defy the laws of nature, then we will have to
bear the consequences. Now, how exactly to harmonise with the laws of nature?
That is given in principle in the scriptures and in practice, that will be
according to time, places, circumstance, explained by the acharyas. So, that is
why we need acharyas. And if, acharyas, like Srila Prabhupada, are explaining to
us how we should act in our lives. So, those who reject this, they are called as
vi-karmis. So, karma means activity. "vi-karma", means "vi" is "vru daru", you
know, opposite. So, those who act opposite to their own good interests. That
should, their interests are given in the scriptures. And Krishna describes this
kind of people in the 16th chapter. He describes, "The Divine And Demoniac
Natures" is the name of the chapter. And practically, the whole chapter, after
the first three verses, is about the demoniac nature. And in 16.23, Krishna says
that those who reject sastra, what is the result for them?

        yah sastra-vidhim utsrjya
        vartate kama-karatah
        na sa siddhim avapnoti
        na sukham na param gatim

So, Krishna says that "yah sastra-vidhim utsrjya", those who give away
scripture, those who turn away from scripture, those who reject scripture. And
then how do they act? Naturally, they will act based on their own selfish
desires. "vartate kama-karatah", so there is nothing to regulate their desires.
They act according to their own desires. So, what happens to them? "na sa
siddhim avapnoti". They do not attain "siddhim", they do not attain any
perfection. "na sukham na param gatim", they do not attain any happiness. Nor
do they attain the supreme destination of life. So, now, Krishna is talking
about "sukham" in this life. But actually, they do not get happiness in this
life, what to speak of next? So, why not happiness in this life? Because, you
know, when desires become unregulated, then people suffer even in this life. We,
at the extreme level, we see this in addictions where people think that I will
drink to enjoy, or I will smoke to enjoy. But then, you know, they f..., they
take drink first and then they become drunk. And first, they cash the drink and
then the drink catches them. And the drink catches them, you know, vicious grip,
that finally chokes off their life so many times.

So, that is extreme example. But even in general, when desires go out of
control, then people suffer terribly. And today, we see so many psychological
problems people are suffering from. Actually, the mental problems society is
suffering from today are far more than ever before in human history. And the
reason for this primarily is that people are having so many wild desires. And
the desires are like the fuel for the mind. And the more the desires, the
greater will be the fuel for the mind, and of course, if the desires are
spiritual, then the mind goes in Krishna, in direction of Krishna. But if the
desires are material, then the mind goes in the direction of so many material
objects. A..., and the mind is hyper energised. And our body's capacity to
enjoy are limited. Our resources are limited. We have some notation because of
our social culture. And because of all this, our, the mind's fantasies are
frustrated. So, then, the mind goes wild, when it says, as I am not fulfilled.

So, the vi-karmis suffer even in this life. They suffer because of I am
controlled mind. Then, that is why the scriptures say that we should, you know,
at least become karmis. We discussed earlier how in today's parlance, often
ISKCON uses the kar..., word karmis to refer to materialists. But in the Vedic
context and even here "karmibhyaḥ parito hareḥ", there the word karmi refers,
not to vi-karmis, it refers to karmi kandis. Karma-kandis are religious
materialists. So, let us look at these religious materialists.

So, karmis act according to Vedic knowledge. They are superior to vi-karmis.
They are elevated to higher planets like the Moon. And they return to
martya-loka. So, the karmis, what do they do? They primarily focus on material
enjoyment only. So, vi-karmis and karmis, both are interested in material
enjoyment. The difference is that karmis are focusing on getting material
enjoyment within the precincts of dharma. They follow scripture to get material
enjoyment. So, this is definitely better. Because they are not going into sin.
And by this, they will, this path of gradual elevation. So, the Vedic program is
that, it will provide for both our spiritual and material needs. It is not that
the Vedic scriptures tell us that because you have to practi..., have to go back
to Godhead, so just forget your body, starve. No. They provide us not just a
philosophical understanding of how, what all sadhanas we should do to go back to
Godhead. But they also give a program how to live in this world. In fact,
varnashram is a systematic social arrangement to facilitate people to live
spiritually. And actually, you know, the Vedic culture is, as far as history
goes, even, you know, even from the modern historical perspective, the only
example where a ho..., co..., comprehensive social model has been estab...,
recommended and established for the sake of facilitating a spiritual journey.

This is something which has not been there in other religions. You know, for
example, in there, there are, the male, mother, other major religions of the world,
Christianity, Islam, and Buddhism. Buddhism of course was offshot from Hinduism
only. So, many of the social models of Hinduism are still there. It is an offshot
of Vedic culture basically. The name Hinduism was not there at that time. But,
as per historical nomenclature, but if you see, in Islam, they have, after the
prophet came, and then, based on his teachings, they have made the Sharia. And
they have certain laws. Every religion has certain laws for how it should
conduct its people. But organising the whole society according to an arrangement
that will facilitate spiritual advancement. That is a massive, massive endeavor.
And practically, nobody has been able to do that. So varnashram was that model.
And it was implemented in Vedic culture.

So, it is understand that, you know, that people will take time to make
spiritual advancement. At the same time, everybody should be kept on a
progressive spiritual path. So these two, at least two factors, that give people
time, at the same time making sure they are staying on the right track, that is
arranged through varnashram. Those who want to make rapid advancement. Those who
want to devote themselves to Krishna, they can just devote themselves. And
Krishna says that:

        sarva-dharman parityajya
        mam ekam saranam vraja

Just surrender unto me. That is the highest as far as the Bhagavad Gita is
concerned. But the varnashram helps people when they are not on "sarva-dharman
parityajya" platform, then they can practice varnashram by that, they can make
spiritual advancement by that also. So, this whole karma-kanda system is, we
sometimes dismiss it, karma kanda, we should give it up. Sometimes, we will
quote Narottama Das Thakur saying "jnana-kanda, kar...", "karma-kanda,
jnana-kanda, kevala visera bhanda". So, that karma-kanda and jnana-kanda, they
are simply poison. Now, actually, this is from a pure devotional perspective.
That a pure devotee feels that, apart from devotional service, everything is
undesirable. Because pure devotional service alone will sat..., alone will
satisfy the heart. Nothing else will else satisfy. Now, that is definitely true.
At the same time, you know, not everybody is capable of aspiring for pure
devotional service. So, the Vedic scriptures, the way broad Vedic scriptures do
not say that if you cannot surrender to God, then you have to go to hell. Say,
no, if you cannot surrender to God, there are other levels that, which you can
practice spiritual life also. 

So, karma-kanda is one of those, intermediate arrangements. So, the Bha..., from
the Bhagavatam perspective, from the pure devotional perspective, Bhagavatam
calls even karma-kanda as "kaithava-dharma", that, and it says, this, this sort
of kaithava-dharma is kicked out of the Bhagavatam. So, "dharmaḥ
projjhita-kaitavo ’tra", so in the Bhagavatam's point of view, this "projjhita",
it has to be given up. This is focused on pure devotional service. But from the
point of view of people in general, who are not at the level of practicing
Bhagavatam, then for them, the karma-kanda is important. It provides a social
arrangement by which they can progress materially and also progress spiritually.
So, what is this karma-kanda? We have discussed this in our Isopanishad classes.
There is dharma, artha, kama and moksha. So, actually, when we start seeking
moksha, one goes to the level of jnani. Dharma, artha, kama is what a person
seeks for when a person is a karmi. So, they follow Vedic regulations. And their
idea is that they understand that their karma happens automatically. There is God
in control. And God acts through His various agents. So, when they want grains.
They understand that we human beings have to work for it. But along with that,
higher sanction is also required. So, they will go and plough their fields, they
will sow their grains. And they will take care of the farm. But along with that,
they understand that r..., rains, fertility of the soil, multiple other factors,
absence of pests, the proper presence of veins and everything, so many other
factors are there, which are required for the proper harvest, that are not in
our hands. And they do not think that simplistic lives are all happening by key,
by chance. Sometimes, there is a good harvest because the weather was good.
Sometimes, there is a bad harvest because the weather was bad. They do not see,
whe..., they do not see things like that. They are much more informed.

Where the modern eyes see simply dead matter moving according to impersonal laws
and mechanical forces with the cloud of the dead matter, and they are moving
according to impersonal laws and mechanical forces. Wind is making it blow. And
sometimes preacher sees and rains fall. So, where matter, where the material eye
sees only matter moving according to impersonal forces and mechanical laws,
there the spirit..., there itself, the spiritual eye sees the Supreme Lord
acting in association with His agents, a..., coordinating the movings of the
material nature. So, yes, this is a material phenomena that when clouds come in
a particular area that in pictures change, and then rain happens. But how does
all this happen? This happens under the supervision of the Supreme Lord. And if
that supervision, Supreme Lord, that is being referred to by the karmis. So, the
karmis understand that if we want something in life, we have to satisfy the
Supreme Lord and through Him satisfying His agents. So, for that, the karmis do
karma kanda, and by that they make gradual advancement. Slowly, slowly, slowly,
they move forward in the spiritual life. So, the whole verse describes that,
those who do like this, they are also serving Krishna. And they are doing it
indirectly.

        trai-vidya mam soma-pah puta-papa
        yajnair istva svar-gatim prarthayante
        te punyam asadya surendra-lokam
        asnanti divyan divi deva-bhogan

So, it is described that they perform yagnas, how the yagna is mentioned
"trai-vidya", three veda, "soma-pah puta-papa", "soma-pah", so they drink some
juice, and "puta-papa", they become purified from sin, and they are worshipping
me only, but indirectly.

"yajnair istva svar-gatim prarthayante", they perform yagna with "svar-ga", and
they get svarga by that.

"te punyam asadya surendra-lokam", and, as they attain "punyam", because
of performance yagna, then they go to "surendra-lokam", the word of Lord
Indra. Prabhupada says the, you know, various heavenly abodes like an abode of
the Moon God and other abodes.

"asnanti divyan divi deva-bhogan", and there "asnanti divyan", they enjoy
immensely, the "divi deva-bhogan", the bhogas, the delights of the devatas.

And then after that, what happens? They enjoy this, but then:

	te tam bhuktva svarga-lokam visalam
	ksine punye martya-lokam visanti
	evam trayi-dharmam anuprapanna
	gatagatam kama-kama labhante

So, they attain that heaven, but once they have enjoyed their fru..., due
karmic fruits, they, they got the another "punyam", and they fall back. "ksine
punye martya-lokam visanti", they fall back to the material world. And even
their best solutions cannot do much about it. So, that is how this is also
temporary. So, karmis are better than the non-devotees, materialists, but still,
they are far away from the highest. Then after that is the jnanis. So, jnanis,
we see that, they come to the platform of yagna, yagna, atma tattva. They know
fruitive ac..., activities bind. And they are superior to karmis, and unless
take to devotional service, they are still in avidya.

So, who are the jnanis in this four point sequence? Kar..., dharma, artha,
kama, moksha. Those who start seeking moksha, they are the jnanis. So, not many
people seek moksha unfortunately. Most people get caught up in dharma, artha,
kama itself. And all the moksha, in the same, contributing, most often goes far
away. Because most people do not think so far as think moksha. But still, there
are a few who do that. And they are far superior. Because they have understood
that this world is temporary. And if I want it happen, I need to go beyond
this world. And they started thinking, exploring in a serious way, what is that
which is beyond. So, their practice often is just contemplation, meditation. So,
they want to empty their mind of all sinful, all materialistic thoughts. And
they simply want to focus on the thought of atma-tattva. So, when they think
about atma-tattva like this, actually, the whole idea is, by such things of
atma-tattva, they realise aham brahmasmi, aham brahmasmi, aham brahmasmi, and
when they think like this, they think that just by repeating they will attain
realisation that aham brahmasmi. And when they get that realisation that aham
brahmasmi, then by that realisation, they are able to go further and come to
understanding that I am not just a soul. I am a soul who is a part of God. And I
meant to serve God. That is when they come to the level of bhaktas.

Let us look at bhaktas. The bhaktas perform devotional service under regulative
principles. And they guide spiritual practice, they become pure devotees. And
then they will develop love of Godhead. And among them, the examples are Narada,
Sanaka, Sanatana and others. So, now, in this hierarchy, Srila Prabhupada has
included the devotees who are seekers and devotees who are seers together. So,
devotees are seekers and devotees who are seers. So, seekers means they are
practicing devotional service as sadhana. But by the practice of sadhana, they
will become siddha, they will develop love of God. So, those devotees who
develop love of God are extremely rare. Even those devotees who are practicing
devotional service are also rare. Because de..., devotional service is
sudurlabhah. The Bhakti-Rasamrta-Sindhu will describe the six characteristics of
devotional service, describes that it is durlabhah. It is very rare to obtain
it, the devotional service.

So, in that sense, even devotees are rare. So, most people are vi-karmis. Among
them, few are karmis. Among the f..., karmis, very few are jnanis. And among the
jnanis, very few are devotees. So, if there is a, if there is a pyramid, and the
pyramid moves, moves, up, up, up, and when it comes to the top. Now, at the
bottom, them, the m..., pyramid seem, may seem to be giant. But by the time the
pyramid reaches the top, it is sca..., it is na..., narrowed down, papered down,
that it is almost like a spot only now. So, that way, that is what happens with
respect with transcendentalists also. Those who are at the bottom level,
vi-karmis, they are very large in number. But those who are pure devotees, they
are extremely few in this world. And there is another reason why devotees become
anxious when they find that, actually, the people practicing devotional service
is so less. Why do, why do these feel anxious because of this? Because they
understand that, you know, human life is so precious and devotional service,
life is such a treasure. Human life and devotional service are made for each
other's nuances. But those who defy human, defy the purpose of human life by
engaging not in devotional service, but in sense gratification. They are
cheating themselves. They are depriving themselves of spiritual advancement. And
they are also depriving others. Because others, when they see devo...., those
who are devotees, or those who are devotees, engaging in materialistic
activities. Then, they are, others become discouraged, and others also give up
the practice of devotional service at times. This is their concern. Now, among
these devotees, who develop love of God. They are devotees who are the highest.
And they are the gopis.

So, gopis, now, what are their chare.., what are their characteristics? They
only know about satisfying Krishna. They do not care for anything else. And
then, they expect no return from Krishna. They cannot forget Krishna. They are
the most exalted of devotees. So, what are the speciality of the gopis? We have
to understand, we have to understand that the gopis are engaged in the most
selfless form of devotion. We have to be careful that we do not think of the
gopis simply as women. Now, if we think of Krishna, as a man, and the gopis as
women, then immediately, we will reduce their transcendental relationship down
to the mundane level. You know, if we start thinking, oh a man is attracted to
woman. Woman is attracted to man. What is going on? However, the gopis, yes,
they have female forms. But as we practice spiritual life, the first thing we
have to understand is we are not our bodies. You know, in Times of India, once I
wrote an article: "Is God male or female?". So, the first thing is, as I said,
before we can understand whether God is male or female, we have to understand
that we are neither male, nor female. We are neither male, nor female. Because
we are souls. And as souls, the soul does not have any gender. Now, sometimes,
it may be said that the soul is female and God is male. So, that is not in a,
that is not in a sense of a gender that we use at present. It is more in the
sense of the nature of the relationship. That the Lord is the enjoyer, and that
the, and then souls is the enjoyed. Lord is purusha. And the soul prakrti. But
it is not in a gender sense literally.

Actually, the Lord is transcendental and we are also transcendental. So, we as
souls, may have svarupa, which may mean different ge..., gender. Some of them
may be Gopal, some of it may be gopis. So, we may have different gender. That
does not matter right now for us. We do not know what the gender is. And, right
now, what we have to focus on is becoming free from our bodily identification.
That means becoming free from our mistaken conflation. Conflation means mixing
up a hover identity with our current bodily identity. So, how do we avoid that
mixing up? That is by education and purification. We educate ourselves with the
philosophy and then we purify ourselves. So, now, when the Bhagavatam takes us
through its tenth Can..., ten Cantos, nine Cantos before doing the sruti, tenth
Canto, where we see the rasa-lila, where is Krishna interacting with the gopis.
The previous nine Cantos, they teach us two important things. Firstly, they tell
us that God can manifest in so many different forms. God can manifest as a
ferocious lion, who is roaring, cause the elephant to tremble. The Lord can
manifest as a giant, or hog, boar, who can leave the whole earth on the tusk.
The Lord can manifest as a brahmanuk, who becomes enraged, goes around killing
people.

Like that, the Lord can manifest in many many ways. So, the Lord can manifest as
an obedient son, and, some, that means as Lord Rama, manifests as oso...,
obedient son, and he teaches how one should follow the f..., father. So, in this
way, actually speaking, anybody can put on any audition. Anybody can put on any
sort of situation by which they can still serve Krishna in their situation. So,
Lord can manifest in any form. The devotees can manifest in any form. We see
in the first Canto, there is Kunti Maharani, who is elderly, gentle, rigid,
rigom, dignified woman. And then we have the same Bhagavatam, in the sixth
Canto, Vitarasur. And Vitarasur was, you know, he c..., he c..., was a person
who created terror in the hearts of people who saw him. When we may sing
about Vitarasur's prayers, and we sing so sweet, spi...:

        ajata bhakseya yumataram kaga
        
Just as a decently born bird longs for its mother to come back and give it some
feed. Just a calf longs for its mother to come and give milk. Just as a baby
longs for a mother. So, like that, my Dear Lord, I long for you. So, it is such
a tender sweet prayer. But actually, the description about Vitarasur is blood
curdling. You know, when he roared, actually he was so giant, he just crushed
the demigod soldiers under his feet. So, we may not think of that as devotional
at all. But it is described that in heart, Vitarasur expressed sentiments that
were exactly similar, and largely similar to those expressed by Kunti. So, the
Bhagavatam enables us to go to the substance of things. That means the Lord can
manifest in any form and the devotees can manifest in any form. So, the devotees
can be an elderly lady. The devotees can be a terrible raksasa. But still, it is
a devotee. And the Lord can be, you know, bow wielding majestic form as a King.
Or the Lord can be in a ferocious form as a lion ought to rip apart the stomach
of the opponent. Whichever way it is, the Lord is perfect. And the possibility
of love between the Lord and the devotee always remains. And that can be
explored by anyone who wants to. So, the Lord can have different relationship
with his devotees. And among all these relationships, there are hierarchies. So,
among these, the topmost is where the Lord manifests as a simple, sweet cowherd
body, and his topmost devotees manifest as very sweet child endearing his
beloved gopis.

So, when we see the Bhagavatam, its ten Canto, after going through the seven,
first nine Cantos, then we do not just see Krishna and the gopis as man and
women, as boys and girls. We see them as the Lord and the devotees. So, for
Krishna, embracing the gopis, and expr..., embracing Hanumanji is same because
they are both devotees and in tattva, he loves both of them. Now, similar way,
in rasa of course, there was a difference, but in tattva, it is the same. So,
the Lord was attracted to both of them because both of them have devotion.

Now, beyond this, when we under..., see the gopis first and foremost as
devotees, not as fe..., woman, not as females. Just they have a female form.
When we say they have female form. Actually, the gopis and their bodies are not
separate. The gopis are eternally the same gopis. In the spiritual world, the
soul, the mind and the body are all the same. Everything is spiritual. But the
point is, that there is, that soul could have been manifested in many forms, Why
did the soul manifest in a gopi form? Because the Lord wants to have the most
intimate pastimes, And whatever we see, the intense attraction between males and
females in this world, that is manifested, in their original form, in its
original and pure form in the relationship between Krishna and the gopis. The
female form is best suited for service. And that is why the Lord arranges that
His topmost devotees, who want to serve Him the most, manifest the f..., have
the form that is best suited for service. And that form is the female form.

So, in this way, the gopis and the Lord perform the topmost reciprocations of
love, and, and that is why they are so much appreciated by great devotees. Now,
Rupa Goswami himself was a sannyasi. You know, he has renounced the world. When
he was in the world, he had fabulous amounts of money, and power, and position
to enjoy. He returned the way from it all and focused on service to the Lord,
single-pointed determined service to the Lord. And when he did this, how did
he do this? He surrendered to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
told him go to Vrindavan. And Vrindavan, he focused simply on living in
extraordinary simplicity and austerity, and one pointedly serving the Lord. So,
here, that verse, he utterly renounced the world. Although, he had prospects for
enjoying the world far better than most of u..., what, what most of us will be
having. But still, he renounced. He was absorbed in "radha krsna guna garam
vrte", actually singing the glories, singing the songs of Radha and Krishna,
"matta ligo", he goes mad in that. That is what the goswamis were.

So, that means they have got higher treasure over there. So, the gopis, these
glorifying the gopis' love for Krishna, just as the gopis' love for Krishna has
been glorified here, similarly, the gopis' love is glorified in the Puranas
also. And there have been many great saints who have been talking about the
gopis' love. So, when we want to understand the gopis' love, we have to be
very careful. We should not mister..., misunderstand it to be male-female. It is
very exalted level of pure love between the Lord manifesting Himself as an
en..., endearing threefold bending cowherd boy and the gopis manifest..., the
topmost devotees manifesting in a perfectly matching female form. And having
intimate pastimes over there.

Now, among all the gopis, Radharani is the highest. Now, why is Radharani
considered the highest? Because her love is the highest. She loves Krishna more
than anyone else. You know, she cares for Krishna so much that seeing the
intensity of her love for Krishna, other gopis start trembling. Krishna Das
Kaviraja Goswami has written Radhikastakam. And:

        mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā

So, each line of that song ends with "mahyam ātma-pāda-padma", oh, Oh Radharani,
please give me service to your lotus feet, "mahyam ātma-pāda", "dāstu rādhikā",
Oh Radhika, please give me the service of your lotus feet. So, what is Radharani
doing over there? What Radharani actually thinks of nothing except Krishna.
When she is so absorbed in thoughts of Krishna, in serving Krishna, in pleasing
Krishna that she forgets everything else. And the go..., all the other gopis,
although they also all have extraordinary love for Krishna, but their, none of
them, their love can match Radharani's love. So, Radharani's love for Krishna is
seen in many beautiful pastimes, especially it is seen in rasa-lila. In
rasa-lila, we know that, we discussed two pastimes now. Once has Krishna, as we
know, disappeared. And so, they are structured as, 29 to 31 is called Ras
Panchadyay. 29 chapter, Krishna calls the gopis by playing his flute. 30
chapter, gopis come and the gopis have a brief talk. Krishna tells them go
back. The gopis say, how can we go back? We have come for you. And then they are
about to start the rasa dance. At that time, the gopis become somewhat proud.
And then Krishna disappears from them. We will discuss that a little bit later
again. We will come back. But then 31 chapter is the gopis' songs of separation,
gopi geet:

        tava kathāmṛtaḿ
        ...
        jayati te 'dhikaḿ janmanā vrajaḥ

So, it is, glorious is that land where you are born, that is the fortunate land
of Vrindavan, beautiful songs they sing. And Jiva Goswami, actually, based on a
very profound insight, into the meaning of each song, and into the rasa of
various gopis tells that this verse is actually recited by Visaka. This verse is
recited by Lalita. This verse is recited by this gopi. And now, after that, then
in 32 chapter, Krishna reappears. And Krishna and gopis have discussion, and the
gopis start chastising Krishna for having left them and gone away. But they also
love Krishna and they are afraid that if they chastise Him, He will go away. So,
they are go..., guided. But Krishna understands their heart. And He says, how
much I love you. And He says "napareham", that he was sacri..., the gopis are,
sacrifice everything for my sake, I cannot repay you. And therefore, you should
be satisfied with the service that you have rendered. There is nothing that I
can do for you. And this is actually normally, the soul says, my Dear Lord, you
have done so much for me, I cannot be sa..., I cannot do anything for you. But
it is so extraordinary, the Lord is saying what you have done for me, I cannot
sati..., I cannot repay you. Be satisfied with your own glorious service. And
then in the thirty-third chapter, gopis and Krishna perform rasa-lila.

So, the pastimes we are discussing are before the thirty-first chapter that
means. The thirtieth chapter, so Krishna has disappeared from the gopis, and the
gopis are frantically searching. As the gopis are searching, then, the two
different incidents, first when the gopis are searching, then they search,
search, search, and Krishna, He is there, but He is in..., invisible. So, he
sees everyone, but nobody sees, no one sees Him. And finally, Krishna decides to
have some fun. So, He manifests Himself in the form of Vishnu. And now, Vishnu
and Krishna, both have a bluish complexion. So, Krishna is turning for, way, in
the form of Vishnu. So, the gopis are looking everywhere, where is Krishna?
Where is Krishna? Where is Krishna? Frantically searching. And then suddenly,
they see their bluish form. And they are so delighted. So, they run towards that
form, and run, run, run, and then finally, when they reach that, the hearts reach
there much earlier and thinking, oh, Krishna is there, I will serve Him, I will
embrace Him, and we will talk sweet words with Him. Their heart reaches that far
before the body. But when they reach there, their hearts sink down. They feel
utterly disappointed. Because they see there is Lord Vishnu over there. You
know, they are shocked. Without Krishna how come Vishnu is there? So, normally,
when the yogis get a darshan of Vishnu, that is the greatest ecstasy of their
life. But the gopis' love for Krishna is so great that seeing Vishnu is a
disappointment for them. You know, seeing Vishnu is the greatest appointment
that a person, one can set up with anyone. It is ultimate achievement for the
soul to be able to see Lord Vishnu. But here the gopis are disappointed. And
that is the exalted nature of their single-pointed love for Krishna. They do not
want, they do not want their love to be distracted even to Vishnu.

So, the gopis see Vishnu. Then, oh, Vishnu is God. They offer obeisances to
Vishnu. They say, oh, Vis..., Lord Vishnu, have you seen Krishna? Please tell us
where is Krishna. So, Krishna decides to continue have fun, just points with his
finger, this way. And all the gopis thank Krishna, thank Vishnu and they run
away, Krishna as Vishnu, and they run away. And then, as all the gopis have been
searching, and they come along, Radharani has been falling behind. Because
Radharani is most frantic in her search for Krishna. And she has been searching
everywhere, where is Krishna? Where is Krishna? Where is Krishna? As she is
searching, then she is let behind. And fi..., she is the last to come. And then
she sees Vishnu, and she comes. Where is my Krishna? Have you seen Him? Please
tell me. Radharani asks with such a despair. Seeing how intense, how fervent,
how urgent, how earnest, how desperate her love is. You know, Krishna cannot
maintain his guise. He wants to point his finger that way. But the love of
Radharani is so great that Krishna's two extra hands disappear. Krishna is
manifested the Vishnu form with there are four hands. But now, Krishna wants to
point this way, but His two hands disappear. And Radharani sees her beloved Lord
in front of her. And there is a, the Radharani, Krishna reunite, united again.

So, this is Radharani's love. Among all the gopis, for all the gopis seeing
Vishnu is a disappointment. But among all, for Radharani, actually, her love for
Krishna is so great that the Vishnu's Vishnu disappears, and Krishna home
manifests. Or rather, Krishna's Vishnu form disappears and Krishna home
manifests. So, the consort of Lord Vishnu, they are Lakshmi. Lakshmi is the
goddess of fortune. All the gopis are supergoddesses of fortune. Because every
gopi's, her love for Krishna is so great, the intensity, the purity, the
fervency is so great that it is extraordinary.

In Vrindavan, there is a place, Belvan, where even Lakshmi Devi comes to perform
tapasya to be, to be able to, to enter into the Krishna's pastimes and perform,
and be a part of the rasa-lila. And she has to do austerity in it. So, without
offering austerity, she is not able to enter. That is the exalted nature of the
posit..., love of the gopis, and that position. So, their, the, Lakshmi Devi is
the goddress of fortune. The gopis are the supergoddesses of fortune. And
Radharani is not just a supergoddess of fortune. She is the supreme goddess of
fortune.

        devi krishna-mayi prokta
        radhika para-devata

Serving Lakshmi mayi, serve

        kantih sammohini para

So, Caitanya, in the Caitanya Caritamrta, there is a verse quoted from Puranas,
where it is said that "devi krishna-mayi prokta", Radharani is Krishna Mayi. She
is filled with Krishna. "devi krishna-mayi prokta radhika para-devata", she is
the supreme goddess, goddess, and

        sarva-lakshmi-mayi sarva-

"sarva-lakshmi-mayi", in all fortune is there in her. She is the supreme goddess
of fortune. "kantih sammohini para", and "kantih sammohini", she is beloved of
the Lord. She is "sammohini". She deludes everyone. She deludes everyone because
she conquers the heart of even Krishna. You know, Krishna is Madan Mohan.
Radharani is Madan Mohan Mohini. "kantih sammohini para", "para", she is the
transcendental bewilderer of everyone, actually, and bewilderer of Krishna also.
Who is the bewilderer, of the bewilderer of everyone? Bewilderer of everyone,
Madan Mohan, Krishna is the bewilderer of ev..., Madan. Bewilderer of everyone
is Madan. Madan is Kama Deva. He bewilders everyone. People get attracted and
they forget everything because of that. So, when people get attracted to Kama
Deva, what happens is:

        sarva-dharman parityajya
        mam ekam saranam vraja

That forget everything and just succumb to maya, so Madan, Kama Deva bewilders
everyone, but above Kama Deva is the Krish..., is Krishna, who Kama Deva cannot
bewilder. Or, in fact, Krishna bewilders Kama Deva. So, but Radharani bewilders
even Krishna. So, this is Radharani's position and her love for Krishna is so
exalted that actually there are no parallels to it. And that Radharani moves
love is so supreme, so sublime, so selfless. That there is no parallel. That
there is no parallel. There is nothing like it anywhere in the world. It is that
Radharani, whose, has own personal kunda. So, Radharani is the highest among all
the devotees. So, when the gopis are serving Krishna, let us look at this. We
will look at Radharani more in our next class also.

So, the gopis, we discussed, are, they are, they only concl..., know of
satisfying Krishna. They do not care for anything else. They expect no return
from Krishna. Their only return was that they want more and more service. They
cannot forget Krishna at all. They are most exalted of all devotees. So, we know
that pastime in the Brihad Bhagavatamrta, where Narada Muni goes and searches,
and he realises the gopis are the highest devotees. Now, they are serving in
vipralambha-seva. What is vipralambha-seva? It is the mood of separation. So,
let us understand this mood of separation a little bit more, but we will do that
in the next class. But here, the whole idea of the mood of se...,
vipralambha-seva is that actually, you cannot take the Lord for granted. You
know, so, there is vripalambha, and there is vrilana. So, there is, there is
service in union, service in separation. So, when there is service in
separation, and there is anxiety. Will I attain Krishna? Will I attain Krishna?
If I do not attain Krishna, then what? And then, because of that anxiety, the
intensity of the love is far greater. And when there is union, the choice is
also far greater. So, in this way, the love of the gopis rises to far far
greater heights. That, Rupa Goswami has made a compilation of verses called
Padyavali. So, he has taken great prayers written by great Vaishnavas, but
various times, and he has compiled them in the Padyavali. So, in one of the
prayers, Radharani says that, this is the prayer of Radharani as revealed by
the Madhava acharyas, he says that, Radharani feels that actually I consider
separation from Krishna higher than union with Krishna.

Why? Because when there is separation from Krishna, at that time, when there is
union with Krishna, I see Krishna only in one place, but when there is
separation from Krishna, I see Krishna everywhere. Everywhere. Krishna is here.
Krishna is here. Krishna is here. Krishna is here. Everywhere. And the intensity
of the love for Krishna becomes far greater. So, in, because of
vipralambha-seva, there is hu..., humility. Of course, there are many reasons
why vipralambha-seva is higher. One reason is, there is always humility. There
is always sense of incompleteness, oh, not an incompleteness in a material
sense, but incompleteness in the sense that I have to attain the Lord. I have to
attain the Lord. And because of that, the remembrance of Krishna, the longing
for Krishna, the love for Krishna rises to such high levels that it is
unparalleled. This is the love of the gopis. And this love is so great that Lord
Caitanya himself came to ta..., taste that love.

So, now, Radharani is the highest of all devotees. And what is her specialty?
She has, she, she cannot be excelled. None of the gopis can love Krishna as
much as Radharani can. Even Krishna cannot understand her love. And what is,
that is an, Radhara..., Radha-kund? That is a personal kund. So,
Laghu-bhagavatamrta describes that actually this Radha-kund is the topmost place
as Prabhupada also quotes. La..., Laghu-bhagatamrta is a pla.., is a book
written by Rupa Goswami himself. Brihad Bhagavatamrta is written by Sanatan
Goswami. La..., Laghu-bhagatamrta is written by Rupa Goswami. And both of them
wrote these books, and different books, Bhagavatamrta, nectar of Bhagavatam.
There he glories the Radha-kund further.

Now, at the transcendental level, everything is not a morpheus. Everything is
tangible, not materially tangible, but spiritually tangible. And Radha Krishna,
they have places where they perform pastimes. And the nature of love is, if you
love someone, we see something about that person, that reminds us that person,
floods us with love. So, for example, way we, a mother sees the, the small shoe of
her baby and immediately the mother starts thinking, oh, where is my baby? You
know, is she, will she be okay? If somebody taking care of her hope, she is
well-fed. So, the mother may be in office working or mother may have gone
somewhere, but if she sees a small tiny shoe, she immediately has thoughts
go towards the Lord, towards her baby. So, like that, the nature of love is that
there never will be any stimulus, when that triggers the love.

So, in the pastime of Radha and Krishna, whatever triggers their love, that is
called "utdipen". "utdipen" is that which triggers love. Of course, there is an
elaborate subject which we will be able to discuss partially in
Bhakti-Rasamrta-Sindhu. That is the end, the end of our course. But at this
stage, suffice to stay that the "updipen" is the, the trigger is very special.
And meeting the triggers the love of the Lo..., Lord for his devotee, or the
devotee for the Lord. That becomes integral part of the pastimes. And Vrindavan
is fi..., Vrindavan itself is transcendental. And it is filled with so many
transcendental triggers which remind the devotee of Krishna. And Radha-kund is
much much more than just an "utdipen". We discussed yesterday how Radha-kund is
actually the manifestation of Radharani's love for Krishna in a liquified form.
So, it is that Radharani who is the topmost of all devotees. Her love for
Krishna is manifest in Radha-kund. And by serving in Radha-kund, in proper
devotional consciousness, one can attain the highest spiritual attainment. That
is the joining in the pas..., most intimate pastimes of the Lord's highest
manifestation, Krishna's pastimes with his gopis. That is the ultimate
aspiration of a Gaudiya Vaishnava. And it is in that path that Rupa Goswami is
leading us through the Bhakti..., through the Upadesamrta.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
