Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eAHjZwxy6LU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=ttzhy8RSGdGlbONmW0zZVge_It18MTU0MTgzMDYyNUAxNTQxNzQ0MjI1&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_032_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_4_Part_1_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=eAHjZwxy6LU

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Bhakti Sastri, Nectar of Instruction.

Today, we will start with text four. So, in the fourth text, Rupa Goswami talks
about association. It is the first verse and this theme will go on in the next
verses. The connection is that, in the previous two verses, he was talking about
association. And the emphasize has been on avoiding bad association and taking
good association. So, now, how do we take good association? That is described in
this mantra, in this particular verse. So let us look at the one's. So:

        dadāti pratigṛhṇāti
        guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati
        bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva
        ṣaḍ-vidhaṁ prīti-lakṣaṇam

So "dadāti pratigṛhṇāti", "dadāti" means to give. "pratigṛhṇāti" means to
receive, "gṛhṇā", "gṛhṇā", is accept, so "guhyam", "guhyam" is confidential.
"ākhyāti pṛcchati", "ākhyāti" means to ask, and "pṛcchati" is to hear.

"bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva", "bhuṅkte" is to receive, to eat, and "bhojayate" is
to feed others. So, "bhojayate", let, "bhojana", so one is to enjoy. In other
word, "bhuṅkte" often means enjoy. So, actually devotees can be happy in taking
prasadam. That is not wrong. "bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva", we will discuss about
that la..., "ṣaḍ-vidhaṁ prīti-lakṣaṇam", "prīti" is affection, "lakṣaṇam" is
symptoms. So, these are the six symptoms of friendship.

It is interesting that bhakti is an inner cultivation. And yet, while describing
how one can go about practicing bhakti, Rupa Goswami delineates specific
activities which may seem to be external. You know, giving gifts, receiving
gifts, is external activity, we may say. You know, eating food, drinking food,
that may also seem to be external. We say, ok, talking about our hearts, that is
internal. But that may be more internal. But what about others? Actually
speaking, you know, for us, we inter..., we live in the world, and we l..., we
look through our eyes at the external world. When people see us, they first see
us externally. And in many cases, people see us only externally.

You know, among thousands of people who see us, during our life, course of our
life, how many people can see our heart? So, external behavior, external actions
are also important. Now, in a later verse, he will talk about how we should not be
stuck with the external vision and we should see devotees spiritually also. But
externals are not unimportant. They are important. And bhakti, the bhakti
culture, that way, if you wanted to talk about externals negatively, we could
say the bhakti culture is filled with so many externals. The way, we, we wear
tilak, we were dhoti, kurta or saaris, we are so, we wear kunti mala. So, there
are so many external things that we do.

Why do we do that? Because the external helps in accessing the internal. So,
when we want to interact with other people, other devotees especially. How do we
do that? There ha..., what is in the heart has to be expressed externally. And
when it is expressed externally, then that expression becomes understandable and
relishable for others. Otherwise, it is not even accessible. Leave alone
understandable or relishable. Accessible means one can contact it, understandable
means intellectually one can grasp it, relishable means at the heart's level, we
relish it. So what is in the heart, is not e..., not even accessible to others,
most of the time, leave alone understandable or relishable.

That is why the heart's affection has to be expressed. So, that is why he uses the
word very clearly, Rupa Goswami, laksanam. These are the laksanas. These are
symptoms of "prīti", so "prīti" has to be in the heart. If "prīti" is not in the
heart, one can do these six things superficially also. That is possible. But
even if "prīti" is in the heart, how will others know that the "prīti" is there?
These things have to be done. And, the, so, the externals of bhakti should not
be dismissed as rituals. That, oh, these are rituals, why do them? No, they are
the ways in which, affection is expressed, and then affection is received by
others.

So that is why it is extremely important that devotees follow the culture and
this is a very important part of the culture. So, we will discuss this verse
based on Srila Prabhupada's purport and we look at also, parallel instances,
from especially the Caitanya Carimtamrta. Because the bhakti culture is most
directly demonstrated, especially in terms of relationships among devotees in
the Caitanya Caritamrta. So, therefore, it is, move forward, now, Srila
Prabhupada, look at the translation.

"Offering gifts in charity, accepting charitable gifts, revealing one's mind in
confidence, inquiring confidentially, accepting prasada and offering prasada are
the six symptoms of love shared by one devotee and another."

So, the six ways in which loving exchanges are done, symptoms of love. Let us
look at the purport, so, purport can be divided into various parts whom to
associate with, where to associate, that is within Krishna Consciousness
movement, ISKCON. Then how, and why. And then there is one whole section on why
we should, with whom we should not associate. So, Srila Prabhupada gives the
example of how relationships are formed even in material life. You know, when,
say, the head of state, Prabhupada uses the example of businessman, and gives a
similar example from, see, the political scenario. When they say the head of
state of one country visits another country. What does second country do?

They should honor of, honor of, anchoress honor. So, they have a big feast. And
then many VIPs are there. And then they sit and talk with each other. And that
is relationships develop. So, what essentially happens is maybe if they want
to develop some relationship, then, this fron...,  the, the visiting countries,
head of state, the visitor, visiting head of state, will bring some, give
mentor, some gift and he will give to the, to the host head of state. The host
will give some gifts. They will have a big feast together. And they will talk
about matters of mutual concern.

You know, for them, their mutual concern may be national. You know, my nation,
your nation, how, what are the areas of disagreement? What are the areas of
possibility of increasing relationships? And these talks can be of pivotal
importance for political consequences. So, therefore, this is the way
reciprocations happen. Relationships happen this way only in life. So, generally
speaking, the way is that these six activities, that Rupa Goswami has talked
about are universal. That everybody does these activities. It is not just
devotees, but when devotees do these, then they can bring Krishna into their
hearts, into each other's hearts, and they can both move closer to Krishna.

So, so principles of living, many of them are similar for devotees and
non-devotees. But the purpose of living is different. Now, devotees eat food.
Non-devotees eat food. The principle is the same. Everybody has to eat food.
Devotees have to work to earn a living. Non-devotees have to work to earn a
living. Devotees have to, devotees maintain a family, non-devotees maintain a
family. So, many of the activities are similar. The principles are common, but
the purposes are different. The principle, by principle, I do not mean a
philosophical understanding. The, the, by principle, I mean, just the fact that
we have to do those activities. The purpose is different. So these six ways, in
which people exchange affection, these when devotees apply it, then there can be
very affectionate relationship.

And Srila Prabhupada in fact goes to the extent of saying, that the Krishna
Consciousness movement is nourished by these six full exchanges between the
devotees. So, this is a profound statement. Generally, we may think of six full,
it is a Krishna Consciousness movement as meant for Krishna Consciousness with
the world. As we want to conduct programmes and we want to give cla..., we have
classes. Then many people becoming devotees. Many books being distributed.
Temples being built. Yes, these are important. They are definitely important.
And they are signs of the vibrancy of the Krishna Consciousness movement's
health. But the same time, what is the essence? What we want after people come
to the temple, after co..., people come to Krishna, what happens after that?
Now, they have to develop loving relationship with other devotees.

Now, our heart gets connected with Krishna, not through some mystical vision
that Krishna suddenly reveals to us. Our heart gets connected to Krishna, by
getting connected to his devotees.

    prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam
    ātmanaḥ kavayo viduḥ
    sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto
    mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam

So, it is described in the Srimad Bhagavatam, Third Canto, that "prasaṅgam",
"prasaṅgam" means attachment. "prasaṅgam", "prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam", the "pāś",
the nose of attachment is "ajaraṁ". "jaraṁ" is old age, "ajaraṁ" is that which
never grows old. So, the attachments to material things is such that they never
grow old. In fact, we see our bad habits. The older they get, they do not get
weaker. They get stronger quite often. They never grow and weak. The longer a
habit has been there, the more difficult it is to give up. So, material
attachments are "ajaraṁ".

"prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam ātmanaḥ kavayo viduḥ", now, wise people know that
attachment to the materialists almost impossible to break, to give up. But
then "sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto", if the same is directed towards devotees, towards
sadhus, then "mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam", then the doors to liberation open.

So, the, it is by attraction to Krishna's devotees that we develop attraction to
Krishna. Now, the word sadhu does not necessarily, may have to mean a, the
spiritual master, or sannyasi guru. It can be any advanced devotee, any devotee,
any person, male or female, grihasta or sannyasi, whoever inspires us to develop
our love for Krishna, to increase our service to Krishna. That can be a sadhu
for us. So, it is by attraction to Krishna and his devotees that our love for
Krishna, th..., gets nourished in a practical sense. So, when people come to the
temples, what is that there is su..., going to happen to them? What should
happen is that they become attracted and connected with devotees in a deeper and
deeper level, and through that, they move forward, upwards towards Krishna.

So, we associate with devotees, now, we see in ISKCON, wha..., what do we
actually do? We have essentially, we have hearing and chanting, that is in a
sense, "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati". Actually speaking, the Bhagavatam class that
is there, the Gita class that is that are there, the various programmes that are
there, they are not just philosophical classes. Philosophy is very important.
And when we say "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati", so that, wha..., what is actually
happening is the devotee speakers are sharing their understanding, their
realisations, and how they have internalised, applied, and relished Krishna
Consciousness. And that is what makes the philosophy come alive.

You know, the scripture lives through those who live the scripture. We can study
the scripture at home also. But the scripture as a living reality will become
manifest to any when we associate with those who are living the scripture. That
is why, so when we come, and hear classes, it is not just abstract philosophy
that we are hearing. The philosophy is spoken through devotees who are living,
and realising, and relishing it. And that is how the class has come alive. Now,
if the Bhagavatam class is treated as a ritual, or the class..., weekly
programme that we go to are treated as ritu..., as rituals. Now, the speaker
thinks, oh, I have to go and speak something, and the audience thinks that, oh,
I have go and attend. Then, not, not much of the reciprocation will happen.
Because the heart is not put in that. Only when the heart is put in it, then
there is the joining of both hearts, centered on Krishna.

So, the speakers speak and the audience hears. And the wonderful thing about
bhakti is that the advancement depends on individual sincerity. You know, even,
even if the audience is very inattentive, but the speaker, is speaking
sincerely, diligently, wholeheartedly, when the speaker, by that intense desire
to glorify Krishna to the best of one's capacity, will experience Krishna, will
relish Krishna, and will make spiritual advancement. We see it with Sanjaya.

Sanjaya spoke the whole Bhagavad Gita earnestly to Dhritarashtra.
Dhritarashtra's heart did not change. Dhritarashtra still wanted the fight to go
on. But what happens still? Although his audience was not transformed, what
happens to Sanjaya? Sanjaya goes relishing. Sanjaya in the last two verse,
second, last, 18.76 and 18.77, there is a second last and third last verse of the
Bhagavad Gita, he describes that:

        hṛṣyāmi ca muhur muhuḥ
        ...
        hṛṣyāmi ca punaḥ punaḥ

So, I am relishing it again and again at every moment. I there remember
Krishna's words, I remember Krishna's magnificence without rupah. I am stunned.
I am thrilled he sings. You know, even when there is an intention to glorify
Krishna with sincerity, that itself brings some joy. And even if some speaker is
not very serious, speaker is not very advanced, but if the audience has a
sincere desire to hear and learn, and the audience will get realisation there
also. Krishna will arrange that. So, of course, if both are sincere, then that
is the best. Then, the reciprocation becomes very rich and very fulfilling. So,
this is how, this is one activity that we do, that we do "guhyam ākhyāti
pṛcchati".

And then there is also "bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva", you know. Srila Prabhupada
would say that whenever we have any programme, you should always have prasad,
even in the early days of the movement, when there was nothing available.
Prabhupada himself was having very little money. Then, Prabhupada would at this,
how, get the apple, and cut the apple. And he would offer one small piece of
pe..., apple to, offer to the apple, to Krishna and then give one small pie...,
slice of apple to everyone. But he said, this principle is make sure you always
have some prasad after the programme. Because prasad is the way, we express
affection.

And, in fact, prasad is the way in which, you know, Krishna enters into the
lives of most people. Krishna enters into their stomach first, and from the
stomach, He works His way into their heart. And He c..., captu... captures them.
So, there is, this is Krishna's transcendental journey through our bodily
anatomy. He enters the stomach. And from the stomach, He moves to the heart. And
many devotees become attracted to Krishna because of prasad. So, this is very
important.

As we know that, Krishna Consciousness is often known as kitchen religion. You
know, Srila Prabhupada's earliest disciple was Kirtanananda. And he was a good
cook. So, Srila Prabhupada called him as kitchenananda. You know, kitchenananda,
he said. So, Prabhupada himself allowed to cook. You know, Hayagriva writes that
in his book The Hare Krishna Explosion, he writes that, when Prabhupada started
cooking, we discovered that he knew so many recipes. He felt as if his knowledge
of cooking the recipes was as vast as his knowledge of sanskrit verses. So, many
recipes, he knew.

There was one time, we asked, Prabhupada, when did you learn this, all this? So,
Prabhupada said, I learnt by observing my mother and asking my mother. So, what
considered a very important part of the culture. He himself cooked. Then he
taught his disciples to cook. And especially, at one time, when Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakur's appearance day celebration was there, and at that time, the
devotees said, ok, today is a week day, and not many people will come, so we
will assure that the programme in the evening and then we will have the cooking.
That was what the devotees had planned. But then Prabhupada, as morning
programme got over and then moving, those going to be sl..., Prabhupada was
expecting Puspanjali to be there. So, how is the cooking going? How much are you
cooking? What are you cooking for my spiritual master?

Then the devotees said, Prabhupada, we are not planning now, we are planning in
the evening. Prabhupada said: what? You said that the spiritual master's
appearance is celebrated at noon. That is the way the convention is. And then
Prabhupada himself ran and started cooking. And single-handedly, Prabhupada
cooked dozens of items, just two hours oneself, all high class. And then
Prabhupada himself led the aarti, and he spoke about the spiritual master, and
then he went to his room and took a little prasad and saw how all the devotees
were relishing the feast also. So, Prabhupada considered it that offering the
bhoga on the disa..., on the holy day of his spiritual master as a way
expressing his gratitude. And the gratitude is also one way of affection. So, it
is important. So, this is another thing that happens.

And "dadāti pratigṛhṇāti", how do we do this? Actually, devotees can, should
give gifts. So, for example, on many of the festival programmes. You know, some
people come and give some sponsorship. They may sponsor the prasadam. And then they
have given gifts. So, this is affection. This is reciprocation of affection.
And this reciprocation of affection is what enables people to relish Krishna
Consciousness. Without that, Krishna Consciousness will be very dry. Now, if we
look back, actually, this is our culture itself.

You know, if you look at Sri Caitanya Caritamrta i..., or even if you look back
further to Srimad Bhagavatam, what do we see, that the culture is, when Sudhama
is requested by his wife, please go and ask Krishna for something. So, both of
them feel that if you are going to Krishna, you should give Him something. So,
actually speaking, you know, Sudhama is a small, he is a poverty-stricken
brahmana, and Krishna is the king of Dwarka. You know, whatever Sudhama gives
will be nothing, practically speaking, for Krishna. But still, it is a way of
expressing affection. So, in a sense, it was valueless, for them, it was
extremely valuable. Because they considered it the way they will express
affection. So, the only way they could express affection at that time was,
offering some rice, some flat rice. So, when they took that, rice, and they gave
it. Now, Krishna did not see it just as cheap rice. Krishna saw the affection
over there.

And he relished it once, twice, you know, and, it was, Rupanemi finally stopped
them. You are satisfied, by your taking those, the whole universe has been
satisfied; enough my Lord. So, you know, out of her love for her Lord, she
wanted him to eat the most opulent foods, and she could not tolerate the simple
cheap price Krishna eating. But she also understood that this is Sudhama's
affection be expressed. So, Krishna Himself adored it so much. He saw that,
actually, so, in there, in this, we said "dadāti pratigṛhṇāti" and "bhuṅkte
bhojayate caiva" combined together. You know, for him, Sudhama offered the
chipped rice, and that was eatable item, and which he also offered as a gift.
Now, what did Krishna do in return? "pratigṛhṇāti", Krishna gave him, oh, huge
palace and abundant wealth. And so, we see this reciprocation even among the
Bhagavatam. So, that is how the relationship gets nourished.

Now, if we come to Caitanya Caritamrta, we see repeteadly, this is how Lord
Caitanya actually thickened the relationships between devotees and himself. We
see that Caitanya Mahaprabhu, twenty-four years of his life, he was in Navadvip
perfo..., and almost from the age of twenty, started the harinaam sankirtan,
before that, he was playing the role of a scholar, more or less. Few years more
role more or less, but after he did harinaam sankirtan, from twenty-four to
thirty he traveled around, did preaching. And then, from thirty to fourty-eight,
it seems as if he had stopped preaching only. You know, because he stayed in
Puri, and certainly many great scholars and great devotees came to meet from
there. But he did not go around and preach so much it seems.

So Caitanya Mahaprabhu was a yuga avatar, and had come to teach yuga dharma,
then why is it that he did not teach in the last eighteen years of his life?
Now, ultimately, the Lord has, has His own sweet will and His sweet plan. But we see
what the Lord did, and how that also contribute to preaching in a phenomenal
way. What the Lord did was, he reciprocated love with his devotees, and through
that, he entered into their hearts, and when he entered into their hearts,
through that, he actually perpetuated the Krishna Consciousness movement.
Because they all wanted to please him afterwards. So we see the six Goswamis.
How Caitanya Mahaprabhu had loving exchanges with them. Raghunatha Das Goswami,
when he came and stayed, after be..., after getting away from his family when he
came and stayed in Puri, at that time, Raghunatha Das Goswami would take some
very simple food. All of us know the austerities that he would perform. And Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu took that food, once, and he felt this is sweeter than
nectar for me, this is better than all the bhogas that I have ate, eaten..
Because, in it, was the, was the renunciation of Raghunatha Das Goswami.

Now, of course, devotion was there. But devotion was extended by his
extraordinary renunciation. So, now, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased
with him. What did he do? He gave him a Govardhana seela, and kunja mala. So
now, that small necklace sort of thing and that small sila stone. Now, from the
material point of view, they were not, they were stone piece, and a small
necklace, it is not of jewels. It is of simple items. That is not, that is not
considered a very precious, or even much valuable. But for Raghunatha Das
Goswami, it was an eternal gift. It was such a precious gift. It was millions of
times more valuable than all the wealth that he had renounced. So, because this
was directly, he felt as if this Govardhan is Krishna, and that, that Kunja Mala
is actually in a sense Radharani. So, the Lord is giving him the divine couple.

So, this was his mood and he felt so grateful to the Lord. So by those acts of
giving that gift, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu entered into the heart of that
devotee. And he stayed in that heart forever and ever. That was how Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu attracted the devotees. And similarly, what did he do to who, Sanatan
Goswami? When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, when Sanatan Goswami came along the way.
Sanatan Goswami, he got some infection because of contact with some polluted
water. And so, whole body became covered with boyles, which gave out a nasty
pass. So, he wanted to stay with Caitanya Mahaprabhu. But Caitanya Mahaprabhu
has come and embraced him again and again. And in this way, he was showing his
affection to him. And that affection was at once in Sanatan Goswami's heart and
eventually one day, when Sanatan Goswami felt, you know, I am contaminating the
Lord's body, how can I stay here like this? So, he talked with Jagananda Pandit,
and Jagananda Pandit said, yes, you know, Lord has given you New Vri..., a
family in Vrindavan, now, you have stayed, you have seen the Lord, now you
should go back to Vrindavan.

So, when Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard this. Sanatan Goswami said I am planning to
leave my dear Lord. He said. Who has said this? He said Jagananda. So, he said,
who is the Jagananda to give you advice? He said, you are so, so learned, so
advanced that even I can take advice from you. That Jagananda is just a small
word. Who is he to give you advice? So, Sanatan Goswami has had such a loving
affection. Sanatan Goswami said, my dear Lord, you know, those whom we love, we
chastise. And those who are really distant from us, then we respect, very
respectfully deal with them. So he says, you are giving Jagananda Pandit the
nectar of your chastisement, and you are giving me the bitter juice of your
respect and prays. So, Ja..., Ja..., Sanatan Goswami said that Caitanya
Mahaprabhu felt embarassed. And he said, no, no, no, you, I love your very much,
but I cannot tolerate the breach of Vaishnava etiquette. How can such a
Jagananda Pandit give you advice? I love you very much. And Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu came like this and he embraced. And when he embraced him by that,
essentially, Sanatan Goswami's body got mystically cured, became effulgent, and
all the postures, one moment disappeared.

Sanatan Goswami folded his hand, and he said, amazing miracle. And he said, my
dear Lord, what you have done is extraordinary. But I see this whole part of
your lila. It was by your arrangement that I got those boyles, and now by your
merciful arrangement you have removed those boyles. So, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
by his unflinching devotion, his unflinching love for Sanatan Goswami, wandered
in the, one's heart.

Similarly, with Rupa Goswami also. When Rupa Goswami came there to Puri. What
did Caitanya Mahaprabhu do? Caitanya Mahaprabhu one day came along. So, Rupa,
Rupa Goswami, Sanatan Goswami, because they had become muslims earlier, as Dabir
Kas and Sakar Malik, so they considered themselves even navalokas. So, devalokas
were the most exalted among devotees. So, they would stay away from the, others,
away from, a little bit away from the temple, in Siddha Bakula, where Haridas
Thakur was staying. And while they were living over there, at that time, the, 
Caitanya Mahaprabhu would come and meet them. So, one day, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
came, and he saw Rupa Goswami and he had written this verse, tunde tandavini. He
was so pleased, so pleased. Now, generally, you know, there are different levels
of pleasure. And these are also expressed by ways we express it, you know.

Sometimes, when we praise a person, or somebody praises us. You know, that might
just be because of flattery. Right in front of the, you know, this person is
there. I should speak something good about him. It might be flattery. Even if it
is not flattery, it might be obligation. You know, it is a senior person. He is.
So, I have to speak something. But suppose, there is, there is one devotee.
There is, you know, there is this devotee, Krishna, there is one devotee, A, B,
and C. So, if B glories A in front of A. Then, that is, that is good. At least,
we are following the etiquette, and appreciating. But if B glories A in front of
C, that means, I am in front of somebody else. Then, that means that person
really appreciates. And because that person really appreciates, it is, you know,
that was. So, if, if after a class, we go and tell the speaker, that was a very
nice class. That is good, but the speaker is right in front of us, and we are
there, and we are expected to speak something, so we may speak. But after the
class, we go and tell, hey, your today's class, it was so good. This point was
good. This point was good. So, then we appreciate to a third person, then that
is, that means the appreciation is actually very genuine.

So, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu not only spoke this appreciated this "tunde
tandavini" verse, this verse which says that, you know, there is so much nectar
in the holy names. I do not know, "kiyad biyam mrite krishneti varnaudve", I do
not know how much nectar is there in the holy names.

        tuṇḍe tāṇḍavinī ratiṁ vitanute tuṇḍāvalī-ladbhaye

He says, I feel, I want thousands, I want crores of ears. I just want to relish
the holy name through my tongue and my ears, and when the holy name enters into
my heart, he dances in the courtyard of my heart, and all senses become silent.
They become innard. They lose their vicious enjoy mentality. And this way, he
says that, I do not know how much nectar is there. So, Caitanya Mahaprabhu said
I have never heard such a glorification. Haridas Thakur also said, I have never
heard such glorification. So, I am happy. And then after that? Caitanya
Mahaprabhu focused to Haridas Thakur. How is he able to understand this? He says
because you have given your mercy. So, he said, yes, actually, when I saw how
humble, how sincere, how diligent they were when I met them at Ramakeli, I felt
that they deserved my foot mercy. That is how I have given.

And then, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu not only himself said that I have given mercy,
but then he took Rupa Goswami in the association of, to the sanga of all the
senior devotees. So, there is, Swarup Damodar was there. Then, Damodar Goswami
was there. Then, Ramananda Ray was there. And these are, were in Puri, the most
intimate associates of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. And, Sri Cai..., Rupa Goswami
brought among them, and Caitanya Mahaprabhu told them that, you know, he is such
a, he is such a wonderful devotee. Please all of you, bless him. And then he
said, please speak some of your poetries. So, Rupa Goswami was very embarrassed.
How can I speak my poetry whatever I have written? He said, no, you speak it.
And then Rupa Goswami spoke it. And all of them were so happy. And they all
heard his poetry. Advaita Acharya was there. And all these senior Vaishnavas,
the intimate associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. So, Rupa Goswami, in one's
late younger generation, although Rupa Goswami was also elderly in terms of age,
but he was one generation younger. He was like that, the disciple of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.

Whereas all these were associates of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. They also of course
considered themselves to be servants, but they were like on that level and Rupa
Goswami was like a junior. So, they had all been devotees, more or less
throughout their life. And they were all very intimately associating with
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. So, they all heard his poetries, appreciated it, glorified,
and they all profusely blessed him. So, it is one thing to appreciate a person,
but it is quite another to take that person in the association of devotees,
the sanga of exalted devotees, and appreciate that person publicly and get
everyone to appreciate. So here, what is Caitanya Mahaprabhu doing? He is
actually "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati", now, he is, when he is telling, yes, when he
is asking, Swarup Damodar, you know, how is it that he has understood my heart,
how is it that he has understood intimately and the, so intimately the glories
of the holy names? He says it is because you have given your mercy. This is the
example of heart to heart communication. Heart to heart communication is
essentially what?

"guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati", heart to heart. And by such heart to heart
communication, the Goswamis, of founder hearts completely pervaded by Krishna,
by Lord Caitanya, and Lord Krishna. And they were far away from Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. In fact, we see that, Goswami's meetings, which met Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, there were a very few. They did not meet him for very long. You
know, if you look at most of the Goswamis, except for another Goswami who stayed
in Puri throughout the life of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, later life, and for
several years, he was there. All the other Goswamis, they, they met Caitanya,
there was one meeting initially, at the time when Caitanya Mahaprabhu
transformed them, converted them and recruited them.

He told them all you go to Vrindavan. And after that, the meetings were so
scarce. Practically, no meetings only. But although there were no such, almost
like no meetings. But still, what essentially happened was, there was always a
meeting in the heart, always a meeting in the heart. So, actually all the
Goswamis that not yet reached Vrindavan, when these six Goswamis not yet rea...,
the five, Rupa Goswami was in Puri, when Caitanya Mahaprabhu himself went to his
Vrindavan Yatra, at that time, the Goswamis were not yet settled in Vrindavan.
And after that one tour to Vrindavan, Caitanya Mahaprabhu never against went to
Vrindavan. And the Goswamis spent their whole life in Vrindavan. So, they
occasionally would come to Puri. But there was a huge distance coming all the
way from Vrindavan to Puri. And Caitanya Mahaprabhu has given them a mission in
Vrindavan. So, they stayed there to fulfill mission.

But even in the small meetings that they had. Caitanya Mahaprabhu entered deep
into their hearts. And they cherished those memories. So, this is how Caitanya
Mahaprabhu nourished the Gaudiya Vaishnava Sampradaya through loving exchanges.
And the Goswamis were like his primary successors in terms of systematising the
Sampradaya. And that is what through their writings they did. And did he inspire
them? At one level, we can say He is God. He is in there in everyone's heart,
and He can inspire anyone and everyone. That is true, definitely. But Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu also demo..., demonstrated, you know, how it is to be done,
practically. And he showed such intimate loving exchanges with his disci...,
with his followers and through that, he won their hearts and he forever stayed
in their hearts.

So, this is essentially the essence of Krishna Consciousness. Srila Prabhupada
himself also a genius of this. You know, he was so busy, but Srila Prabhpada was
always looking for opportunities, for loving reciprocations. So, you know, at
the place where, in the early days of the movement, Srila Prabhupada was
practically all alone, trying to share Krishna Consciousness with people. And
then, he was in New York and there was a book store, where Srila Prabhupada had
kept his books, and he would periodically go there to ask how many, how many
copies of the books have been sold, and if only books had been sold, then he
would take some commission, take some commission from there. So, one day, at
the talk, so when he would go there because elderly man, so the, the store in
charge, usually, he would talk with them.

And one day, casually she mentioned that, actually, she said that I like Indian
samosas. Now, she just heard a little bit of Indian cuisine, she said I like
this Indian item. And immediately, next time, when Prabhupada came and brought
a big tray of that same favorite item for her. And she was so amazed. And she
took it very joyfully. So what was Srila Prabhupada doing? You know, every
opportunity could have loving reciprocation, he would do that. So, Srila
Prabhupada was a person, who very much was conscious of Vaishnava etiquette, and
that is how he would share Krishna Consciousness and take Krishna Consciousness
deep into the hearts of his disciples through the sort of loving exchanges.

Now, let us look at each of, so as we have just discussed now the whole
tradition. How this is such a part of, always, rich part of our tradition having
intimate exchanges. Srila Prabhupada's purport explains how we do it in Krishna
Consciousness movement in general. And I will focus on how we can do these in a
greater details. So "dadāti pratigṛhṇāti", "dadāti" means to give, and
"pratigṛhṇāti" is to receive. What? Gifts.

Now, when we give gifts, there are two aspects to the gift. You know, there is
the intent of the way we give gift, and there is the content of the gift. The
content means what is it that we are giving. And the intent is with what
intention we are giving. So the intent and the content, both are important. In
the path of bhakti, actually, the intent is more important than the content. You
know, that is why Krishna says in the Gita that, I will accept even "patram
puspam phalam toyam". I will accept even a fruit, or flower, little water, or a
leaf also if it is offered with devotion.

        patram puspam phalam toyam
        yo me bhaktya prayacchati

"bhaktya prayacchati" with devotion, it is offered. And here the word "bhaktya"
as we know, comes twice:

        tad aham bhakty-upahrtam

"bhakty-upahrtam" when offered with the devotion, then

        asnami prayatatmanah

definitely accepted. So, the intent is more important than content. Krishna says
if the intent is there, even if the content is very simple, I will accept it. And
we see the same principle in the pastime of Sudhama. Where he offers, the
content was very simple. It was just rice. But the intent was there, and
Caitanya Maha..., Krishna also delighted with the intent, so happy about it.

So, as we saw, in general, when we give gift, the intent is extremely important.
Our goal is not just to show the world that I have given so much. So, when we
give some gifts. For example, we may give some charity to the temple. So now,
when we give charity, our goal should not be, just tell the words how much
charity I have given. You know, we cannot get pure devotion by mere donation.
Now, donation is important. It is a part of bhakti. But by donation, we cannot
get pure do..., pure devotion. By do..., pure devotion will come by the practice
of bhakti. And that is, that involves, one aspect of it is donation. But
essentially, it is the direction, direction of our consciousness towards
Krishna. The movement of our consciousness towards Krishna.

So, actually speaking, if our intention is not to glorify Krishna so much, it is
intention to glorify our own charitable fa..., charit..., fame, charitable person.
Then, our consciousness does not really go towards Krishna. See, the whole idea
of giving a gift, now, I will talk, I am talking first about Krishna, then we
will talk about devotees also. When we give a gift to Krishna, you know, the
whole point, when we actually, we do not call it as gift, because who are you
to give any gift to Krishna? Everything that we have belongs to Krishna only. So
when we give something to Krishna, so at that time, we can call it a gift
because that is a way of affection, but philosophically, ultimately, we are
simply returning to Krishna what belongs to him.

So, when we give charity to Kri..., charity to Krishna's mission or Krishna's
cause, at that time, you know, that is a way we are offering our heart to
Krishna. The whole principle of bhakti is that we have to offer our heart to
Krishna. And if we cannot offer our heart to Krishna, then we offer what is in
our heart to Krishna. That is wha..., what does it mean? You know, in our heart,
there is money. That is what normally happens with everyone in the world. It is
inevitable. So many concerns. Oh, I have to earn this much, this one, one needs
this project, you will get, you understood, this will cost this much, will cost
this much.

So attachment to money is there. So, what do we do? When, if the worldly concerns
are completely packing and crowding our heart, then we sacrifice that for
Krishna. So, when we cannot offer our heart to Krishna, at least we offer what
is in our heart to Krishna. What is in our heart is money. So, by offering
money, what are we doing? We are offering a part of our heart to Krishna
because, it is, we are, we are attached to money. So, when we offer a part of
our heart to Krishna, by that Krishna gets a part of our heart. That means we
give Krishna place in our heart. Oh, I gave this. I gave this lakshmi, this
particular. I did this particular service for Krishna. And that way, we get
connected with Krishna.

Generally speaking, if we are attached to money, then we will be concerned how
we are spending the money. So, if we are giving the money to Krishna, so,
because then we remember that. And that is how our Krishna connection also
develops. So the whole purpose is to direct our heart's flow towards Krishna.
So, the, the, giving gifts is one way of doing that. Now, when we give gifts, if
we give it for the sake of telling, broadcasting the fame to the world. Oh, I
gave so much charity. Then what is happening? Actually, sometimes, you know if
you throw a ball to the wall, then the ball goes to the wall, and tuck, it comes
back again. The harder we hit it, the faster it comes back. So, like that,
Krishna becomes simply a ball, where we toss our con..., becomes a ball, where
we toss our consciousness, our consciousness comes back then.

That means our consciousness does not go towards Krishna, because we are not
really attracted towards Krishna so much. Our goal is, ok, by offering something
to Krishna, everybody will come to know and then I will be the eternal famous
person. Oh, I become, I become a famous charitable person. When that happens
then unfortunately, surely because we are offering the charity to Krishna, but
we will not make as much as we could have. So, that is why "dadāti", so the
intent should be to actually please Krishna, not to necessarily, not to promote
our own glories. Now, of course there are situations, when devotees even may
have their names published, ok, I give this much donation. That will vary
depending on the person. Sometimes, it may be that, that by telling that, ok, this
person has given this much donation. Others will also be inspired to give. So
putting the name there is fine. And so..., and some people may really want that.

Somehow, they want the fame, and they want that. Ok, if I am giving donation,
the name should come. If that is they want, we can give them. But gradually,
they can be also encouraged through philosophy, education, through love and
culture to rise to a higher level of Krishna Consciousness. So, the, when we are
talking about this, we are not talking about this, about how to judge others.
Why do I have this person want his name to be there? Oh. We should not think
like that. You know, we are talking for ourselves. How we can direct our heart
to Krishna. What is happening between that person and Krishna is their mutual
business. Krishna will take care of that. I do not have to put my head in that.

So "dadāti pratigṛhṇāti", so intent is important, but when the intent is there,
then the content will also be as best as is possible. Because if I love
someone, the loving intention is there, naturally, I want to offer that person
the best. You know, a mother who loves a child, it is not that the mother will
say, oh, child, I love you. The intent is there. So, I will give you some soup
and I am going to eat this big feast. She will not do that. Because intent
automatically ships the content.

So, when we say that the intent is more important than the content, the point is
that when a very attractive co..., when an attractive content is not possible,
then Krishna is satisfied even with the content, with the simple content if the
intent is there. But from our side, we should think that the intent has to be
there, and along with the intent, the content should also be there. And what is
the content? The content is, Krishna, I, I will try to offer you as nice things
as possible. And this, and something similar applies to devotees. You know, when
we give gifts to devotees, you know, we, actually, different people value
different things. So depending on what people value, we can think about those
people, and then plan and gift accordingly.

So, some people like words of appreciation. Actually, everybody likes words of
appreciation. But for some people, words of appreciation are most important. For
others, physical presence when they need, or just seeing that is important. So,
being there for their important ti..., occasions, that is what is most
important. For others, certain tangible gifts are more important. You have come,
but what have you brought? So, you know, different people, there are, these are
called love languages. Different people have different love languages. That
means they perceive love in different things. So, you have to find out, if you
really care for some devotees, and we want to deepen the relationships with them,
we have to find it what is it that they care for? What is it they value most?
What is it that is most important for them. Once we realise that, and then share
in that. And those gifts will be very much cherished and not just appreciated,
but cherished actually. So, and, they will create very wonderful moments.

And for this, actually we have to know the person. We know the person and then
we give a gift accordingly. So, now, this applies within a family also. You
know, sometimes, when we talk about attachment to devotees. If a family is
progressively coming to devotional service, then there can be this excess of
duplication among the family members also. Just staying together, that does not
mean that automatically, everything is taken care of. Affection has to be
expressed. And this is, the forums where it can be expressed.

So now, there are some traditional ways, in which affection is expressed. For
example, there are the birthday. So, when the birthday of a person is there, at
that time, you know, what do we do? Naturally, we wish the person, we may give some
gift. Now, in mate..., in material circles, birthdays can be very big occasions
for big bashes. You know, people have big, big parties at that times. As
devotees, we may not want to do such things. Now, there is one ex..., one
extreme view that devotees say that, actually what is the point of birthday? You
know, for example, in some buddhist traditions, they have the idea that we have
had so many lives in material existence. Now, if we looked back, and if we had
memory, then practically, every day would be our birthday, and every day would
be our death day.

So, we have gone through so many lives. So what is the point of celebrating
birthdays? So, this is a very negationist idea. So there is one devotee who told
me, a senior devotee now, he told that, he, once he joined in a temple, in
ISKCON, in the early days, and then on, after he joined, the first birthday, his
birthday he went to the temple and he told the president. Prabhuji, today is my
birthday, and the temple leader said, so? How old is your stool back today? So,
how old is your stool back? Sorry? How this devotee said. He was shocked. But
afterwards, that felt grateful. Yes, freed me from my illusion, of infatuation
with the body, and bo..., the day of body's birth.

Now, actually speaking, this is a quite a cool hearted attitude. Now, certainly,
we do not want to identify with the body, but that does not mean that we have to
reject everything related with the body. So, actually speaking, any occasion
that can help us to come closer to each other, come closer to Krishna, that can
be used. So technically, or this is, this is called as a rite of passage, 'r',
'i', 't', rite means, rite is like ritual. Rite of passage means that as we are
going through the journey of life, as we are passing through various, various
important landmarks, at that time, there are certain functions that are done.
So, traditionally, we have the various samskaras. So, for example, when the
child anna.., the child is born, annaprashana, first child, child takes the
first grains, name giving ceremony, like that there are many ceremonies. These
are all rites of passage. So, the rites of passage start from garbhadhan and
they go, go onto antyesti, when the cremation is done. These are rites of
passage. These are traditional. And the importance of those rites of passages is
that they all create devotional impressions.

Now, the point of those rites of passages is to help, to, to help create
devotional impressions. So now, if we are now born and brought up in a culture,
where things are different, where the rites of passage were different. For example,
birthdays are very important. Then, we can utilise those to also bring
devotional impressions. There is nothing in principle wrong in that. In fact,
being insensitivity may be wrong at certain times because we can alienate people
by that sometimes.

So, the point here is that we do not want to make a big labor about the
birthday. But the same time, these are, by our cul..., the culture, in which we
live, by our own inner feelings, these are considered are important. And our
hearts are soft on that day. So, at that time, some words of affection, some
words of reciproc..., some gestures of reciprocation, they go deep into the
heart. Everybody needs to feel valued, loved, cared. And these can be occasions
when we can share that value, love and care. And bring each other closer to
Krishna. So, devotees will try to spiritualise these occasions.

And by spiritualising these occasions, they can all move closer to Krishna. For
the same time, we have to careful that we do not get so caught up in the
birthday celebration, thin..., automatically assuming everything is spiritual.
You know, because I am a devotee, because you are a devotee, so whatever we do,
it is spiritual. No, we have to ke..., endeavor to keep Krishna in the center.
But at the same time, it is not that we have to reject. Everything that was,
that was not there in the traditional culture. So, celebrating the birthday is a
way, in which we can do the, the occasion on which we can do the "dadāti
pratigṛhṇāti". But the whole center should be Krishna and that is wonderful.

Now, so as I said, there was an intent, and there is the content. So, both of
them are important. Among the two, what is more important? From Krishna's point
of view and from devotee's point of view, is the intent. So, we do not have to,
necessarily have to think that, ok, this person, either so many people I have to
give up, gift as a birth, this much, that person give a gift that is worth that
much, and that much. We do not have to go into that zone, in devotee circle. But
still, the intent and the content, when both are there, and there is, that, that
brings us sweetness to the relationship.

So, there were many stories about how devotees, Jananda Prabhu, when he was the
temple president, you know, he would him..., he was actually the temple in
charge, but often he would do the basic services, and he would t..., train young
devotees, and they would become leaders under him. So, one day, one devotee,
there was a lot of service him, and then Jananda prabhu has offered, he says,
you know, he told that devotee, you go inside inside the office, open the door,
then see something. There is something on the table for you, and then close the
door. And then you can have it.

So, the devotee was, eagerly went and saw, Prabhupada's office, and saw there was a
big beautiful cake for him, and it says, it is all for you, take it. So now, the
cake was wonderful, but what was the, more wonderful for the devotee? It was the
thoughtfulness, the sweetness of that gesture. So, there are small, small ways,
in which affection can be expressed, and relationships, small gestures go a long
way in deepening relationships.

So, you know, the terminology of certain things may be modern, but the
principles are there in the Vedic literature also. In modern, in modern
terminology, people use the word called as emotional bank account. Emotional
bank account, just like we have financial bank account. So, there is an
emotional bank account. That means that, in, in our every relationship with
everyone, we all have credit and debit. So, when we are warm, and loving, and
appreciative, and have an overall positive interaction, that adds to the ba...,
emotional bank account balance. And whenever we have negative interaction,
whenever we are critical, whenever we are in a curt, or rude or insensitive,
then there is a withdrawal.

So, so, there are modern selfless teachers who say, actually, we have to make
sure that in all our relationships, the emotional bank account is always on the
positive, not on the negative. So, how do we do that? We have to be very careful
to be able to do that. And that happens by these kinds of gestures. So, the term
may be new, and as soon as we hear a new term, this is very impressive. But
actually, what is the new? It is only the term. The principles are there. What
is Ru..., Rupa Goswami telling over here, he is telling that actually we care
for each other, and we express that care through the relishing and sharing of
prasad, or gifts, or heart to heart discussions.

So, I will discuss about "bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva" first, and then we will
discuss about "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati" later, a little bit more. So, "bhuṅkte
bhojayate caiva" means, that we offer prasad, and we take prasad. So, we have to
understand that prasad is the way devotees are expressing affection to us. And
we can express affection to us. So, in, in devotional life, we see that,
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, you know, he, Advaita Acharya brought him to his home, and
he fed him some sumptuous prasadam. After offering after Caitanya Mahaprabhu
has taken sannyasi, Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, oh, I am not sannyasi, just give
me some laugh revenge, just give me some simple vegetables, simple unspice sort
of vegetables. Caitanya Mahaprabhu said.

Advaita Acharya said yes, yes, yes, but when he came, la..., he huge feast for
him. He said, no, I am a sannyasi. I cannot take this. No, no, no, actually this
is what Jagannath has taken. If it is Jagannath's prasad, how can you say no?
And he fed Caitanya Mahaprabhu opulently. And Caitanya Mahaprabhu, when he was
in Puri, and the devotees from Navadvip would come there and for them, the
highlight of their visit would be seeing Caitanya Mahaprabhu and all the
devotees, they would wonder, we will get some day when we can offer food to
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. They would look forward to that opportunity, and in that,
was, what was "bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva", so Caitanya Mahaprabhu himself what he
would do is, on special days for example, the day after Haridas Thakur, on day
which Haridas Thakur departed from the world. Caitanya Mahaprabhu himself went
around. And as he said, you noted to various shopkeepers, please give me some
charity, no, please give me some food, no, when the sannya..., when they saw
this.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed there for years, and the shopkeepers say Caitanya
Mahaprabhu never, Caitanya Mahaprabhu was such an exalted person, and all of
them knew that he was Supreme Lord. Those who did not know also, because it was
a very great sannyasi. He has converted Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya. He has
converted Prakashan Sarasvati, very great person. They were stunning when
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was himself coming, and then they started bringing their
whole, as much as they could from the shops to give him, you know, because they
also realised this is the way we can express our regard to the Lord. Then,
Swarup Damodar said, "parano", I will take from you, my dear Lord, you can go.

And then, I will arrange, to take, have a, make all the arrangements for this, and
then Caitanya Mahaprabhu would make the arrange..., would come and, when Caitanya
Mahaprabhu himself wanted to serve, he said, then Swarup Damodar said, no my dear
Lord, unless you take food, nobody else will take food. Then, they said ok. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, Damodar said, everybody serve prasad to everybody. And
Caitanya Mahaprabhu actually knew every devotee's heart, and he knew what that
devotee like. He would say. Give him this more. Give him this more. And give him
this more.

And Caitanya Mahaprabhu relished the prasad, and wanted everybody else to relish
the prasad. And he said, they all ate up to their neck. So here, for Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, the sharing of prasad was a way of reciprocating affection. So, this
is also a very important part of Vaishnava culture. You know, in the same
Caitanya Caritamrta, where Ragunath Das Goswami is glorified for eighteen years
just to little, little charge, little butter milk, once in three days, that same
Caitanya Caritamrta also glorifies elaborately the, the feast that were prepared
under the guidance of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and how all the devotees ate the
feast.

And in fact, there are so many items that are mentioned in various places. There
is sometimes verses and verses, dozens and dozens of verses describing just the
recipes that were cooked, carried and served. Now, Srila Prabhupada writes in
some cases in the purport that, you know, our ISKCON devotee should learn all
these recipes and they should also in..., in..., integrate it into ISKCON
quizzies. So, the idea is that this is a culture. Bhakti is not a dry
spirituality. It is very engaged spirituality. And we see this goes on at the
highest spiritual level also. Even Radharani is cooking for Krishna, and it is
said that she cooks simultaneously on fifty stoves. You know, simultanous,
decide, decide, decide, she is running from one stove to another, one stove to
another cooking, cooking, offering the best food to Krishna. That she cooks
everything to perfection.

So that is the way, through food, she is offering her heart's love to Krishna.
So, we should not just, as devotees we do not see food as just an item to be
eaten. We see food as a way in which Krishna and devotees are giving mercy to
us. So, actually, what is the feast? We say the love feast. Now, love feast was
a word for the Sun..., Sunday programme. We call it love feast. Prabhupada uses
that love feast word also in his purport here. So, what was the idea of a love
feast? That was a word which came from the hippie jargon at that time when
Prabhupada started the movement in 1965. But the idea is that the devotees cook
the feast. And when the devotees cook the feast, they are putting their love in
it. They are putting their bhakti, and then Krishna feasts on that bhakti.

And then, Krishna fills the prasad, transforms the bhoga into prasad, fills with
His mercy, and the devotees feast on the mercy. So, this is the actual
reciprocation of love. And so, actually there was, so there is some, there are
devotees who cook so that Krishna feasts on their love, on their bhakti, and
then Krishna surcharges the food with His mercy. An when they are all, the
devotee community gets the prasad. What are they getting? They are getting the
bhakti of the devotees who have cooked along with the mercy of Krishna? And then
there is such an intense reciprocation of love over there. So, the whole culture
is of taking prasad with love.

Now, at the same time, we have to know that it should be a "prīti-lakṣaṇam", it
should not become a "loba-lakṣaṇam". That means when we take prasad, the prasad
should be taken in the mood that this is Krishna's mercy. This is a devotee's
affection that I am reciprocating. But you see, this, sa..., same, same book, we
see the paradox over here, earlier in the same book, what has been said? "vāco
vegaṁ", "jihvā-vegam", it was talking about. Then "atyāhāraḥ" has also been
talked about, so do not eat too much, control "jihvā-vegam", it is talking
about.

And now, it is also saying that, "bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva ṣaḍ-vidhaṁ
prīti-lakṣaṇam". So, the idea is that,  actually, we cannot relish even material
things properly if we are not in control of our senses. Sometimes, if we are too
greedy for eating something, we are eating one item, and that is delicious, but
we are looking around, what is the next item coming? What is the next item
coming? What is the item coming? Yeah, that person has got, but I have not got
till now. That person has got twelwe. But why have I been given only one
helping? Now, that person has been given, given sweet, that person has got a
full spoon, me only half spoon. Why?

So, what happens is that if we do not have a basic level of control of
"atyāhāraḥ", control of "jihvā-vegam", then we cannot even relish things
materially, what to speak of spiritually? So here, when this is talking about
"bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva", it is already understood that one is not, one is not
having uncontrolled senses. One has controlled senses. And then there can be a
reciprocation of affection happening. That reciprocation of affection can be
very rich and fulfilling when devotees come together and they take prasad
because they see it as a means by which they are coming closer to each other.

So, we should not use the Caitanya Caritamrta's glorification of prasad as a
means for, as justification for, vented, unregulated, eating. If we have some
dietary restrictions, if we have some, some conc..., additional concerning
situations. You know, we have to take these into considerations because prasad
is spiritual, and it lacks spiritually, but it is also manifesting through some
material elements. So, that will also act. So if we, somebody has diabetes, and
just, because somebody else offers sweet, he takes that sweet. That person will
have, will have consequences.

So, when we are offering prasadam, as I said, we want to show affection, we want
to show a..., but we want to show affection in a way that pleases the person to
whom we want to show affection. So, when we are offering prasadam, sometimes, we
feel, I have cooked so much. You know, I should, you should, that the guest
should take it, that devotee should take it. But how can that devotee take it
if that devotee has some health concern or something? Then, we should not think
that, oh, I have to force that devotee to take. You know, both from the
receiver's point of view and the giver's point of view, the point of the
exchange is to make both of them, both enriched in devotion.

There is in the, in the pre-Christian tradition. There was a concept in among
the Greeks, in their own, it was called the sin eater. The sin eater was a very
fa..., peculiar concept, fascinating concept. The idea is that there was certain
groups of people, they were not exactly priests, but they were somehow considered
holy, and the custom was that, if any family did any sinful activity, they would
call this person to their house. And then they would feed that person. And the
idea was in that person would eat, that person, all, the whatever sin they have
committed, that person is eating the sin. And the reaction for that sin will go
to them.

So, what happens is many times we, we have the idea that if we invite a devotee
to our house, especially if they are renunciates, then the whole idea is that,
the more they eat, the more our sin is going away. So, therefore, many people
want to invite sadhus and feed them. But as devotees we should not be thinking
about sin. We should be thinking about reciprocation of love. And the idea of
sins is, you should eat more and more. Why? Because more of my sin will go away.
That is not the idea which devotees have. Devo..., devotees, when even the
renunciates come to some grihasta's house, and grihastas invite them, the whole
idea, there should be a reciprocation of devotional affection, and by that, both
will move forward, move higher in devotional service. Sannyasi is doing the
duty. Grihastas are doing their duty.

And like that can be, even within the devotee community, at all levels. And by
this, we can all move towards Krishna, by, as Prabhupada would say, we can chant
Hare Krishna, we can dance, we can feast, and we will move back to Krishna.

Thank you very much. Sri Upadesamrta ki jaya. Hare Krishna.
