Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8A3fv3VM9ok
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_029_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_3_Part_1_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=8A3fv3VM9ok&redir_token=cfDiOvxDOFjY_fRJ9G9kkscOSZl8MTU0MTgyOTc5OUAxNTQxNzQzMzk5

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to our Nectar of Instruction, Bhakti Sastri course.

We completed mantra two last time. Now, it starts with the verse three. Now in
the verse three, Rupa Goswami talks about the six principles that are favorable
for the execution of devotional service. Earlier, we looked at the six principles
that are unfavorable.

Now, so these early near flow of thought, by which he... Now, from this verse
onwards, the focus will be on the six favorable principles and later on, he will
take one of them, association, and he will elaborate on them further in
subsequent verses also. So let us look at these, this, verse text three:

        utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt
        tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt
        saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ
        ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

"prasidhyati", the earlier word was "vinaśyati". These are, these are things
which cause the bhakti to flourish, to grow. So what are these? "utsāhān"
enthusiasm, "niścayād" is confidence, "dhairyāt" is patience.
"tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt", other activities favorable to devotional service.
"saṅga-tyāgāt", giving up bad association, "sato vṛtteḥ", and then, the actions
of past sa..., past great acharyas, when you do these, by these bhakti
flourishes.

There are six principles favorable to the execution of pure devotional service:
(1) being enthusiastic, (2) endeavoring with confidence, (3) being patient, (4)
acting according to regulative principles [such as sravanam kirtanam visnoh
smaranam -- hearing, chanting and remembering Krishna], (5) abandoning the
association of nondevotees, and (6) following in the footsteps of the previous
acaryas. These six principles undoubtedly assure the complete success of pure
devotional service.

So Prabhupada gives a very categorical explanation, they completely assure the
complete success of pure devotional service. So, let us look at this. Now, Srila
Prabhupada's first sentence itself is a sutra, which we will be elaborating on:

"Devotional service is not a matter of sentimental speculation or imaginative
ecstasy. Its substance is practical activity."

So what does it mean? Then Srila Prabhupada immediately quotes the
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu's definition of bhakti as:

        anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ
        jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam
        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

So Srila Prabhupada's focus in this purport is on "śīlanaṁ". "śīlanaṁ" means
cultivation. And what kind of cultivation? "ānuśīlanaṁ", "kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ",
cultivation that is favorable to Krishna. And that he says is bhakti.

So, many temple..., people feel that devotion is just a matter of the heart. Oh,
she says, feel love for Krishna. And people do not feel... Why do you have to
exhibit devotion to the world? Srila Prabhupada, he is saying that it is not
sentimental speculation or imaginative ecstasy. So, what do these do two,
sentimental speculation? There can be speculation. Oh, for example somebody may say, I
closed my eyes and chanted. And I saw Radha Krishna dancing the rasa lila. Oh,
Krishna gave me his darshan. I feel so happy. I am so blessed. I am so
fortunate. Actually, what I am saying is I am so exalted. Do you understand how
exalted I am? That is what I am saying. Sentimental speculation or imaginative
ecstasy.

So, Srila Prabhupada is very cautiously protecting us from mistaking just our
pseudo visions for actual spiritual visions, and mistaking pseudo advancement
for real advancement. The essence of bhakti is not just some visions or some
feelings. The essence of bhakti is relationship. We want to develop a
relationship with Krishna. And relationship is developed, feelings are no doubt
very important, but relationship essentially is centered on commitments. Two
people can say we love each other, but then, the strength of their relationship
will not just depend on how often they say to you we love each other. It will
depend on how committed they are to each other, through thick and thin.

Similarly, our bhakti, bhakti is a feeling, but the feeling has to be expressed
through commitments. Now, the gopis are exalted devotees. Why? Because they are
so committed to Krishna. And how do we know that they are committed to Krishna?
One way is people say, oh, they left everything when Krishna called on the flute
and they went at night to meet him, loyalty. Yes, that leaving everything, and
when one is going to get some privilege and pleasure, oh, Krishna has called all
of us, and we ought to perform rasa lila with, also dance with him. There is
pleasure over there.

So, giving up something when we are going to get something pleasant is easy. But
we see the commitment of the gopis also. Of course, it is not easy, even when we
are getting something to give up something, but it is relatively speaking, it
may be possible for some people. But the gopis' commitment, we see at a much
deeper level, when we see what they did for Krishna, when they came to
Mathura's house when Krishna has got the headache.

So just to relieve Krishna's headache for one moment, they were ready to go to
hell for all of eternity. They knew that if they put the dust of Krishna's
feet, dust of our feet is put on Krishna's head, they were all to go to hell.
But they were ready for that. They said, we will re..., we will go to hell for
all of eternity if that frees Krishna from with, headache, for just one moment.
So that is their love. That is the commitment.

So, the essence of bhakti is not just feelings. Feelings are important. But
feelings, they are expressed through commitment. That is why Prabhupada said
"its substance is practical activity". Its substance is how we are serving
Krishna. The closest that we can come to deep selfless love in this world, which
is something similar to the spiritual love, the depth and the selflessness of
the spiritual love that is there between Krishna and the devotees. The closest
we come to that in this world is in the relationship between the mother and the
child.

And what is the essence of that relationship? The way a mother loves a child,
the essence is practical activity. The mother may say it in her comfortable bed
or dream, oh, maybe we will become big, and maybe we will do this, and maybe we
will do that. Yes, that is natural. When we love, there are feelings and there
are dreams. But the substance is if the baby starts crying in the middle of
the night, what does the mother do? You know, she immediately wakes up and
then caresses the baby, fondles, if the baby needs breast milk, the mother gives
breast milk, and nourish the baby that way.

Or sometimes, when we go, when we sleep at night, we put an alarm clock. Now,
the alarm clock rings at the right time when it is, when it is meant to ring.
And still, bang, we sometimes, you know, just shut it down. Put it snores, put
it smooth, or put it off, and again we want to sleep.

But comparatively speaking, a baby is like an alarm clock that goes off at
anytime. But if the baby starts crying in the middle of night, which mother,
tuck, shut up. Which mother will ever do that? Never. Why? Because that is love,
the substance of love is practical activity. Anytime the baby starts crying, the
mother wakes up immediately, and fondles, caresses, comforts the baby, and does
whatever is required to silence it.

So the love of the mother is seen through the service of the mother does to the
baby. So, if a mother just sleeps dreaming while the baby is crying, then that
would, then those dreams are not really signs of love, because the baby is
crying over there. So, if somebody is dreaming like that, we would not... We
would start doubt... we would be forgiven if we doubted, but that is actually
the mother of the ru..., the baby.

So, real love is seen through selfless service. Selfless service is the way in
which the authencity of the love is shown. Now, there can be real love and there
can be shallow love, pseudo love. How is that tested? That is tested by one's
willingness to sacrifice. You know, in the bible, there is the story of King
Salamon. You know, there were two women who came, both of them were claiming that
this is my baby. And both of them said my child, my child, my child. Now, how do
you determine?

So King Salamon is considered wise King, among the, the biblical tradition. So,
he said, ok, both of you are claiming the baby to be yours. We cu..., we do not
have any witnesses to resolve it. So, we will do one thing, we will cut the baby
into two. Both of you can take half. And, one of the women agreed. And the
other woman horrified and said, no, let her keep the baby. Let her keep the
baby. Do not cut the baby. And then immediately, the King said, the baby belongs
to her, give it to her.

He says the real mother would rather sacrifice the baby than just to possess,
let the baby be cut. So, the point here is that love is tested through what we
are ready to do for the sake of love. So, it is not just as a feeling.
That is why Prabhupada says, it is not mental speculation or imaginative
ecstasy. It is, its substance is practical activity, practical activity.

And we see that Srila Prabhupada exemplified this most extraordinarily, most
unforgettably, most vividly. That Srila Prabhupada wanted to absorb himself in
thinking of the pastime of Radha Krishna. Vrindavan was the best place for him.
And he had already done his] family responsibilities. He was, he was in an
advanced age, sixty-nine, and he had every reason and right to stay on in
Vrindavan, and be absorbed in the pastime of Radha and Krishna.

So, that is what, normal vaishnava would do. In fact, doing that itself is
considered glorious. Because many people stay in their own home still the end of
their lives, but he had already left his home, gone to Vrindavan, was living in
Vrindavan, and he was, he had already taken sannyasi also, so he had every
reason and right to stay in Vrindavan, but he did not do that. Substance is
practical activity. What is the practical activity? He wanted to spread the
mission of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

Right, spreading the mission of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu meant that hee wanted
to personally go because that is how the mission would spread. So, he went to
America, and from there all over the world he went, almost fourteen times.
Circumnav... with the wall on preaching tour so that Krishna Consciousness would
spread. So, its substance is practical activity. And we see the kind of
practical activity that Srila Prabhupada did. And he went to America. He would
cook for the hippies.

One time, we devotees had gone for a Yatra, so we have just gone to Jagannath
Puri and we were staying in one of the Gaudiya Matha a..., ashrams at that time.
So, some Gaudiya Math sannyasi came over there, as you, we were, devotees, all
of us were taking prasadam. Gaudiya Math sannyasi also came in there. And one of
the youth forum boys from Punaj, he thought that, let me get to serve the
sannyasi. So he said, wait a ten. Can I service prasadam to the sannyasi? So,
they asked him the devotees over there. Are you initiated? He said, no, I am not
initiated. He says, if you are not initiated, you cannot serve prasad to a
sannyasi. You have to be initiated to do that. So, he came, that was the
standard over there.

Now, this is a traditional standard that a non-initiated person cannot even
serve prasad to a sannyasi. So the, now of course, in tradit..., in some
traditional places, this may be followed, but was Srila Prabhupada's standard?
It is far beyond tradition, this kind of traditional standard. It was the
tradition of selfless compassion. Leave alone taking prasad from uninitiated
devotee. Prabhupada was cooking prasad for people, who, leave alone not being
initiated, even not even practicing devotees, they are breaking all the regulative
principles, and Prabhupada not only serving them prasadam, Prabhupada was
washing their plates, he was happily doing it. Why was he doing it? Its
substance is practical activity. That was what was required to bring people
closer to Krishna. Prabhupada was ready to do that. So, whatever it takes.

So ecstasy, you know, devotional ecstasy, we sometimes have a very fanciful
idea. Devotional ecstasy means, oh, I think of Krishna, I think of such an
intimate pastime that at. I start getting some feeling in my heart. That is
devotional ecstasy. Is that? Maybe, that may not be. We do not know. We, it is
safe to assume that we are not so advanced right now. But actually, even if it
is some devotional feelings, the real essence of devotional ecstasy is not that
which gives us ecstasy, but that which gives Krishna ecstasy. And because we are
parts of Krishna, just as in the stomach is nourished, the hand gets nourished
automatically.

Similarly, if we give ecstasy to Krishna, then automatically we get ecstasy in
return. So, Srila Prabhupada here said, his purports are his devotional
ecstasies. So, what does it mean? Now, sometimes we start reading these
purports, we feel that it uses basic points. And, for example, First Canto Srila
Prabhu..., Krishna is, is very devotional scene, Krishna is living in
Vrindav..., in Dwarka, and at that time Arjuna is coming, and Arjuna is holding
an umbrella over Krishna's head and then all the people that are outside. Now,
just seeing him open, everybody is in tears because Krishna is leaving.

And Prabhupada in those purports, is condemning modern civilisation. And he is
saying, this is going filled with factories, and this and that, and you wonder.
Still, devotional thing is happening in the translation by his Prabhupada
condemning modern civilisation in the purport. What, what devotional ecstasy is
there? See, devotional ecstasy is that which gives Krishna ecstasy. What gives
Krishna ecstasy? When Krishna loves all his children, and when those children
who have gone away from him, they come back to Him. That will give Him ecstasy.
And what is the duty of a, of a spiritual master or a spiritual teacher? The
duty is to remove the obstacles between the conditioned souls and Krishna.

So what is Srila Prabhupada doing in his purports? He is removing those
obstacles, tuck, tuck, tuck. So every purport is like a hammer. And the hammer
hits on the head. The misconceptions that have built thick walls, closing our
head to perceiving Krishna's beauty and glory, those walls, tuck, tuck, tuck,
they break.

So, Srila Prabhupada's purports, they smash the misconceptions that stop us from
understanding Krishna and loving Krishna, in a genuine sense, not in a
superficial sense. So what is the devotional ecstasy of Srila Prabhupada's
purports? That his purports are actually removing the misconception that keep
people from going to Krishna, and are bringing those people to Krishna. And we
see that these purports have brought thousands of people from all the world to
Krishna's lotus feet. So, its substance is practical activity.

Devotional service is cultivation, and cultivation is through practical
activity. So, even chanting that we do. The importance of chanting is that it is
also activity. Prabhupada did not recommend just silent meditation. Although,
even in our tradition, there are acharyas who have chanted the Hare Krishna
mantra silently. But in the morning times, our acharyas have not recommended
that. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu himself told Haridas Thakur, as it is described
in Harinam Cintamani by Bhaktivinoda Thakur, that actually, now, who chants
loudly that person benefits not only oneself, but others also. Because others
who hear, they get benefitted.

So, therefore, he important point is that everybody should be engaged in
Krishna's service. That is the mood of a devotee. And for that, the devotee is
ready to do whatever activity is required. So, Srila Prabhupada, when he was in
Mayapur, the devotees were all engaged in the construction of temples. And
Prabhupada said, why do we need such big temples? He said for ourselves, we can
chant Hare Krishna, in this place, even if it to the material vision, it looks
barren, it is filled with, it is rich with fruits of love for Krishna, as
Caitanya Mahaprabhu is distributing them even today. He says, we can get those
fruits and we relish them. But we want the whole world to relish them.

And, we may be living really simply, but people from all over the world cannot
live simply. For, for them, we need to have comfortable accommodations. We need
to have a puzzling activity over here. We need, they need the facilities, we
provide them the facilities, and then they will come here. When the big temples
that we are building, they have to attract the people, and thereby, we glorify
the Lord. So, its substance is practical activity.

Garudas Prabhu describes in one of his Vyasapuja offerings that he was the
temple president of Vrindavan temple, which, the temple is still coming up. He
was in charge of the Vrindavan project. And once Prabhupada came from, brought
to Delhi, and he was on his way to Vrindavan. And at that time, the devotees
have just come to Vrindavan, and his Vyasapuja has just started, and he had just
come to Vrindavan for the first time. And he was, that means, Prabhupada had
come to Vrindavan for the first after Gauradas Prabhupada had come there.

And based on reading Krishna book, and others similar literatures, the devotees
had very, very sweet picture of Vrindavan. Oh, peacocks are chirping. Peacocks
are spreading their words, and spreading their beautiful feathers. High up in
the sky, the birds are chirping. And then here the trees are having roots with
jewels in them. Now, they are thinking, oh, now if Prabhupada comes here, and
Prabhupada will tell some very sweet, esoteric advanced pastime about Radha
Krishna, and then I will relish those pastimes. That was their mood. That was
what he was thinking. But when Prabhupada came down from the airplane and he
saw him, he saw Prabhupada was looking very grave. God, maybe the pure devotee
is thinking of some intimate pastime of Radha Krishna, I should not disturb.

And then, he got into the car, and they were coming along. And all along,
Prabhupada's hand was in the bead bag, and Prabhupada seemed to be lost in
thought, chanting Hare Krishna occasionally, but deep in thought. And then,
throughout the car ride, from Delhi to Vrindavan, Prabhupada did not speak one
word practically. And he was thinking, he was, he was good associa..., I was
eager, I wanted to hear some word of nectar coming from Prabhupada's lips,
something about the glory of Krishna, about the glory of Vrindavan, but I was
thinking, I should not disturb the ecstasy of a pure devotee also.

And finally, as we just came near Vrindavan, Prabhupada spoke one word, and that
one word shattered my illusory conceptions of devotional advancement. He says.
What was that one word? One word... Cement. How are you planning to get cement?
So, he said, Prabhupada, he could very easily have been thinking of the intimate
pastime of Radha and Krishna. Although, he was conscious, he was high up there,
he was down here with us because he wanted us to be engaged in devotional
service, and wanted us to wear, to engage our thirst in devotional service, to
help others to come to Krishna. So, he says, that time I understood that what
Prabhupada would want me to do is not just imaginative ecstasy or sentimental
speculation. But Prabhupada would want is engage in practical devotional
service.

So, Prabhupada was concerned, that he wants to construct the temple quickly, but
cement is not available. How, how should we get cement? That was Prabhupada's
concern. And eventually, when they got cement, Prabhupada got one devotee to
count all the bags, and told them, keep them and lock them very carefully.
Prabhupada told how you should lock them, how you should mix all that, nobody
steals it. And what relationship... So, Prabhupada talked about those cement
bags as if they were like bags of gold.

So, in the Bhagavad Gita, in the sixth chapter, there is a verse about the
advanced devotee, which describes how this advanced devo..., advanced
spiritualist sees ev..., jna..., everything equally.

        jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā
        kūṭa-stho vijitendriyaḥ
        yukta ity ucyate yogī
        sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ

So, in 6.8, here Krishna is telling that "sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ", that a pure
devotee, or advanced spiritualist, an advanced spiritualist, maybe also an
impersonalist, or maybe a seeker of transcendence without having any clear
conception of transcendence, whatever, but such a person,
"sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ", such a person sees stone, pebbels and gold equally.
So, now the, the focus of this context of the Gita is that the person is not
attached to anything material, but here we see the application of that verse in
a far deeper and richer context.

That is, for a pure devotee, stone, or cement is ultimately the stone powder, we
could say, in one sense, but pure devotee, if stone, if cement can be used in
Krishna's service, then the pure devotee will value cement as much as one values
gold also. So, a devotee does not think of things in terms of passive equality,
that they do not give me any pleasure, so they are of no use to me. A devotee
thinks of everything in terms of the potentiality of those things to be engaged
in Krishna's service. So, if cement is so, so vital for the service of Krishna,
then I will treasure cement. That is the pure devotee's mood.

So anusilanam, anusilanam is cultivation. The essence of bhati is cultivation.
So, now, Srila Prabhupada uses this word devotional service. There is devotion,
and there is service. Both are combined together as devotional service. That was
Prabhupada's rendition of bhakti. Quite often, many transcendentalists
translated it as, as devotion, or divine love. Prabhupada translated it
devotional service. And this, this is an adjective and a noun. So, service is
there. That is practical activity. And what kind of service? Devotional service.

So, what do these two words combined together say? In a sense, you could broadly
classify that service refers to the external component and devotion refers to
the internal component. When we are engaged in service externally, and we are
cultivating devotional remembrance internally. So, both are there. At the same
time, its substance is practical activity. So, we keep ourselves engaged in
service and we try to remember Krishna as much as possible. At our level, if we
try to remember Krishna constantly, and for the sake of remembering Krishna, we
do not do eating, things will not work. You know, we have to remember Krishna
internally, and we have to se..., more importantly, we have to serve Krishna
externally. Just keep ourselves busy in serving Krishna, and then we use the
classes, we use the morning programmes, sadhana time, we use our study time to
cultivate conscious remembrance of Krishna. And when we have both of these things,
we advance in spiritual life.

But the, as here Prabhupada says, the substance is practical activity. Now,
sub..., now when we talk about substance is practical activity, how does, how do
these two aspects relate to each other? Devotion and service. So there are many
ways we could talk about this. Here, I will focus on one aspect of their
relationship. Service is the vehicle of devotion, and service is the union of
devotion. So, this is based on article that I have written based on Prabhupada's
teachings. The article is there on the website.

Why does devotion need to be exhibited publicly? That is the title of the
article. So, devotion is, you could, the substance, fine. But the substance is
not really real unless it is expressed through service. So service is the
vehi..., vehicle of devotion, and service is the engine of devotion. Let us
understand these two concepts carefully. Some people say, ok, you want to, you
want to have, practice bhakti? Practice it. Why do you do the, raise your hands
and dance publicly? Bhakti is private, through bhakti in your heart. Why do you
have to do exhibition?

Actually, kirtan is not an exhibition of bhakti. It is an expression of bhakti.
And there is a world of difference between exhibition and expression. Exhibition
is for public consumption, for public show. But expression is for the object of
devotion. You know, as we discussed earlier with the example of the mother, the
mother expresses their love, not just to reassure the love the child, the
child that I love you. That is there, definitely, but along with that, it is
also to do practical service to the child. Both are important.

Similarly, when we do service, service is the way we practically express our
devotion to the Lord. So, otherwise anybody can claim I am an advanced devotee.
And how will anyone else know about it? The way we know that somebody is an
advanced devotee or not, is by the commitment. So, when a person loves somebody,
that person does various things for that person. So, love is not just a feeling,
love is also a doing. Love is not just a verb, love is also a noun. So, love is
not just a noun, it is also a verb. That we love, it is not just feeling that is
there in the heart of there somewhere, but love is also expressed through our
actions.

So, therefore, service is the way we express our devotion to Krishna. Now,
somebody may say, oh, but God does not need any... We need service, but God
does not need service. God is self satisfied. Yes, God is not helpless like way
we, and God is self satisfied. God does not need anything. is That is true,
definitely. But God reciprocates love. And for the sake of reciprocating love in
His highest abode, what does the Lord do? The Lord acts, Lord acts and responses
to those who act with Him. So, we see that, actually speaking, although the Lord
is present in our heart, and the Lord can see our devotion, the Lord is present
even in the spiritual world in the, and he see..., He can see everybody, but
still people engage in devotional service.

Imagine if the spiritual world were a place where everybody was just passively
meditating on the Lord, and nobody was doing anything for all of eternity. So,
the Lord is meditating on His devotees, and they are meditating on the
Lord. Yes, they will be happy, no doubt. But, right, that will not be a very
exciting place. The reciprocation gets deeper and richer when one does various
activities. So, if we thought, if we were to take, to go such a place, where
everybody is just lost in thought, and nobody is doing anything, now, we would
not find that place particularly attractive.

And imagine, if that place was supposed to be the place, where you are meant to
study for, stay for all of eternity. Now, we would feel that we are in a sm...,
we are in some, we are in a nightmare or something like that. So, actually
speaking, Krishna and the devotees engage in constant activity in the spiritual
love. And that is how they express their love for each other. Krishna goes and
herds the cows. Now, He knows that I am, He is playing the role of the son of a
cowherd couple, and therefore He acts responsibly as their son.

And mother Yashoda, He is, Krishna is my child, and She is, she serves. She churns
butter for Him, and she feeds Him butter, and she cooks exc..., wonderful meal
for Him, and she serves Him that way also. So in this way, Yashoda Maya and
Krishna, they reciprocate love. So, even at the highest level in the spiritual
world, love is expressed and through that expression, love is reciprocated in a
very deep and rich way. So, service is the vehicle of devotion.

Service is what? The vehicle. Vehicle means what? Something which carries. So, for
example, if I have to go from here to Calcutta, I need a vehicle. I may go by
train. I may go by plane. But I need a vehicle. Similarly, our, service is the
vehicle by which we express our devotion to Krishna. Srila Prabhupada would say
that whenever we come in front of the deities, we ask ourselves. We should feel
as if there Krishna is asking us. What are you doing for me? What are you doing
for me? That is Krishna Consciousness. What does that mean? We have a
relationship with Krishna and Krishna expects us to offer our devotion to Him
through service. Service is our vehicle of devotion.

Now, along with that, service is not just vehicle of devotion, service is also
the engine of devotion. Now, what do you mean by engine? Engine is that which
causes the vehicle to move. So, actually, when we do service, then, our
devotional feelings get stimulated. So when we are saying service is the vehicle
of devotion, at that time, what are we saying? Devotion may be there in the
heart, but that has to be expressed and conveyed to Krishna through service. But
what about all of us? When we do not f..., we sometimes do not feel any devotion
at all. And I will, whatever devotion that we have is meager right now. So,
actually, service is also the engine of devotion.

That means that by rendering service, our devotional feelings get stimulated.
How is that? That is because we are not our bodies. We are souls, and as souls,
we have original eternal relationship with Krishna, which we have right now
forgotten. So,

    nitya-siddha-kṛṣṇa-prema "sādhya" kabhu naya
    śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya

"karaye udaya", this is a Sun rises its own course. Similarly, the
"nitya-siddha-kṛṣṇa-prema", the "kṛṣṇa-prema" that is there in the heart, it
rises. When does it rise? When we do sravanam kirtanam. When we engage in
devotional service, in due course of time, our love for Krishna will awaken in
our heart. So, what, what is our goal? Our goal is for that love to Krishna to
awaken as quickly as possible. Wha... How does hearing and chanting make that
love for Krishna awaken? Because hearing and chanting stimulates and activates
our covered memory, our covered memory. We are all suffering from amnesia.
Amnesia means forgetfulness. We have all, we have, we may have seen in movies
that sometimes, let us say, a hero, is traveling in a car in a movie, and
so the hero falls off the car, the car falls off a big cliff, and some of the
heroes survives and falls into a trible community at the bottom of the mountain
of helly, and there, he has hit the head, and because of that he has forgotten
who am I.

So, then people around that person give him a name, give him a role, give him a
goal. Tell him, ok, you are a road cutter, cut wood. And he starts cutting. And
then, the father, he says, my son was, the father, this hero is like a
millionaire. Father and son are a millionaire. And father comes searching, oh
son, what are you doing here? Son? Whose son? Who are you? He does not recognise
anyone. And what does the father do then? The father starts providing stimulus.
You do not remember? See, this watch? Do you remember this watch? Then, he says
ok, do you see this pen? Do you see this shirt? Do you see this car? So
whatever was dear to this child, he starts showing that thing, and then slowly,
this is the way amnesia is treated.

When a person has difficulties in remembering, then the stimulus of past life,
when they are provided, through things connected with pastlife, then they
gradually revive the memory. Similarly, the whole process of devotional service
is that we have forgotten Krishna. But the attraction to Krishna is there within
our hearts, however it is barriered under layers and layers and layers of
forgetfulness. So when we are exposed to devotional stimulus now, that exposure
to devotional stimulus slowly awakens us, slowly step-by-step-by-step, it
awakens us. And thus we learn to love Krishna.

So, therefore, the important point is that we even we say learning to love
Krishna, learning is not about acquiring. It is about reviving. Love for Krishna
is not something which we have to acquire. Say, if, generally movies, they will
show a boy and a girl, see each other, and they touch each other, and they feel
let the car go between their bodies, and they fall in love. So, actually, they
had no relationship, but they fell in love. After they met and whatever they did
together. So, that is where love is external. Two souls are tryin..., two
souls basically, two, two bodies, they are trying to connect with each other
now.

But our relationship with Krishna is not like that. You know, we already have a
relationship. We just want to revive that relationship now. So, how do we revive
that? Just like the, the son of a millionaire does not have to learn to love the
farther in the sense that he has to develop a new relationship. He simply has to
revive the memory of the earlier relationship. Sim..., that is the same thing
that we do have to do. We do have to learn to love Krishna in the sense that we
simply have to revive our memory of our loving relationship with Him.

So when we expose ourselves to devotional stimulus, when we chant of the holy
names, when we take darshan of the deities, when we associate with devotees,
when we do hearing and chanting, and serving Krishna, which is what we do in the
spiritual world, also, eternally. Then, gradually by that, we become, we become
spiritually healed, and our spiritual memory comes back. So in that sense, what
does devotion do? Devotion acts as the engine, sorry, service acts as the engine
of devotion. By engaging in service, our devotion gets stimulated. So when I
chant Hare Krishna, when I take darshan of the deities, my forgotten memories
revived. And when the forgotten memories are revived, then by that,
automatically, my love for Krishna also becomes revived, and I start loving
Krishna.

So, this is how service is both the vehicle of devotion, and the engine of
devotion. And in this way, service enables us to advance in spiritual life. So
let us look at what Srila Prabhupada is saying further. Prabhupada again comes
back with the same point:

"Bhakti is a sort of cultivation. As soon as we say "cultivation", we must refer
to activity."

And as an activity, Prabhupada says over here:

"Meditation means stopping all nonsensical activities, at least for the time
being. Devotional service, however, not only puts an end to all nonsensical
mundane activities, but also engages one in meaningful devotional activities."

So, we discussed earlier in our Isopanisad class, how, if we imagine X axis and
Y axis. Material activities are negative. Spiritual activities are on the
positive axis. So, when we move from then, we, so passive meditation would mean
moving from the negative axis to zero. But bhakti means, we not only move to
zero, by giving up passive, negative activities, but we also engage in positive
activities. That means we start doing positive activities in the service of
Krishna. And because our mind is filled with positive stimulus, then the
negative stimulus automatically go away. So Srila Prabhupada gives the example
of Prahlad Maharaja teaches. What is bhakti? Even Prahlad Maharaja also does not
say that, bhakti just means contemplation internally. He says nine limbs:

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
        smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam
        arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ
        sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

        iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau
        bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā
        kriyeta bhagavaty addhā
        tan manye ’dhītam uttamam

"tan manye ’dhītam uttamam", this is the best education, he says. That by which
one learns to offer these nine activities to Krishna. Now, if we look among
these "smaranam" alone is, is passive, remembrance. But apart from that,
practically all the other activities involved we, involve action. All the other
limbs of devotional service, sravanam, kirtanam, vandanam,  dasyam, all these
involve acti..., action. So, the same point is there. We have to cultivate.
Cultivation involves action. So, now, why is this important?

We will be discussing about "ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati". That, six activities
that enable bhakti to flourish. That is what we have been discussing. But we
have not even started, we have the class, so we have not even started which are
the six activities that flourish. So why are we spending so much? Because, time
before coming to the six activities, because when we say these six activities,
these six things, enthusiasm, patience, faith, these will let bhakti advance, or
cause bhakti to advance. When we say that, what do we mean by that?

To understand of how these six activities will lead to spiritual advancement,
devotional advancement most specifically, we have to clearly understand what is
devotion. And that is why Srila Prabhupada has spent so much purport on first
explaining what is devotion, and removing whatever misconceptions,
preconceptions we might have had about devotion. And then with a clear
understanding of devotion's cultivation, then we will be able to make sense
about how devotion, our enthusiasm, patience, faith, how all of this, will
enable us to make spiritual advancement.

So, all the discussion is setting up the background for explaining how bhakti,
I mean, how "utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt" leads to spiritual advancement. So, let
us look at this further.

So these are six elements: utsahan, niscayad, dhairyat, tat-tat-karma,
sanga-tyagat, and sato vrtteh. So utsahan is enthusiasm. Here Srila Prabhupada
explains what is the important of, enthu..., importance of enthusiasm. So,
Prabhupada explains that nothing great can ever be achieved, with any feel
without enthusiasm. So, if a student wants to come first in the class, if a
student sleeps during the class, says, sleeps at home, student fools around,
lazies arund, the student cannot come first. If the student wants to come first,
he has to be enthusiastic. Now, hear the class attentively, ask questions, go
home, and study the books, and then be energetic and enthusiastic writing that
people also.

So, when the student is enthusiastic throughout, and then he gets good marks.
Similarly, we have to be enthusiastic. Only when we are enthusiastic, will we
get results, in devotional life also. So, what is enthusiasm? Prabhupada
explains that endeavor with intelligence in Krishna Consciousness. That is
enthusiasm. So enthusiasm is endeavor. But what kind of endeavor? With
intelligence. See, if I endeavor unintelligently, somebody is going to, somebody
says, oh, Krishna, and oh I want to cook for Krishna. So, I am enthusiastic, and
go to the kitchen and cut sabji, and put grains, and take masala. I do not know
how to cook. I am very enthusiastic. Well, enthusiasm is good, but enthusiasm is
not a replacement for competence. We need to have the right intelligence to know
how to cook. And if we do not know how to cook, we have to at least have enough
intelligence to ask somebody who knows how to cook. Then, we will learn, and
then we will be able to do service well.

Or maybe, we can do a part of the service, which is not required from us, and
then we ask somebody else to do a part of service which requires most skills.
But either way, endeavor with intelligence in Krishna Consciousness. So, there
are many people who may endeavor intelligence. So, there are materialistic
people who work on their projects in companies. So, they are doing endeavor.
They may have plan also. They work very hard. And they have intelligence to
evaluate. Ok, This was what we were trying to do. This is what we have achieved.
So endeavor with intelligence is there. But it is not in Krishna Consciousness.

In Krishna Consciousness means, it is for the pleasure of Krishna. It is by
those who want to do seva for Krishna. So endeavor with intelligence in this
way, that is actually enthusiasm. So how do we know if a devotee is
enthusiastic? One visible parameter might be, oh, the devotee joi..., jumps high
up in kirtans and swings around exuberantly. Oh, this devotee is so
enthusiastic. Yes, that is possible. That is one parameter of enthusiasm. But
that is not the most important parameter. Dancing in kirtan is wonderful. But
whether dancing in kirtan, we are getting devotional happiness or bodily
kinesthetic happiness, we really do not know.

Oh, yes, we have the good feelings swinging around and raising hands, and moving
around, of course, we are doing it of the sound vibration of the holy name, we
were doing it in front of the deities, the picture of Krishna. And we are
surrounded by our devotional atmosphere overall. So, naturally, it will not be
that we will not be at all remembering Krishna. But we may not be doing it
entirely for the pleasure of Krishna. Whatever it is, our motivation to always
dance enthusiastically in kirtans. But the point is if, we want to measure our
enthusiasm, just the energy of the person dancing is not enough to measure the
enthusiasm. We have to, enthusiasm is expressed through sustained commitment.
Sustained commitment. How do we know that? That brings us to the next aspect of
faith. We will discuss a little later about that.

But here, essent..., simple example is, if I am going to Mumbai, and I know
which way leads to Mumbai, then I will go enthusiastically. I wil go fast. If I
am not sure this leads to Mumbai, then what happens? Then I will say, that oh, I
am moving along this road, but should I keep going or should I stop? Maybe, I
should turn back? So because I am not sure, because my faith is not strong. So,
actually, enthusiasm can also not be strong. Therefore, endeavor with
intelligence. So, we have to know that the right path is this, and then we
endeavor longer on that path. So, enthusiasm is endeavor with intelligence. And
enthusiasm is expressed through commitment. And it is, to express it through
commitment, we have to see how much actively a person is trying to serve
Krishna. And then Srila Prabhupada includes in, enthusiasm, one more interesting
point. He talks about "yukta ve ragya".

Srila Prabhupada says in the purport that we do not have to confine the scope
of our activities, because we are practicing devotional service. It is rather,
we expand our conception of devotion to include as many things as there are
possible to be potentially engaged in Krishna's service. So many people think
that devotion is just one specific cultural activity within the devotional
culture or the spiritual culture in India. So, they may say chanting, or maybe
reading some Bhagavat, or worshipping some arty in front of the deities. These
are devo..., this is devotional activities. But this is based on a very narrow
conception of devotion. That narrow confined conception is that activities that
are explicitly connected with Krishna, with God, with religion, those constitute
devotional activities.

However, this is a very narrow conception. In fact, everything and everyone is
connected with Krishna.

        mattah parataram nanyat
        kincid asti dhananjaya

There is no one beyond Krishna.

        aham sarvasya prabhavo

Krishna says in 9.10 that I am the source of everything. So, because I am the
source of everything, everything is connected with me. And, therefore,
everything can be used in Krishna's service. So enthusiasm means to also find
out newer and newer ways in which we can engage in Krishna's service. So, Srila
Prabhupada would often give the example of microphone. That was, at that time,
now for sadhu, to use microsco.. was unusual, but Srila Prabhupada used it
because he wanted to attrach people to Krishna and he says, microphone, its
compliance belong to material nature which comes from Krishna. And actually, it
can be used in Krishna's service, so we use it. So now, for doing this course,
We are using the internet. We are using modern technology. So what are we doing?
We are, we are actually expanding our conceptions of devotion so as to include
various activities which would normally not be considered devotional.

For example, just to turning on a computer, or turning on a mobile device,
internet car or something like that, and turning on to some channels, some
programmes, that itself may not be considered devotional. But when we expand our
conception of devotion, we understand that, whatever can be engaged in Krishna's
service, that should be engaged. So that is also enthusiasm. So enthusiasm is
illustrated, not just in the energy with which we do devotional activities, but
al..., also exhibited in the, in the creativity, in the intelligence, by which
we are able to expand scope of our thinking, and include more and more
activities in the service of Krishna. That is also very important parameter of
enthusiasm.

Now utsāhān, when "utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt", "niścayād" is, "niścayād" is
sometimes, it means determination, when in this context "niścayād" means
con..., confidence. So what do you mean by confidence over here? Prabhupada
explained that: "avasya raksibe krsna". That Krishna will always protect me.
That is the confidence of a devotee.

So, we will see "niścayād" over here. So what is that Prabhupada explains
"niścayād" from a very spiritual perspective. He says no confidence in other
paths, and confidence only in bhakti. This is the meaning of "niścayād". So, for
us sadhakas, you know, we do not have to, at this stage, have any re...,
requirement of very lot of intellectual exercise, or a lot of systematic study
and things like that, just to understand the existence of God. The existence of
God is very primary. And what Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition gives us is far far
far lofty. That is why in a sense the lofty teachings, the latch is tight. So
only those who are qualified can understand lofty teachings, others can not.

But that does not mean that other practitioners or other paths are excluded.
No, a devotee understands that everybody can practice devotional service, and
devotional service can give better results than anything and anyone else.
Therefore, I will fix myself in devotional service to Krishna. So, Prabhupada
talks in this that no confidence in other paths is a sign of bhakti. So, if I
take a treatment, and if I get cured. And if in the past, I have taken some
treatment, and I was not cured by that treatment. So, naturally, what will I do?
Whichever treatment works, I will take it again. So, similarly, whichever
treatment works, I will take it again.

So, if it happens a devotee has experienced for himself or herself that other
treatments do not work. Bhakti works. Bhakti purifies my heart, like nothing
else. And bhakti enables me to develop love for Krishna in a wonderful way also.
Then, let me practice bhakti enthusiastically. And devotees' faith is based not
just on one's own experience. That is also based on the scriptural testimony.
So, when scriptural testimony and one's own experience, both gel with each
other, in the sense that both are in the same tracks, broadly speaking, both
bring one closer to Krishna, then one can be grateful for both.

At the same time, one has to be aware that actually speaking my essence, my
essence is to practice bhakti. And when I practice, then I make spiritual
advancement. So, materialistic people have opposite lifestyle, devotees have
opposite lifestyle. Why?

        anisya sarva bhutanam tasyam jagad to sevanam

That, materialistic people and devotees, they are different. So, their values
are different. Their goals are different. Now, one has to identify oneself. I am
not materialistic person. I am a, I am a devotee. I may not have devotion, but I
am trying to develop devotion. I am trying to love and serve Krishna. So karmis,
jnanis, yogis, they all have to fall back to material existence. Prabhpada
writes it, impers...,  impermanence, impermanent causes restlessness, and leads
to falldown. So what are the alternatives? There can be karmis, yogis, jnanis,
who are other transcendentalists. So, because they do not get a higher taste,
they become restless. And because they become restless, eventually they fall
down.

Now, sometimes when a devotee has confidence only in bhakti, Prabhupada quotes
often Jay Krishna Karaj Goswami's definition that:

        suddha sadbhi visvasa kaisehu durga niscye
        krishna bhakti kailey sarva karma krottahe

That if I just serve Krishna, all other obligations will be peformed. And I will
attain perfection. So, this is same point noted over here. And further it is
said in that, Bhakti is life, soul, desire, perf.., and desire perfection. Bhakti
is a life, soul, desire law and perfection of the soul, of the, of the sadhaka.
So, in this way, we learn about enthusiasm and patience, their importance on
the path of bhakti. So, we will discuss about the remaining elements in a
detailed class.

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad. Sri Upadesamrta ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada
ki jaya. Srila Rupa Goswamipada ki jaya. Gaura bhakta vrindava ki jaya. Nitai
Gaura Premanande hari haribol.
