Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iUMv2T5DGZQ
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_034_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_5_Part_1_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=rCEGv7PKC_mGV0Z0QApDtZJzJC98MTU0MTgzMDY4N0AxNTQxNzQ0Mjg3&v=iUMv2T5DGZQ&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction study course of the part of the
Bhakti Sastri. We esta..., previous class, we completed the fourth text. So, the
fourth text is the beginning of the section that talks about association. And we
discussed about the six full loving exchanges. You know, that is general for
reciprocation with all devotees. Now, the fifth verse moves forward, and points
out that there are multiple levels of devotees, and with different devotees, we
need to reciprocate differently. So let us discuss that based on the fifth text.

        kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta
        dīkṣāsti cet praṇatibhiś ca bhajantam īśam
        śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam ananyam anya-
        nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā

So, "kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta", so "giri" is tongue or mouth. So,
when Krishna is there on the tongue of some person, that person deserves
respect. "manasādriyeta", what kind of respect? Respectful offering with the
mind. We should respect that person. This is not ordinary person. Among the
millions and billions of living beings, this person is chanting the holy names
of Krishna, this very special. So, I respect that person.

And then "dīkṣāsti cet praṇatibhiś", then if somebody has actually taken
initi..., initiaton, and "bhajantam īśam", and then after the initiation, that
person is bringing worship. That means that person is bringing deity worship,
here it is referred to. So, initiation refers, not just to first initiation, but
second initiation also. Then, "cet praṇati", so at that time, "praṇati", one
should offer obeisances to such a person.

And then "bhajana-vijñam, "śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam ananyam anya-", "śuśrūṣayā"
means to serve humbly. "bhajana", to hear and to serve. So, hearing itself is a
service, and there are other kind of services also. "bhajana-vijñam ananyam
anya-", so one who is "bhajana-vijñam", and what kind of "anya-", "ananyam",
"bhajana", "ananyam". and then "anya-nindādi-śūnya". So, that person has no
inclination to criticise others. "hṛdam", then that, not only that person not
criticise, but that person has no inclination to criticise in the heart also.

"hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā", so if one, one should desire that association,
when one gets the association, one should cherish that association and treasure
it. And one should faithfully serve. So, many, many times, we may not criticise
because we are afraid of the backlash that will come from criticism. We want to
burst out and speak a lot of things, but say, for example, since working in
a company, and the boss is very tyrannical. One wants to burst out, but that
person does not burst out because there is a backlash that will leave f..., feared.

So, there is inclination, but there is still not the criticism, whereas here
there is actually no inclination to criticise also. This does not mean that they
would never criticise us, but their inner inclination to criticise means one does
not get any delight in criticising. So, in that sense, there is no inclination.
Let us look at Srila Prabhupada's translation.

"One should mentally honor the devotee who chants the holy name of Lord Krishna,
one should offer humble obeisances to the devotee who has undergone spiritual
initiation [diksa] and is engaged in worshiping the Deity, and one should
associate with and faithfully serve that Pure devotee who is advanced in
undeviated devotional service and whose heart is completely devoid of the
propensity to criticise others."

This is describing three levels of devotees. So, the first is the kanistha level,
"kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta", that person is chil..., chanting Hare
Krishna. Whatever be the understanding of that person. That does not matter. It
is, at least chanting Hare Krishna. So, that person comes to the temple, and
prays in front of the deity, chants the names, now "manasādriyeta". That is
kanistha.

Then, that person takes initiation, starts serious worship, that is a madhyama.
And that person who is completely devoted to the worship of the Lord, undeviated
worship of the Lord, and that person is not at all inclined to criticise others.
That is an uttama adikari.

Now, among these three kinds of people, all three are important for our
spiritual advancement. The spiritual master, or spiritual guides, they need,
they need to be more advanced than us. So, our spiritual master will be, you
know, uttama adikari, or a very advanced madhyam adikari. And then, there is
kanistha adikari. So, Srila Prabhupada wanted all of us to raise from kanistha
at least to the madhyama level. Because we discussed earlier in our Isopanisad
course that primary difference between a kanistha and a madhyama is the
appreciation of devotees. So, if one not only not appreciate devotees, oh, I
have direct relationship with Krishna, then such a notion is actually a kanistha
notion. It is not an uttama notion. It is a, so madhyamas understand that I have
relationship with Krishna, but that relationship will be developed by how we
relate with others also.

So kanistha thinks that I just relate with Krishna, I come to the temple, I
worship the deity, after that, I go back home, whatever I do, it does not
matter. And how we deal with others, does not matter. You know, I can shout at
others. I can be in rajaguna, tamaguna while dealing with other people. But as
long as I come and fold my hands in front of the deity, do some puja, offer some
dakshina, that is all that I need to do. Then, I am a religious person.

No, but a madhyama understands, no, bhakti is not a part time activity. Bhakti
is actually a full-time activity. You know, one of the main differences between
those who practice as a traditional culture, and those who practice bhakti as a
sadhana. So, we could say that, in a generic sense, not in a very precise sense,
but in a generic sense, you know, those who are ISKCON devotees, and those who
are general hindus, even if they are worshipping Krishna, the difference is
that, for those who are practicing bhakti because of cultural reasons, traditional
reasons, for them, bhakti is a part of life.

Whereas for serious devotees, bhakti is not just a part of life. Bhakti is their
whole life. In fact, they understand life is a part of bhakti. What does it mean
life is a part of bhakti? It means that actually bhakti is something which goes
on throuh many, many lives. And it is a, it is very rare and special that
somebody attains perfection in just one life time. So, when extends over many
life times, that process of extension over multiple life times means that this
life is just a part of the long process of bhakti, which ultimately takes us
back to Krishna's lotus feet.

So, we may have done so some "agjana suprati santil" in previous life, or some
spiritual inclination, we might have had in previous life, that is why we have
come to Krishna in this life. Now, it is of course, because of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and Srila Prabhupada's mercy, that we can return back to Krishna even
in this one life. But otherwise, it takes effort. "bahunam janmanam mante", it
is said. So:

        tatra tam buddhi-samyogam
        labhate paurva-dehikam
        yatate ca tato bhuyah
        samsiddhau kuru-nandana

        prayatnad yatamanas tu
        yogi samsuddha-kilbisah
        aneka-janma-samsiddhas
        tato yati param gatim

So, in 6.44 and 6.45 in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna talks about how one whatever
spiritual attraction one has developed in an earler life, one still carries that
with oneself, and then one keeps endeavoring. One starts practicing spiritual
life, and one endeavors strictly, "prayatnad yatamanas tu yogi
samsuddha-kilbisah", one because purified of all impurities, and
"aneka-janma-samsiddhas", it may take many life times, then "tato yati param
gatim", one attains the supreme destination.

So, so that means for a serious devotee who has a philosophical vision of
things, understands that life is a part of bhakti. That means bhakti has been
going on through many lives and this life can be the last part. Just like in a
marathon, there is a final lap. Just last lap has to be covered. So, we can,
this can be our final lap. Or we can have many more laps depe..., after this, 
depending on how seriously we practice spiritual life.

Now, when we talk about the practice of bhakti, what are we essentially talking
about? That, conception is different for a kanistha and a madhyama. So, kanistha
thinks just going some, doing some religious rituals, like worshipping the
deity, going to holy place, chanting the holy names, that is enough. Now, that
is important, no doubt. But all this is meant to develop our relationship with
Krishna. And our relationship with Krishna is not in isolation. It is in
connection with those, all those who have relationship with Krishna. So,
spiritual world is not a place of silent meditation, silent exclusive meditation
on Krishna. Yes, everybody is focused on meditating on Krishna, but they are all
the community, and they are all together serving Krishna in the spiritual world.

So, that is what we aspire to do. Now, when we look at this particular verse.
So, it is talking about different devotees beingi offered different levels of
respect. So, even a new person is "manasādriyeta", he should be offered respect
with the mind. And the serious devotee should be offered obeisances, going down.
And the advanced devotee should not only be offered obeisances, but should be
offered submissive hearing, and one should hanker for that association. 

Of course, we offer obeisances. Of course, we offer respect, but more than that
we also hanker for that association. Because through that association, we make
rapid spiritual advancement. Because essentially, we get the desire, that
"ananyam", "bhajana-vijñam", that undeviated desire to serve Krishna from their
heart through their lips, when we hear it from the, when we serve them, that
desire comes to us. And when that desire comes to us, then our heart also
becomes permuated with similar desires to serve Krishna, and other desires get
subordinated or silenced. And that is how we become progressively purified on
the spiritual path. So, let us have a look at this purport.

So, here we see there is the description of kanistha, madhyama and then uttama.
So, the kanistha, what does kanistha do? Worships only the deity and then
behaves badly with devotees. It is not that, the, intentionally badly with
devotees, but just does not realise the value of devotees. So, therefore, if
there are any differences, then there are conflicts. So as we say, the kanistha
is called as neophyte. So, neophyte means new fight, always keeps finding new
reasons to fight with each other. And then, a harinam initiated, trying to
chant. So, now, when you say "kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ", now, this is not
necessarily with a devotion. It is just, there is some starting of chanting, is
some starting chanting is there, but it is not very committed, it is not very
pure, it is not very focused, it is just a pliable faith, soft and unsteady.

Now, the terming, terms, kanistha, madhyama and uttama, they are used by
different acharyas, and not all the time, when they used the words, all of the
time, they mean the same thing. Now, the word kanistha, at some other places, is
used by Bhaktivinoda Thakur in his Krishna Samhita. And there, he uses madhyama,
and he uses it in a slightly different context over there. So, kanistha, he
says, those who only see external things. Madhyama is, he says, those who are
more intellectual. And uttama are the transcendental devotees. So, he uses the
terminology, and if we look at the futher implications of what he is
describing, there, the madhyama term refers to something slightly different. It
is more of people who are intellectually inclined. They are not necessarily
devoteed also. But they are, they are discriminating. Ok, they go, they go
beyond appearance and they try to look at the substance.

So, when he wr..., he wrote the book Krishna Samhita, he wanted to attract
intellectual people who were, who were repelled by the simplistic ritualism of
vaishnavism. And tho..., those people were thinking, all these differe...,
different people, they have their different rituals and they will all get
divided by that. So, some people will worship Durga, some people will worship
Vishnu, some people will worship Rama, some people will worship Shiva. So, all
these are external rituals. So, these external rituals create division. So we
have to go beyond external rituals. So, those people considered ritualism as
revision and external. So, they wanted to go deeper. So, Bhaktivinoda Thakur
normally sort of flatters them. Yes, there are people who see externals, but
then you are, there are higher people who see substance. And they are madhyamas.

So in the, directly, the way he describes, he says, you people are madhyamas.
You are intellectual. You can see deeper. But then he says, actually, there is a
higher level also. And that is the uttama. And then at the uttama level,
actually, one goes beyond the material, the externals, one receives the
substance, but in that substance, one sees variety. And there is a
transcendental reality that is pursued by through samadhi, through spiritual
vision. And the uttama is at that level. And the scriptures, actually, guide us
to that level if we follow the scriptural processes properly.

So, basically, when he uses word madhyama to refer to intellectuals, who
were not even necessarily serious sadhakas, not even kanisthas in a sense, he
was using that in a flattering sense to get them to recognise, ok, there is a
higher level also, do not dismiss the whole religious culture just because you
see some superficiality. These rituals, they have their original spiritual
foundations, prototypes on which they are based over here. And those who
understand those proto..., those originals and based on that, they practice,
they are definitely advanced.

So, of course, Krishna Samhita was a complex book, and we are not going to go
into analysis of that book here. Our essential focus right now is on the,
understanding the terms, kanistha, madhyama and uttama. Now, here, in this
particular section, Rupa Goswami does not use the words kanistha, madhyama and
uttama. He just generally desribes the three levels of devotees. From the
sanskrit, we can make out he is talking about three different levels of
devotees. And after he described these three levels, Prabhupada based on the
other writings in the Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition, including Rupa Goswami's own
writings, he gives this typology, nomenclature.

Now, the Bhagavatam uses these. We discussed this in our Isopanisad course. The
Bhagavatam gives ver..., there are verses, which talk about characteristic of
advanced devotee, intermediate devotee, and new devotee, new spiritualist. And
there also, the terms are not used. This is, "isavaye bhagavato tamah", which is
uttama bhagavata, which is a madhyama, which is a "prākṛtaḥ". So, there are the
words used "uttama", "madhyama", and "prākṛtaḥ" are there. So, "prākṛtaḥ" is
materialistic, like we use your "prākṛtaḥ" for sahajiyas. So, "prākṛtaḥ" means,
"prakṛti" is material nature, so "prākṛtaḥ" is material. So one who sees
material things alone, that person is kanistha.

So, the adikari, the concept of adikar, is something which is extremely
important, it is fundamental in Vedic thought and Vedic culture. See, adikar
means authority. So, that is the sanskrit meaning. And adikari is one who has
authority, one is, in one sense, authoritative. So, kanistha adikari means one
whose authority is inferior. Uttama adikari means one whose authority is
excellent. It is superior. It is excellent. So what determines one's authority?
It is not birth. You know, that, some people who claim to follow the Vedic
tradition, they say that only brahmanas have the rights to practice spiritual
life.

So, that, no, brahmana only has the right to study scriptures and they alone can
teach scriptures. So Srila Prabhupada said, that is true, brahmanas, but who are
the brahmanas? It is not just a person who is born in a brahminical family, one
who has acquired brahminical qualifications. And if somebody sincerely studies
under the guidance of a spiritual master, then even that person who does not
have brahminical qualifications, can also develop brahminical qualifications.
So, it is a progression which moves upwards. And it is not a static from birth
till death. Something which we just follow forever fixed. But the adikar is
determined by our level of consciousness, our frame of reference in life.
Different people have different levels of consciousness, different frames of
reference.

So, the kanistha fails to see anything beyond matter. And that inability to
pursue higher realities what makes the person a kanistha. So, it is not that
kanistha is forbidden from certain things. It is simply that one's own
consciousness makes certain things impossible for a person to see. And that is
why that person is told ok, do not go in these directions right now. And this is
not necessarily any kind of discrimination. It is simply progression. Now, a
student who starts studying mathematics, is in right now, in say, third standard.
And the student takes up a book of the, of quantum, of say, triple integral
calculus. Now, the student cannot understand anything. What will the student be
told? You do not study this right now. You can study this later. Now, is it
discrimination? Why? Why do you not allow me to study this? No, no, no, you
cannot study this. Why? I want to study it. Yes, but at that level, the student
cannot understand.

Somebody may actually, in early, say, you are, if you see, the student has to
study, and when they have to study, often they go to school, they pay fees,
they purchase books, and then they study. Now, if a person goes to PhD or
postdoctoral research, at that time, the person is, in a sense, doing the same
thing. He is taking books and study. But there, the dynamics are very different.
Now, there, actually when the person studies, the person is paid for studying.
The person is provided the books, the person is provided the facility for
studying, and on top of that, that person is provided payment also for studying.
So, what is the difference?

The child is doing the same activity and the postdoctorate person, such, fellow
does the same activity. But one has to pay. The other is paid. Why there difference?
Because there is a progression. And then the postdoctoral stud..., postdoctoral
research fellow's studies are going to lead to a beneficial output for society.
Whereas this is just a beginning stage, where the person is building up his own
career, his or her own career. So, things are progressive.

So, similarly, in the Vedic culture, those are more advanced, they are given
more facilities. And that is because their productivity, it, they are more
spiritually advanced, they are pleasing Krishna more, and even from the world's
point of view, their productivity is much more. So, it is not a discrimination.
It is a progression. And the important of point of progression is the, in the
bhakti tradition at least, the progression is universally open for everyone. It
is not that some, for some people, it is allowed, some people, it is not
allowed. It is allowed for everyone. So, when he says, somebody is a kanistha,
that does not mean that person has to permanently be a kanistha. It can rise
from kanistha to madhyama and to uttama. That is a progression by which the
person will rise. So, that is how a person grows in spiritual life.

So, now, after that, if we look at the madhyama, so the madhyama is having, as
we have discussed earlier, four characteristics:

        prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā
        yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ

So, now, the kani..., madhyama has "prema" for Krishna, is the object of love,
"kṛpo" for the innocent, "maitrī" for the devotees, and "opekṣā" for the
atheists. And this way, the madhyama understands that I have to interact
differently with different people because they have dispositions towards
Krishna. And how I interact with them is going to reflect my Krishna
Consciousness and it is going to affect my Krishna Consciousness also. So, it
reflects and it affects. How does it, how do the two relate? Reflect and affect?
If I am Krishna Consciousness, and if somebody is blasphemous of Krishna, you
know, if I do not feel any emotions by that, then actually, it reflects that my
Krishna Consciousness is not very deep. You know, if somebody is blaspheming
Krishna, I should feel distressed. Because if I love Krishna, you know, if I
love anyone, and that person is criticised, that now means that I, I do not like
that criticism. I feel pain by that. And I would like to defend it, my love, my
Lord one against that criticism..

So, same applies to a devotee's relationship with Krishna. The devotee does not
want to hear criticism. And when there is a criticism of Krishna, blaspheme of
Krishna, or Krishna's devotees, the devotee wants to counter that. So, here, we
do not see that, Hanuman, when he heard Ravana minimising Lord Rama, Hanuman did
not say, you know, I may calm, I will be understood, I will be siren. No. He got
angry. And that anger is an expression of his devotion. So, the madhyama in that
sense has discrimination and by that discrimination, the madhyama understands
this is the level I should practice. You know. This is the level I should
practice. You know. And this is how I should deal with it now. So if somebody is
blaspheming, then he either tries to counter it or then he, or moves away from
there. So, "opekṣā".

So, like that, madhyama sees that my Krishna Consciousness will be reflected
through my behavior. So, if I, when Krishna is blasphemed, and I do not feel
bad, that means my, I, my Krishna Consciousness is very superficial. It is not
deep. And only, there is my behavior reflect my Krishna Consciousness, my
behavior, the different kinds of people will affect my Krishna Consciousness.
For example, if I meet a new person, who is innocent. And then, if I try to
share Krishna Consciousness with that person, the desire to share Krishna
Consciousness with that person reflects my Krishna Consciousness. Because I want
the soul is also part of Krishna, but has become estranged from Krishna. Now, I
have to help the soul back, to go back to Krishna.

So, with that sort of attitude, that sort of disposition, that sort of concern,
for connecting Krishna's lost children with Krishna, that ref..., that reflects
my Krishna Consciousness. If that is not there, then again, my Krishna
Consciousness is superficial. But along with reflecting Krishna Consciousness,
it also affects my Krishna Consciousness. Affects means that, it, when I try to
speak about Krishna, that enlivens me. When people ask me questions, then I
think about the subject, I go deeper into subject, my own understanding
increases. So, my own understanding, my own realisation, my own purification
increases. So, the madhyama understands that Krishna Consciousness is not
just something that is in isolation done in the temple.

That I go to the temple, in front of the deity, and I chant, and you know, I, I
pray, and I worship the deity. That alone does not aff..., that does not al...,
alone is not my Krishna Consciousness. My Krishna Consciousness is reflected and
affected, by beh..., by behavior with the different kinds of people. And based
on this understanding, I behave appropriately so that my Krishna Consciousness
is protected and nourished. So, now, Srila Prabhupada, in his purport, gives
some interesting examples. He talks about firstly George Harrison. He does not
mention George Harrison by name, but he says that there is, there is famous
musician. And he chants Hare Krishna and he, he takes prasad. He invites devotees
to his place. He likes devotees. And he speaks about Krishna wherever he gets an
opportunity. So, Prabhupada says that, you know, we of..., we do not hesitate to
offer respect to such a person. So, Prabhupada is saying that he is at least in
the category of "kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta". He is chanting Krishna's
name and therefore, we do not hesitate to offer him respect.

So the point Srila Prabhupada is making is, he is making this whole verse
appreciable to the contemporary audience. So, he is saying that as sadhakas, we
should be able to respect anyone who chants the holy names. So, now, if we look
at George Harrison's life, you know, his de..., his devotion, that to Krishna
was definitely there. He loved to chant Hare Krishna. But he was not exactly a
single-pointed devotee in the sense that he was not committed to Prabhupada
alone. He was connected with many other spiritual teachers also. And several of
them were impersonalists. So, all of them combined to help him become attracted to
Vedic culture. And Prabhupada was well aware of his attractions to other
spiritual teachers. And, at, when Prabhupada would meet him, he would sometimes
ask also. So, Prabhupada, without criticising any other teachers, would just
present his message to them. And by presenting his message to them, you know,
this message of chanting the holy names and serving Krishna, he attracted those
people. He attracted George Harrison to him also.

So, now, the point is that, George Harrison may have had some other conceptions
also, of spirituality, you know, not just the pure devotional conception, but
Prabhupada did not see that. What Prabhupada saw is chanting the holy names.
That means "mana...", "manasādriyeta", should, should offer respects to such a
person. So, as sadhakas, we should be able to see the good in others. So,
people, generally speaking, unless they come to, you know, Krishna's lotus feet
properly, their conceptions are likely to be messed up. So, people may have,
people may, may chant Krishna's name, but that chanting of Krishna's name may be
mixed up with the chanting of some other demigod mantras. They may be uttering
some mantras, even to worship some semigods. Semigods is, Say me Gods. I am God.
So, those people who claim that I am God. And these people somehow, do not know
whether that is right or wrong. And they, they just avoid any complication. They
also chant the names of those self-made Gods.

So, at such times, we cannot leave all these people without mayavadis. So,
"kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta", "manasādriyeta", we offer respects in
the mind at least to them. Of course, we can offer obeisances also to them if
that is practical for us. But at least in the mind, we have to offer respect.
And beyond that, we also have to recognise that life itself is progressive. So,
those are kanistha can become madhyama later. You know, Srila Prabhupada also
refers to those who are initiated, but are not very serious practioners, as
kanistha. So, it is not that and we are going to get a label or label people.
This person is a kanistha. This person is a madhyama. This person is an uttama.
We cannot get like that. Nor we can put a label on ourselves. I am a madhyama.
"pranto bishca bhajanta mesa". Offer obeisances to me. Or not that a pure
devotee will say, uttama, you know, dandavat pranam, and "sudosaya", render
menial service to me. No, things do not work like that.

Any typology, any nomenclature that is there based on what classification,
purpose is, to translate that into reality is always a complex issue. So, the
focus is not on precisely categorising people in our mind and putting them into
pigeon holes. This is a kanistha. This is a madhyama. This is an uttama. No.
That is not our goal. This is for us to make spiritual advancement. And in
general, we can make out. That if somebody has been, has, he speaks very deeply
on the scriptures. He has been practicing for many decades, many years, many
decades. And he is devoted to Krishna. Then, accordingly, we understand that
that person is definitely not a kanistha. That person is a madhyama or uttama.
And we will offer our respects accordingly.

So, the important point is to recognise that there are different levels of
devotees, not to pigeon hole devotees in a certain categories. Somebody is a
madhyama, would be, but because I have a, I have a grudge against that person,
so I treat that person as a kanistha. No, these are objective criteria, and we,
we cannot subjectively decide that I do not like this person, so I assign a
lower catogery to him. In general, if somebody is new and chanting, we offer
"manasādriyeta". If somebody is initiated and worshipping the deity, then we may
not be able to practice right now "prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā". They may not exactly
be at that level, although they are trying for disrimination, among different
kinds of people, based on one's Krishna Consciousness. But even if they are not
doing that, still by worshipping, by, by sort of befriending them, and by
offering obeisances to them, one will make spiritual advancement.

So, Bhaktivinoda Thakur has written elaborately about these various adikaris.
And he says that, one of the characteristics of kanistha is that kanistha often,
if, even if that person becomes a worshiper of Krishna, that person becomes a
sort of fanatical worshiper, and offends the demigod. Yes, people are
worshipping demigods, stupid. So, now, ok, now, there should not be any
condemnation. There is a clear explanation of why demigod worship is for the
less intelligent people. And how more intellient people should give it up. But
beyond that, it is the decision of every individual. So, Bhaktivinoda Thakur
explains that even a bhakta should not disrespect the demigods. We do not
worship the demigods as independent Lords. We do not consider them supreme. But
that does not mean that we disrespect them. We offer them the proper respect as
representatives of Krishna, as exalted devotees. Although we may not worship
those specifically on altars.

Now, going beyond, let us look at here at the bottom, how, so we discussed this
about "prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā". And Prabhupada writes that the person who is
madhyama may have inconclusive knowledge of sastra. That means as far as sastra
is concerned, one may not be able to conclusive explain, this is the meaning.
One may not be able to conclusively explain or establish, this is the meaning
and not this. Now, but still, as far as one's internal conviction is con...,
conviction is undeterred. And even if there is some logical arguments for which
one does not know the answers, still one keeps practicing, undeterred, continues
process in any circumstance and then faithful and firm in chanting is the
madhyama level. So, all of us at least try to stay thus at the madhyama level
and move towards the uttama level. So, what is the uttama level?

So, uttama, tama means darkness, uttama means beyond darkness. So first of all,
what is the pure? Free from anarthas. And then Srila Prabhupada describes the
characteric of uttama in a very down to earth way. He does not telk, talk about this
in ways that will be too complex or too esoteric for disciples to understand.
Although the aspects of uttama adikari consciousness is also there. So here he
talks about, such a person is seriously engaged in the Lord's service and
expounds, spreads Krishna Consciousness, such a person is a guru, and saws the
guru. And such a person is offenseless. These are the characteristics of an
uttama adikari, Prabhupada says.

So, based on these characteristics, one may think, oh, I am also, I might also
be an uttama udikari, you know. I am also seriously chanting Hare Krishna, also
think about preaching and sharing Krishna Consciousness with others and I
have been initiated by spiritual master, and I try to be respectful to others,
and avoid offenses. Therefore, am I uttama adikari? No, whene..., one of the
basic principles of hermeneutics is to always consider the complete picture, not
a fragmented picture. Hermeneutics refers to the art of understanding scripture.
You can call it also as interpretation. But essentially, it is not
interpretation. It is understanding, art of understanding scripture. Why is it
an art? Because actually people can simply assemble quotes that they want to
support their ideas. I have one quote. Another person has another quote. And
then we have quotes wars. You know, quo..., you know cold war, and there are
quote wars. So cold war is when there is no physical shooting happening so much,
but still, people were always curious each other. The United States and USSR, at
that time, there was a cold war between them.

So, a quote war means I say this, this is the quote. Prabhupada said this. And
somebody says, no, Prabhupada said that. And both are, both sides show their
quotes and based on that they have a war. This is what should be done. This is
what should not be done. So, shooting a quote war is not the characteric of a,
definitely not the characteristic of uttama adikari. The quotes are there and
the quotes are important. But the quotes also have a context. And unless we
understand the context, we will not get the complete picture. So, the uttama
adikari is also described in the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. And there very
advanced characteristics of the uttama adikari are also described. So, we all
have to aspire towards more and more advancement. So here, Srila Prabhupada is
giving us characteristics which definitely, uttama adikari definitely has. But
these are not the only characteristics that uttama adikari has. Uttama adikari
has multiple characteristics among which these also are there. Yes.

Then Prabhupada describes, what is the characteristic of uttama? The person is
uncritical even if a pure devotee criticises. That means, it is, it is not that
just because we are in devotee association, there will be no criticism
happening. So, many times, even in devotee association, there might be serious
criticism. So then, what does person do? Person tolerates it. And then, person
may of course clarify at certain times. But the whole idea is that one does
not love criticising others. Now, Srila Prabhupada, even when he would use the
strong words like fools, fools and rascals, his intention was not to criticise.
It is not that Prabhupada loved criticism. Prabhupada wanted to enlighten
people. You know, for example, this is very striking. Srila Prabhupada,
sometimes would call a person very strongly, would say, that person is a rascal.
But when Prabhu..., if Prabhupada would meet that person, Prabhupada was very
respectful and polite. He would not say that, to that person, you are a rascal.
Why is that? Because Prabhupada knew what was required to get whom towards
Krishna.

So, that person is completely lost in materialism to, to, to joilt people out of
their stupor, about oh, what that person is. You know, that person is rascal.
So, for example, the, some person had been prime minister of India, and
Prabhupada said that is a rascal. Hey, how could you call the prime minister a
rascal? So, Prabhupada did not just see from material vision. Prabhupada did
see even from a spiritual vision, and he is training us to see from spiritual.
In the material vision, that person might be a big politician. He might be even
the prime minister of the country. But that person has no attraction towards
Krishna. And that person is just living like an animal. So, there is nothing
glorious about the way that person is living. And that is why to joilt to use
the word rascal. But quite often, when Srila Prabhupada would meet with such a
person, he was very polite, respectful, cordial and gentleman-y. Why is that?
Because Srila Prabhupada was instructing us. There could be many reasons, but
what we know is that Srila Prabhupada gives instructions how to carry on Krishna
Consciousness. And the whole point is that those who can understand spiritual
vision, for them spiritual vision should be given.

Those who cannot understand spiritual vision, for them material vision has to be
given. But material vision, that is sattvik. That is elevating. That is
gradually purifying. So, Srila Prabhupada knew how to speak with whom. And
somebody who was un..., completely godless, just by speaking strongly to that
person, initia..., after an initial, initial phase of putting the graving person
to calmness, then by that one is able to elevate the person further. That means
that if a person is in material consciousness, then suddenly, we cannot bring
that person to spiritual conciousness. So, within material consciousness, we can
apprec..., we can exhibit sattvik qualities, and try to bring that person to
sattva-gunic points. So, when Prabhupada meets a big politician, he may speak
very strongly about politicians and even that politician also. But when
Prabhupada meets that politician, he speaks cordially, respectfully. Why?
Because through that, when he is speaking strongly to his disciples, he is
dissipating the ever-present glamour of the material world that is there in
minds of all conditioned souls. So, this is, what are you so excited about this?
It is all trivial. It is all temporary. Do not get so excited about it.

But after saying that, when, if that person, Prabhupada is meeting that person,
what is Prabhupada's focus on? It is on elevating that person. So that person
cannot at this stage understand the whole concept of rascal or anything like
that. That person is encouraged just to understand basics of Krishna
Consciousness. By understanding these basics, one can make spiritual
advancement. So, in this way, the acharya speaks according time, place,
circumstance, according to what is the best for the person at a particular time.
And in this way, by understanding this, one can actually move forward in
one's spiritual life that I understand how I am to practice, how others are to
practice.

So, such a, "bhajana-vijñam ananyam anya", so it is without false ego or envy.
And then, heat the disease, not the diseased. So, this is an important point
that the pure devotee, it is not that pure devotion means we whitewash
everything. A doctor wants everyone to be healthy. Of course, to a doctor, he
may not want because they may seem a little bit they run out of business if
everybody becomes healthy. But at least speaking, godly, there are hypocrites,
much, doctors are supposed to take, at the assembly they are supposed to answer
questions, they want, they are supposed to, they culti..., they facilitate, and
assist in the prevention of disease and the recovery and health among all
patiences irrespective of cast, creed, nationality or anything like that.

So, that is the vow that they take that we will offer care to everyone. Now,
ce..., now doctor certainly has a caring attitude towards everyone. But that
does not mean that doctor tries whitewashing every, mentally say that, oh,
everybody is now, right now healthy. No. Different people get different levels
of sickness. And the doctor has to understand that this person will need this
treatment to come from here to here. This person will need this treatment to
come from to here. There are different people at different levels of
consciousness. And accordingly, they have to be provided spirituality in a way
that is accessible to them. So, understanding this, the acharya can set up
various systems by which Krishna reaches people.

To those who are new, such a process may appear to be very simple, very
primitive. Now is the age of technology of google, and wikipedia, and Mac. And
what are you dancing? Dan..., chanting, dancing and singing. Cannot you do
anything more advanced? Actually, chanting, dancing, singing is the most
advanced activity that we can do. It is the , as Prabhupada said earlier, it is
the life and soul of the living entity. You are all meant to serve Krishna
wholeheartedly. And a person understands this is what my life is, to serve
Krishna and to help others serve Krishna. So, we want to go out of the hospital,
not for our own selfish enjoyment, or our own selfish freedom of misery. We want
to go out of the hospital of material existence, so that we can serve Krishna
more purely and fully.

Right now, because of our mind and senses, our service remains impure and our
service remains incomplete, and not able to serve Krishna as much as we want,
and it is not certainly, not of as much purity as we would like. So, we want
to go out of the material world, not so that we can enjoy with Krishna. Yes,
that enjoyment will be a byproduct. But we are going out of the material world,
because we aim to go out of the material world, aim to go closer to Krishna
because we understand that by Krishna's presence our heart will become purified.
And then when our heart is purified, then we can invoke Krishna's presence and
then we can become attracted to Krishna. So, there is a progression. So, the
pure devotee does not whitewash everyone as, the advanced devotee does not
whitewash everyone as a devotee.

All that, at the high stages of uttama, one does not necessarily see the bodily
copy. One sees only the soul. So, it is like a progression. The kanistha sees
only the body, but not the soul. The madhyama sees the body and the soul, and
tries to shift the focus from the body to the soul. And the uttama sees
everything, but does not see that, actually speaking, he sees beyond material
things to spiritual things. And that is why at the spiritual level, every soul
is a potential devotee of Krishna. And that is why the uttama is "ananyam", 
"ananyam anya-nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam". He is completely free from the desire for
worldly c..., name fame g..., glory.

So that freedom is remarkable for a person who is so advanced. So, by this
understanding, one can understa..., we can know who is actually "bhajana-vijñam
ananyam anya-" and how we should serve such a person. Because the standards are
there described. Now, after describing these standards, "vijñam ananyam
anya-nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam", so we have discussed the characteristic of such a
person means "nindādi-śūnya", such a person does not want to criticise anyone.
But how do we understand the point of such a person having various levels of
reciprocation? Levels of reciprocation means, such a person, is Krish..., is
receiving service from others. Now, receiving service can be quite detrimental
to our spiritual life. If we think, oh, I am so advanced that people can take
service fr..., people can give, people can render service to me. That is not a
very pleasing attitude for a humble devotee. Or it may be pleasing for our ego.
But it is not very healthy for our devotion.

But at the same time, the pure devotee understands that actually Krishna is
manifesting through me, so let me do what I can to attract people towards
Krishna. So, if doing some service for me is living they can render service to
Krishna, and become attracted to Krishna, and if they are not going to render
service to any..., similar service to anyone else, then ref..., then they render
to me because they feel inspired by the, by what I am doing. Then, at that time,
such a devotee can accept from others. But from our side, we should not think
that, oh, he is, he is such a, who does, we are all meant to be servants. Why is
this person taking service from everyone? No, the point is that actually that
person by taking service is giving us an opportunity for service. The person
does not necessarily need service from us. But by, by getting service, we are
been given the opportunity to render service.

Now, Srila Prabhupada, in the purport, goes further and he talks about security.
We can see over here long. This process of "anya-nindādi-śūnya-hṛda", that
person is seriously engaged in the Lord's service. So, now, then, that person
expounds, spreads Krishna Consciousness. Such a person is offenseless. Yeah,
actually, these are characteristics of an uttama adikari. So, Bhaktivinoda
Thakur, Prabhupada quotes Bhaktivinoda Thakur also over here, you know, a
vaishnava is known by how many other vaishnavas such a person makes, converts.
He does not stick to material enjoyment, strictly following to the regulative
principles. He is self-realised. And why is the person non-critical? Because
such a person feels that actually I have committed so many sins in the past.
Because I have committed so many sins in the past, so I deserve criticism.

Even if I am not committed any..., anything wrong to this particular criticism,
in general I have committed so many wrongs because of which, I deserve
criticism. And therefore, the person feels regret, oh, what all have I done in
the past? Krishna, please forgive me. And such a person tries to protect new
people's faith, and by protecting new people's faith, by not unnecessarily
quoting controversies. So, in general, when we see faults in others or others
see fault in us, it is important that we do not broadcast it in public. You
know, in most traditional societies that even in, even sensitive to the, modern
societies. So the par..., the parents are there, and parents have difference of
opinion. It is quite possible that parents will go anger. The mother anger, the
father want to fight with each other. But generally, the mother and father will
not fight in front of the children.

Because for the children to see their mo..., parents, shouting together,
crimages, throwing things that is, throwing punches at each others, that can be
traumatic. It can be devastating also. So, even if parents have some difference
of opinion, they will go in a private room, close the door, and then talk
whatever they want. So, like that, actually, when there are differences of
opinion between devotees, it is best if they are not held in public. Actually,
those senior devotees meet and talk things through privately. Because it can be,
especially for young devotees who are going in their spiritual life, to, for
them to see s..., criticism going on between devotees, that can be very si...,
very devotionally damaging to their faith, to their inspiration to serve, to
their inspiration to advance in devotional life.

Now, it is definitely true that, ev..., there will, there will be disagreements.
There will be difference of opinion because different people have different
inclinations. And different devotees may have different priorities. So advanced
devotee understands that different devotees can have different definitions of
success in Krishna Consciousness. That means I have a particular definition,
others have a pa..., another definition of success. Now, of course, all these
definitions of success have to be within the purview of what Srila Prabhupada
has given us. But still, there can be variations. Now, somebody can have a
definition of success as, you know, distribute as many books as possible. It is
very important to distribute books. Srila Prabhupada wanted to it. And we get a
lot of mercy by distribution of books.

But at the same time, there are other services. Somebody feels that I want to
build a lof ot temples, or I want to worship a deity very opulently. And that
person's life may be just that, opulent worship of the deity and building
gorgeous temples. And we are talking about advanced devotees over here, serious
devotees. Somebody else may feel, oh, actually, you know, Prabhupada wanted
brahminical culture. I will study the scripture, go deep in the scripture,
understand the scripture and then systematicaly educate others. That is where,
that is, that is my definition of success. You know, like that, some peoplemay
feel that, oh, we have to build varnashram, and Prabhupada felt that fifty
percent of my mission is completely varnashram project. Somebody may see that,
oh, we have to educate the next generation. We have to make sure that the next
generation that is born in ISKCON, they become devotees. We have schools for
them. We have special retreats for them. And some others may feel, actually,
those who are inside, they cannot be changed, we have to get new blood. So, they
may say, we have to just, just, we have to do college preaching and by college
preaching, we attract the young people and when there is young people with
the universal potential come to our movement, then our movement will flourish
up toward, many many people will come towards Krishna's lotus feet.

Now, these various definitions of success are all valid. And they do not have to
be competitive. They certainly do not have to be exclusive. That nobody should
say, this is alone is what Srila Prabhupada wanted to do. This is the definition
of success and everybody has to abide by that. No. There are different, there
are many aspects to Srila Prabhupada's vision and mission. And we, as sadhakas,
and even as advanced devotees, we see just one aspect of Srila Prabhupada's
mission and try to advance in that, try to make spiritual advancement ourselves,
and try to have an effective outreach in that field.

So, for example, Srila Prabhupada said that we make spiritual advancement by
refuting atheism. And he specifically quoted atheistic theories, like the
evolution theory. So, now, does that mean that, when he said that the more we
refute atheism, the more we will make spiritual advancement, now, does that mean
that every devotee in ISKCON should study science, and study atheistic theories
and scientifically refute atheistic theories, so that they can make spiritual
advancement? No, that is not necessary. You know, if those devotees who have
scientific inclinations, they may feel, oh, but if I study science, that is
material, I should study about Krishna. He says, no, for such a person, it is
your service. What are we doing? You know, we want to glorify Krishna. So, one
glorification of Krishna is direct glorification. Krishna is so wonderful.
Krishna is so good. That Krishna is so attractive.

Another is actually to remove the misconceptions that obstruct people from
understanding Krishna's glories. And one of the greatest misconceptions is we
are seeing Krishna is so beautiful, that we surrender our life to Him. And here
people say that Krishna does not exist only. So atheism in that sense is quite a
heavy criticism. So those devotees, it is a heavy criticism of God. And those
devotees who have the inclinations, they should be able to use those energies,
those inclinations, that intelligence for establishing the glory of God and
refuting all misconceptions. Now, this does not mean that everybody has to do
it. Nor does it mean that those who do it thinks that it is just material. It is
not spiritual.

So, this is a definition of success, which is important for Srila Prabhupada.
It is important for the intellectual respectability and the intellectual faith
of devotees, but it is not that devo..., these alone have to, all devotees have
to do it. Different devotees, some devotees may choose to adapt this as their
definition of success. Most may not. Most may just be practicing the process of
Krishna Consciousness and doing other services. Just we understand that with
respect to specific field like science, it also applies to other fields. So,
different devotees may have different definitions of success and accordingly,
they practice spiritual life.

So, when the devotee, advanced devotee understands, ok, this is the person
serving this way, this is the person serving this way. This is the way Krishna
has inspired. Now, you know, somebody may start compromising on the regulative
principles, that is a different issue. With that has to be dealt with. But even
that does not have to be dealt with in by, by publicly criticising anyone.
Actually, then that can be done "anya-nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam", that one does it by
actually carefully meeting with that devotee who we feel as gone wrong, and
clarifying, asking questions, getting clarifications, "anya" is presenting our
perspective and then making sure that a harmonious reconcilation comes about.

So, now, Srila Prabhupada explains that when we talk about initiation, now, an,
the, the devotee, advanced devotee should be uttama adikari, but along with
that, there can also be the kanistha. Madhyama adikari also can initiate. And
beyond that, the, it is not that, then one's, only the topmost devotees can
initiate. The way Prabhupada presented Krishna Consciousness is that anybody
can initiate, as long as the person is strictly following Krishna Consciousness,
and is proved by the devo..., by the general leaders of the devotee community.
So, now, it is not necessary that a person has to be a pure devotee, having
reached the point of purity beyond return, having gained, given ensurance that I
will never fall.

Now, such a person starts taking of disciples? No. That is not what Srila
Prabhupada told us to do. But he told us those who are qualified, in terms of
their commitment, steady commitment of practice of Krishna Consciousness, they
can initiate. So, certainly, our spiritual master has practiced spiritual for
many years. And he is more advanced than us. And it is not that, on..., when we
are practicing spiritual life, we alone advance. Spiritual master is also going
closer and closer to Krishna. So, if the spiritual master is practicing the
process sincerely, we are practicing the process sincerely, then spiritual
master will always have covered more terrain than us, and they will be able to
guide us.

So, Srila Prabhupada says that if one is not initiated by an uttama adikari,
then one's advan..., one can be initiated by lower devotee also, but one's
advancement will be limited to the extent that one's spiritual master is
advanced. That is true. But at the same time, we should not think that the
spiritual master is always going to be at one particular face. Spiritual master
is also advancing and as the spiritual master is advancing throuh his guidance,
we can also advance.

So, that way, even Srila Prabhupada says that we should practice spiritual life
in a diligent way. So, he says that the test of a vaishnava is... What is the
test of vaishnava he says? How many other vaishnavas he has made. So, when Srila
Prabhupada was in, came to, came to India with his disciples, at that time, some
of his godbrothers could not digest this, Prabhupada's godbrothers. Because
during Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur's time, Prabhupada was just the, on the
periphery of the Gaudiya Math. He was just one grihasta who would occasionally
come and meet Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur, and attend some programmes. And
they had been the leaders of the movement at that time under Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakur. But now, when Srila Prabhupada started ISKCON, at that time,
they were sidelined and even in the Krishna Consciousness, Caitanya Mahaprabhu's
profession, mission was fulfilled, people from all over the world were becoming
devotees, but still, they did not know how much roles to play in it, so they
just could not stomach it, and often, they would try to find out some faults.

Why did Prabhupada not do this? Why did Prabhupada... they would not even use
the name Prabhupada, so, so they objected sometimes saying why that Prabhupada?
Why are you using? Some of his godbrothers came to him and said, you know, why
are you using the title of that Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur had? Why are
you asserting his title? So, Prabhupada became very grave. He told his disciples
to use their own. So, this would bug significant, you know, there are conflicts
between senior devotees. It is not that they have to be played out in public.
Prabhupada told them, play on your own. And Prabhupada told the servant, you get
my letterhead. And when they got letterhead, on that letterhead, they saw that,
it was written through ending Goswami, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami, so the person
said there is no Prabhupada over there. Prabhupada said I have never accepted
this title.

Actually, the disciples wanted to glorify me, and Pra..., how it historically
happened, Prabhupada suggested, the devotees used to call Prabhupada swami,
because at that time, that is what the ending for any Indian teachers. And
Prabhupada said the Swami is not a very advanced name. It is like a, just, hey,
swami, come here. It is a common empathy also people use. They used to call me
ordinary person also. Prabhupada said this is not the, a respectful address for
the spiritual master. They asked what should a spiritual master be called. So,
Prabhupada said, he could be called Vishnupada, he could be called Prabhupada,
he could be called Bhagavatpada, there is, Prabhupada mentioned three, four
names. So the devotees who were hearing, can we call you Prabhupada? Prabhupada
said, yes, you can call me. And then in the Back to Godhead, published article,
it got formalised. And then they would start calling Prabhupada as Prabhupada.
But Prabhupada never himself referred to himself as Prabhupada in his own
letterheads. He was just saying Bhaktivedanta Swami. So, then his, his
godbrothers became pacified.

But then, some other godbrothers said, you came to, you came to Mayapur, but why
did you not come to the yogapit? Why did you not come to the place which
Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared? So, and what was happening was, they were speaking
all this criticism to Prabhupada disciples and through local people, and through
local people, Prabhupada disciples were hearing. And Prabhupada disciples were
hearing, Prabhupada was hearing from them. Then Prabhupada said that when he
heard this, he said, you know, here, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared is not as
important as why Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared. Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared
to share Krishna Consciousness with the world and I am doing that. Though, then,
he said that when he heard the cri..., criticisms, he said that, you know, you
go and ask those who are criticising me, it was mainly his godbrothers only, he
says that, actually, ask them, who has opened more temples than me? Who has
written more books than me? Ask them, who has made more devotees than me?

And now, the stupor is Prabhupada has done this more than anyone else. But we
are missing why Prabhupada is bragging over here. Why is he saying I opened
more temples than anyone else? But then Prabhupada became grave and he said that
I have inherited the legacy of my spiritual master. I have inherited the legacy
of my spiritual master. What was the legacy of spiritual master? It is not
material legacy. You know, Prabhupada did not, when the property of the Gaudiya
Math was there, phenomenal property, and after Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur
depar..., departed, there was severe property disputes. So, in that, Prabhupada
did not get any property. So, what was the legacy that Prabhupada was referring
to? He said the true legacy that the spiritual master gives to disciple is the
desire to serve Krishna, especially the desire to glorify Krishna. Because
through glorifying Krishna, to serve, any service that we do, it is good for
ourselves, but when we glorify Krishna, others also become attracted to Krishna
through by hearing that glorification.

So, Prabhupada was saying that Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur had such an
intense vibrant desire that led Krishna Consciousness spread far and wide all
over the world. And then he said, he gave me that instruction and I took that
instruction. So that desire which we had, I took that desire as my life's
mission, and through the books have come out, through that the temples have come
out, through that the devotees have come out. So, what he is saying is, I have
inherited the legacy of my spiritual master. This was not pride. This was
humility. But Prabhupada was also stating facts.

So, Prabhupada, whenever there was the, thevedic function, you know, if his
godbrothers were there. He would always ensure that if you are sitting on a
particular asana, particular level, they would also be sitting on an asana at
the same level, so just to be respectful, never violate a vaishnava etiquette
for his godbrothers. So, "anya-nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam", Prabhupada would not want
to criticise anyone, even when they criticised, he wa..., he tried to protect
his disciples' faith, and give clarification. But in some cases, Prabhupada had
to protect his disciples' faith and he was vocal stronly also.

59:10
to
