Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4g8Cbf7S-R8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=4g8Cbf7S-R8&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_039_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_9_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=-GIvQqeW1uN44U9w8cVLUaikUyB8MTU0MTgzMDg0MUAxNTQxNzQ0NDQx

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to the Nectar of Instruction class. We are now coming to the last part
of the Nectar of Instruction, the last three texts are there. So, the ninth, tenth,
and eleventh are talking more of glorification. They are not so much of
instruction. Although, instruction is indirectly there. So, the first will talk
about the hierarchy of the various dhamas. That is the ninth text. The tenth
text will talk about the va..., the hierarchy of the various spiritual seekers.
And then the eleventh will combine both the two that the, how, both of them
combined, and that is the highest perfection that a seeker can achieve. So, let
us look at the text here, this ninth text:

        vaikuṇṭhāj janito varā madhu-purī tatrāpi rāsotsavād
        vṛndāraṇyam udāra-pāṇi-ramaṇāt tatrāpi govardhanaḥ
        rādhā-kuṇḍam ihāpi gokula-pateḥ premāmṛtāplāvanāt
        kuryād asya virājato giri-taṭe sevāṁ vivekī na kaḥ

So, "vaikuṇṭhāj janito varā", so "vaikuṇṭhāj" is great, but "varā" is greater
than that, is "madhu-purī". "madhu-purī" is Madhura. Why is Mathura greater?
Because "janito", Lord Krishna was born there. "tatrāpi rāsotsavād", "tatrā",
greater than that even, "āpi" is "rāsotsavād" because of the performance of
rasa-lila, festival of rasa. Greater is " vṛndāraṇyam udāra-pāṇi-ramaṇāt", so
"udāra-pāṇi", so "pāṇi" is hands, "udāra" is ha..., so "udāra" is charitable,
the one person, the person with very charitable hands, who gives benedictions
very f..., freely, very mercifully. And that Lord, "ramaṇāt", keep of, we,
perform the lightful pastimes over there. And "ramaṇāt" especially refers to the
madhuryas pa..., pastime. "tatrāpi govardhanaḥ", so because Krishna performs
the, these intimate pastimes, so "govardhanaḥ" is important.

And "rādhā-kuṇḍam ihāpi gokula-pateḥ", and even higher than "go...",
"govardhanaḥ", is Radhakund because here the Lord of "gokula",
"premāmṛtāplāvanāt", so here there was the nectar of "premā" in which
everybody was flooded, including "gokula-pateḥ", the Lord of "gokula". So, He
was flooded and e..., He flooded all His devotees. So, "kuryād asya virājato
giri-taṭe", so "virājato", means a desiring here, "giri-taṭe", at the foot of
Govardhan. That means near Radhakund, or, on, on Radhakund, at the foot of
Govardhan. "sevāṁ vivekī na kaḥ", so where is that intelligent person, "vivekī"
refers to intelligent person, especially "vivekī" refers to, not just "pudhe",
but it refers to discrimination. The intelligence is to know this is, to know
various things, but "vivekī" means to be able to understand higher and lower, to
discriminate, "vivekī". So, that person who can discriminate, where is that, if
a person can discriminate, where is that person who will not do surrendered
service at Radhakunda. So, in this way, Radhakund is talked about as the
highest of all holy places. Let us look at Srila Prabhupada's translation.

"The holy place known as Mathura is spiritually superior to Vaikuntha, the
transcendental world, because the Lord appeared there. Superior to Mathura -
Puri is the transcendental forest of Vrindavana because of Krsna's rasa-lila
pastimes. And superior to the forest of Vrindavana is Govardhana Hill, for it
was raised by the divine hand of Sri Krsna and was the site of His various
loving pastimes. And, above all, the superexcellent Sri Radha-kunda stands
supreme, for it is overflooded with the ambrosial nectarean prema of the Lord of
Gokula..."

So, Radhakund is overflooded and Radhakund overfloods everyone at it. But:    
    
"... Where, then, is that intelligent person is unwilling to serve this divine
Radha-kunda, which is situated at the foot of Govardhana Hill?"

So, let us look at the purport. So, the hierarchy is something which is
extremely important to understand for us, especially as Gaudiya Vaishnavas. So,
Vaikuntha is, now, Prabhupada basically elaborates on this theme in the purport.
And he explains that Vaikuntha is the spiritual world. That is a transcendental
realm. And it is a tree fourth of total creation. It is superior to the material
world. So, let us look at these concepts first. So, when we look at the concept
of the spiritual world. Some people say this is just a fancy. You know, you
people want to believe that you will not die. And therefore, you imagine the
world that is in..., undestructible. And you will say that, there is, you call
it the spiritual world.

So, people feel that the spiritual word is just a fancy. Now, actually speaking,
we will see that, those same people who are sceptical about the spiritual world,
they will turn on their television, and they will watch Disneyland, and they
will watch all kinds of, for example, or Harry Potter is there, and Harry Potter
is normal character and he goes to some magical school and people get so lost in
that magical school. So, what we see over here essentially is that attraction to
the supernatural is natural. People want some extraordinary. People want
something special. People want something which is not stereotype. And basically
the whole material world, it is ultimately the same thing. You know, everywhere,
there is birth, old age, disease, and death. Everywhere, there is eating,
sleeping, mating, defending. Everywhere, there is struggle for existence. So,
just their shapes and forms in which these things are done different. But
essentially, it is the same.

So, people want something new. The same people, now, we, they may see that, they
do not believe that there is some, some actual place called Disneyland. Or there
is no some actual place where Harry Potter lives. You know, it is just for
entertainment. Yes, even if they say it is just for entertainment, but the two
questions. First is, why do they need such a make belief for entertainment? And
second is, why do they take that make belief also seriously? You know, and it is
not just children. When the cartoon shows come up and when these kind of novels
come up, people just read them so eagerly. Why is that?

Nowadays, there is a perverse kind of supernatural. So, there are horror movies.
And there are, there is a very popular genre of fiction is paranormal fiction,
where there are vampires and sometimes there are stories of love affairs between
a vampire and a human being. And now this is all f..., a, from the material
scientific world viewpoint of, f..., point of world, view, it is all
imagination. So, why do people take it so seriously? Because the heart longs for
something beyond the ordinary. So, there are three levels actually. There is the
daily level of existence and because that is so ordinary, we want something
higher, we want something sweeter. But w..., we do not know about God, whe..,
and His kingdom, which is actually higher and sweeter. Or we, even if we know
about it, we dismiss it of as imagination, as mythology, as just fancy. But then
we create our own methodology. We create our own imagination. We create our own
fan..., fancy. We use our own fancy and imagination to create some other places.
And then people just absorb their consciousness in them.

So, now, this sort of obs..., o..., o..., obsession with illusion does not lead
to any transformation. It does not lead to any purification. It does not lead to
any elevation of consciousness. So, the very fact that there is a longing for
something like this, their attraction to the supernatural is natural. So, why is
there attraction like this? That attraction is there because it is natural to
the, us as beings, human beings. And that natural attraction should not be
suppressed, but it should be rightly directed. So, when we dismiss the spiritual
world, and Krishna's supremacy there, and the wonderful things that happen in
the spiritual world as imagination. Then, we, actually, reject reality, and then
we create another imagination, which we actually, for emotional purposes, we
treat as if it is a reality only.

So, instead of mis..., misdirecting our search for the supernatural, we should
direct, understand philosophy and then direct it properly. So, that is the first
point. He said this is universal urge that people want this. And it is not just
o..., ordinary people, even rational people, even intelligent people, they
delight in these things. Why? Because the heart longs for something
supernatural, something wonderful. So, it is an inherent longing in the heart,
and this itself is not a conclusive proof that something is there, which, which
fulfills that longing. But it is an indicator of the possibility that something
can be there, that, beyond that, that is the first point.

Second point is, if we look at the, all the great wisdom traditions of the
world. Now, they all talk about an eternal place. That they may call it kingdom
of God. They may call it Janet. They may call it an, in, as we, in our part, as
we call Vaikuntha. But there are, they all refer to it. And throughout history,
the great wisdom traditions have talked about eternal place, which is our home.
And this world, it is described, is a station. It is a place for a journey. It
is not a place, for, as a destination. So, we are, we are transitory travelers.
And actually we can just be wandering souls or we can be pilgrims on a
pilgrimage. So, the whole process of spirituality is to convert, our disastrous
travel actually. Our travel through material existence is ultimately as a
disasters of old age, disease, anddeath. It is meant to convert our disastrous
travel into a glorious pilgrimage, where we ultimately return to a place, from
where we do not have to return. Where we attain happiness.

Now, universally, it is there. So, first of all, it is universally there in. It
is a universal longing in the human hearts. Secondly, it is expressed in all the
great wisdom traditions of the world. Then, thirdly, it is also talked about in
the scriptures. The scriptures talk about it. Now, even if somebody does not
believe the scriptures or the word of God, but at least, at the basic level, we
see that the people who have studied the scriptures throughout history, they
have been among the wisest peoples. You know, if, whether we look at teology in
so different traditions, or we look at Ramujacharya, Madhavacharya, we look
Baladeva Vidyabushana, Jiva Goswami. You know, if, even if we just look at their
works, we look at the level of scholarship, look at the level of logical
reasoning, and look at the masterful analysis that is there in these books.
Then, we will understand that these are far more than ordinary people. Such
people of..., such extraordinary intellectual caliber. They had talked about
such things, this world, this place called as the spiritual world.

So, it is not something ordinary. It is something that was talked by some of the
most intelligent people in the whole world. And apart from that, when we develop
a little understanding, the basic understanding that we just as all our needs
are provided for by God. You know, the food is provided. Water is provided. Air
is provided. Heat is provided. Light is provided. All our fundamental need for
survival are provided for a, for by God. So, now, if God hhas provided for all
our basic needs, now one important need is knowledge. You know, if somebody
provides us a machine for using, and does not provide a manual or any guide for
how to use the machine. Now, that person would be incomplete in the guidance.
So, now, God has provided for all our needs, but one important need is
knowledge. Will God not provide for that need also? So that need is provided by
through the scriptures which are the revelation of God. And the scriptures, you
know, once we understand that they are manual for life, then we see that they
are actually talking about the spiritual world. And they are saying that that is
the ultimate destination of life. So, once we understand this point, the
spiritual world is ultimate destination of life, then, as per the scriptures,
then all these reasons make us, take this more seriously. And the beyond that,
if we think about the soul. So, the soul, once we understand that, I am not the
body. I am the soul. And this is not very difficult to understand. The body is
just dead matter. And there is nothing in the body that can, nothing in the body
that can actually experience anything. Because it is all dead matter. So, matter
cannot experience matter. There has to be some other experiencer.

And that is consciousness. And that consciousness stays the same in essence even
though the body changes. So, that consciousness is eternal. That is the soul.
So, now, if the soul is eternal, the soul has to be at some place, bel..., we, has
to have some place where it belongs. Nothing in this world is eternal. So, if
the soul is eternal, there must be some place to which the soul belongs, which
is eternal. So, that is how we understand that there is a spiritual world, which
is the original home also. Soul is spirit. So, the spirit soul has to have an
original place. If I come in a particular room, where there is, there are tiles,
and suddenly, on the room floor, I find a gold tablet. That the gold is so
precious, as soon, I, I will pick it up. And one of the most important question
that is coming in my mind is, where did this come from? Now, if somebody is
exploring in a forest, and suddenly somebody finds a gold tablet over there,
then immediately thinks, where is the gold coming? Is there a gold mine from
where this gold has come? So, when we see something incongruous, something which
does not belong to its surrounding in a particular place, that naturally raises
the question, where did this come from? So, once we understand that I am the
atma. And the atma is spiritual. And the atma is eternal. And everything here
around is material and is temporary. Then naturally, the question arises, where
did this atma come from?

And that brings us to the point of the soul, of the spiritual world again. Just
as gold comes from or a gold hole, or gold mind. Similarly, the soul comes from
a place where everything is spiritual. And that is the spiritual world. So, even
from the existence of soul, one can infer the existence of a spiritual world.
And beyond that, there is a lot of scientific research, which has clearly
demonstrated that science with all its advancements has given us tremendous
power, but that power is over a narrow slice of reality. There is much that is
there in this desti..., world, that is beyond the experience of science, or
beyond the reach of science. We know the visible spectrum is tiny in the
electromagnetic spectrum. Similarly, scienctists say that actually, first of
all, our very scale of perception is rema..., limited. And beyond that,
scientists say that it is only parallel universes now. So, if the parallel
universe is axis there, by definition, it is in inaccessible to us.

And there are multiple levels of existence, and we have access to only some of
them. So, this is not just some religious teaching. This is, is, the teaching of
science. Science says that there can be many ways of perception. Many scientists
were pointed this out that actually the scale of perception determines the
perception a lot. You know, if I perceive a person's, even a beaty queen's face
under microscope. Now, there will be no beauty seen over there. All that will be
seen will be some rigids and traps. It will be seen like a mountain area, taken
from a top..., topview area seen through a helicopter. So, there will be traps.
And there will be crest. And there will be valleys. And there will be mountains.
So, the beauty, as we see it at our skill of perception, will not be seen.

Now, if we go deeper and use electron microscope, there will not be seen the
face at all. We will simply see electrons running around. Now, we do not have
any microscope which can show us electrons running around. But if we had, then
we would see something entirely different. So, we have been given a particular
scale of perception, at which we operate. But at other skills of operation,
things will be seen differently. So, there is a too scientific person will
have the humility to admit that there is much in the universe that we do not
know. And the more we have come to know, the more we have realised how little we
know. This is a paradox of science. Sometimes, people think that our knowledge
is increasing. It has increased. But the more we know, what we understand is how
much more there is to know. So, for example, you know, scientists, when they
went to the space. So, human beings conquered space by that. So, that was the,
considered to be a great victory. That proved man's greatness, they say. Ok,
even with prove man's greatness, actually when people went into space, and they
saw from outside the space. What did they see? They saw that universe is so
vast. The earth which seems to be a little gargantuan of land and water when we
are on it, from outer space, the earth seems just like a marble, a tiny marble.
You know, vast universe, where are dangerous missiles shooting by all around.
There are asteroids and meteroids, and all, there are all kinds of dangerous
missiles. So, earth is so tiny, and so vulnerable, just like a tiny marble, a
blueish colored marble.

So, what we understood from that point when, when we had gone out into the space
is that the universe is so big, so big, so big. Therefore, that also is a clear
indication that the universe is far bigger than what we can make categorical
statements about. If somebody is saying that there is no spiritual world. That
is, that is not a scient..., statement that an honest scientist would make.
Honest scientist would say that universe is vast that we do not know what all is
there in it. So, scientists themselves have had to propose concepts like
blackholes, and dark matter, and dark energy, which are imperceivable. So, of
course, these do not directly relate in any way with spiritual world. That
is all within the material world. But the point is that to dismiss anything as
an impossibility, is in..., is indicative and arrogance that is not in a harmony
with the spirit of science. And no honest scientist would, we saw so dismissive.
So, we, we, we can at least be open minded. So, science has itself expanded our
conceptions of what all is there in the universe, and what all is possible, what
all is possible.

So, many of the particles which science has discovered now, say, they have been
considered fantasies hundred years ago. So, those which were considered,
dismalled, even dismissed fantasies, now scientists take those seriously. Why?
Because, it is, progressive scientific research is opening up our minds to show
what all possibilities are there. So, by all this, un..., reasoning, we can
understand that the spiritual is not just a fantasy. It is actually a reality,
and not just the reality. It is the supreme reality. When everything in this
world is destroyed, that parts stay as it is:

        paras tasmat tu bhavo 'nyo
        'vyakto 'vyaktat sanatanah
        yah sa sarvesu bhutesu
        nasyatsu na vinasyati

So "paras tasmat", that beyond this material world, is a spiritual world. When
all in this world is destroyed, that part remains as it is. So, in this way, we
can infer that, actually, all these various lines of reasoning, they are
concurrent, and then they are con..., they are confirmed, they are reinforced by
scriptural revelation. So, we can understand that there is an eternal world. And
that is actually our goal in life. And that abode is where Krishna resides and
from there, and from there, He descends, and from there He sends His
representatives to invite us back to His abode. Now, when we talk about the
spiritual world, Prabhupada explains that this material world is "ekapad
vibhuti", the spiritual world is "tripad vibhuti", so, it is, it is three times
the material, mate..., spiritual world. The spiritual world is three times the
material world. Now, this may raise a question for us. I..., is the material, is
the spiritual world finite or infinite? And if the spiritual world is infinite,
then how can we quantify it? How can we say that, this is, if spiritual world is
infinite, and it is three times the material world, then is material world also
infinite? Because it is one third. So, one third of infinity, is that also
infinity? We, when we come to this, there is, there is an important principle to
understand. You know, although there is infinity, there are also levels of
infinity. What does levels of infinity mean? You know, for example, if we say
that there is a, the whole set of natural numbers, one, two, three, four, five,
six, seven, that is infinite. You know, if I take those whole set of, o..., the
set, the complete set of odd numbers, one, three, five, seven, nine, that is
also infinite. Now, intuitively, I understand that, although both are infinite,
there is a difference. You know, this inf..., the infinite se..., set of all odd
numbers is contained within the infinite set of all natural numbers. Now, if I
take the set of all prime numbers, one, three, five, seven, eleven, thirteen,
seventeen, nineteen, like that, twenty-three, so then this is also infinite, but
this is contained further within the natural set, and it is smaller than the set
of all odd numbers.

So, the, in mathematics, we have to understand that when we come to infinity, we
cannot really apply our logic. So, there are possibilities. So, the point is,
the spiritual world is infinite. And the material world, "ananta koti brahmanda
nayaka", it is said. Lord Vishnu is the creator of innumerable material worlds.
This innumerable means that there are so many that they cannot be counted. So,
the basic point of this comparison is to emphasize that the spiritual world is
far far greater, far far grander, far far more wonderful than the material
world. And tha..., that is that spiritual world which is our ultimate
destination.

So, now, in the spiritual world, why is it superior to the material world? It is
Vaikuntha. Kuntha means anxiety. Vaikuntha means, vai means without, so without
any anxiety. So, it is all without anxiety. It is completely perfect that is
eternal happiness over there. So, there is eternal existence, eternal happiness
over there. And that is why, that is the so, cherished aspiration of all the
wise souls. They all want go back there. "ma upeta konde puna manjana vijayate".
Krishna says:

        duhkhalayam asasvatam
        napnuvanti mahatmanah
        samsiddhim paramam gatah

So, those who understand this is "duhkhalayam asasvatam", they attain that abode
and then they never come back. Once they worship me, they attain that abode and
they never come back here. As they worship me, they attain that abode and they
never come back here. So, now, when we talk about the spiritual world, are there
hierarchies in the spiritual world? Yes, when we say the hierarchy, again, we
have to be very careful. See, the hierarchy concept in the spiritual world has
to be understood in terms of rasa, in terms of tattva. The whole spiritual world
is eternal. Whole spiritual world is the kingdom of God. And everybody in the
spiritual world is a liberated soul.  aBecause everybody in the spiritual world
is a liberated soul. Thereore, everybody there is perfect. And everybody there
is happy. It is not that, some, you know, the Go..., when we say Goloka
Vrindavan is higher than Vaikuntha, or as this verse says that Mathura is higher
than Vaikuntha. Now, that does not mean that Vaikuntha's residences are
miserable and they are thinking that, oh, if you go to Gol..., Go..., Vaikuntha,
go to Mathura, it is so nice. See, from the point of tattva, they are all
perfect. What we are talking here is in terms of rasa.

You know, for Hanumanji, Lord Rama's worship is a perfection of his life. He
wants to serve Lord Rama and does not want to do anything else. He is not
thinking, oh, oh, oh, Krishna is higher than Rama, so I want to serve of
Krishna. No. He is completely satisfied. So, for him, in terms of rasa, it is
completely satisfied in serving Lord Rama. And that is how it tastes for all
devotees in the spiritual world. The Vai..., in the Vaikuntha also, the devotees
are perfect. You know, this says there is a hierarchy described by Rupa Goswami
in this verse. The same hierarchy, a similar hierarchy is told through a story
by Sanatan Goswami through his Brihad Bhagavatamrta. And in that Brihad
Bhagavatamrta, he describes how this Gopa Kumar, Gopa Kumar is a seeker, and he,
he is attracted to blue cowherd, bluish cowherd boy. And he goes to various
great people in this world, and ultimately, he meets his spiritual master, gets
a mantra, and then becomes attracted to Supreme Lord. When he is attracted to
Supreme Lord, then by chanting the mantra, by getting purified, he actually goes
to the spiritual world. He reaches to the spiritual world. He reaches to
Vaikuntha.

So, in Vaikuntha, he finds that, actually, he is a..., he is happy to see the
Lord worshipped in opulence, and he feels grateful that he is there. But after
some time over there, he starts feeling restless. He starts feeling restless. He
feels, you know, I wanted, I want, I want to, I am not satisfied here. I want to
go to a blue co..., see a blue cowherd boy. And then by the arrangement of Lord,
from there, also he comes back here to the material world. And he comes to
Goloka Vrindavan, and, you know, there is Goloka Vrindavan in spiritual world,
there is, you could call it Boloka Vrindavan, what is manifested over here, in
this world, and from here, it is sadhana, vraja bhakti, and then he goes to the
spiritual world again.

So, the point of this is that when he goes to s..., Vaikuntha, and comes back,
so he is not satisfied in Vaikuntha, but the other Vaikuntha vasis, they are
satisfied. And they are worshipping Lord Vishnu. And they are satisfied in the
worship of Lord Vishnu. They do not think, oh, we want to see somebody else. And
they actually consider the Vishnu to be the Supreme. You know, the, for them,
Lord Vishnu is the me all and the end all. And that is accepted. Rupa Goswami
does not, Sanatan Goswami does not say there is anything wrong with that. He
accepted fully. Why? Because we have to understand that in the transcendental
realm, when it comes to rasa, one ser..., one person's rasa cannot be imposed on
another. So, from the rasa point of view, the Vai..., the way Vaikuntha vasi
sees, Vaikuntha' isperfection on Lord Vishnu. Worshipping majestic form is the
perfection their life. They do not want anything higher. They are satisfied with
that.

So, similarly, different devotees can be in different rasas and they are all
satisfied. But in terms of the swe..., intimacy and the sweetness of the
pastimes, Krishna's pastimes are, say, more intimate and, and sweeter than the
pastimes of Vishnu. So, that is in terms of rasa, if we see it from a point of
view of objectivity. Yes. Kri..., now, Lo..., Vishnu does not have a father.
Krishna has a father and a mother. And then the vatsala rasa is very intimate.
So, this way, we understand that there is the objective way, we, in which we can
understand, and this is higher. But when we talk about objective, with that does
not say that subjective is all wrong. The.., there is room for transcendental
subjectivity. And in spiritual world, there can be many bests. So, Vaikuntha is
also the best. But at the same time, for the devotees who are in Vaikuntha, it
is the best. But for those who are seeking after Krishna, then Krishnaloka is
the best.

So, we are in the Gaudiya Vaishnava Sampradaya. And Rupa Goswami is giving us
the Gaudiya Vaishnava siddhanta. And that Gaudiya Vaishnava si.., siddhanta is
not just subjective. There is some objective reasoning also for saying how the,
how and why, Goloka Vrindavan and as is discussed over here, Radhakunda is the
highest. So, we should not impose our rasa on others. At the same time, we
should not just say that everything is same. Everything is perfect. But at the
same time, there are levels of perfection. Prabhupada writes in the purport
that, Radhakunda may not be considered to be the highest by those belong, those
who are not in Gaudiya Sampradaya. That is fine. If they are not in Gaudiya
Sampradaya, they may not accept it. But we do not have to, we do not have to
ourselves becomes insecure, oh, why are they not accepting it. Nor do we have to
think that they have to accept it. We, I have to impose it on them. No. We do
not have to do that. Caitanya Mahaprabhu, when he went to South India, you know,
when he saw a devotee worshipping Lord Rama, so devotely, a Rama bhakta, that he
was feeling agony thinking that, oh, Rama ha..., that Rama's consort, the
goddess of fortune, Sita had been touched and abducted by Ravana. He was so
bereaved, he was so distressed by that, that he could not do anything. Here, he
invited Caitanya Mahaprabhu to his house. But he could not cook food also. So,
so distressed because of that.

When Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw that, Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not tell him, forget
Rama, worship Krishna. Caitanya Mahaprabhu actually appreciated his sentiments.
And after appreciating his sentiments, he later on find a, found a scripture,
in which, there was a reference to how Lord Rama, was, Lord Rama's consort,
Sita, was never touched by Ravana. It was only maya Sita who was taken away. And
he came back and gave that to this devotee. And that devotee became very
enlivened by this. So, here, we see that the Lord was so caring. The Lord did
not try to impose. The Lord was not ins..., Lord was not in a sense trying to
just convert everyone to Gaudiya Vaishnavism. Yes. Those who were not, were not
so devoted to a particular thing, they were just devoted to Supreme Lord. In
some cases, he elevated them to higher rasa. But that is f..., that is fine. So,
the point is the Lord allowed people to practice according to their rasa also.
So, what that indicates is, that we should not hier..., use this hierarchy to
thrust down things on others. But still, we have to cherish what we have been
given in the Gaudiya Vai..., the Gau..., Gaudiya Sampradaya.

So, now, after understanding these basics, let us move to the next one, Mathura.
So, now what happens in Mathura is. Why is considered, Mathura considered
higher? Mathura is higher because Krishna appeared over there. And, you know,
Krishna exists eternally in the spiritual world, but Krishna also appeared,
over, over there in Mathura and Lord appeared in a particular place, so special.
And then the spiritual world is there. But the spiritual world is not accessible
to us. But Mathura being in the material world is accessible to us. So, that is,
that is how the mercy is manifesting even more. You know, Vaikuntha is elevated.
But we cannot attain Vaikuntha right now. If we want to practice sadhana bhakti,
only when we become siddha, we can go to Vaikuntha. But because the Lord has
descended over here, so, the Lord has manifested Himself, and that is how it is
so special. That, it is accessible. Now, there is a verse in the Puranas which
says that, where Lord Vishnu is telling Narada Muni that:

	naham tisthami vaikunthe   yoginam hrdayesu va
	mad-bhakta yatra gayanti   tatra tisthami narada

So, he says that, I, the Lord is saying over here that I am not present in the
Vaikuntha planets. I am not present in the heart of the yogis. I am present
where the devotees are chanting my glories. So, now, what does this verse mean?
Is Lord not, the Lord not present in Vaikuntha? If the Lord is not present in
Vaikuntha, what are, what all the souls who are in Vaikuntha are going to do? Is
the Lord not present in the heart of the yogis who are meditating on Him. He is
present in both these places. But in both these places, he is not accessible to
us. You know, we cannot have access to Vaikuntha. We cannot have access to the
hearts of the go.., great yogis unless we ourselves become a great yogi. But we
can join the association of devotees where they are glorifying Krishna. And
there we can relish His glories. That is, so, that is how, therefore the Lord is
saying that, I am present, there in my Lo..., my devotees have been glorif...,
devotees are glorifying me.

So, similarly, Mathura is the, is the spiritual world itself. It has become
accessible to us here in the material world. So, now, people wonder what exactly
happens when the spiritual world becomes accessible to us, so, in the material
world. So, what exactly is a dhama? How exacty, if I go to Mathura, or if I go
to Vrindavan, you know, you say, there is spiritual world, but then I see over
there, there are savages, and there is dirt over there, and there are, there are
hogs over there who are consuming stool, and stool is there over there. And it
looks quite filled with dirt. So, and, nowadays, there is so much
commercialisaton also over there. So, then what exactly do we mean it is a
spiritual world? So, actually, to understand this, that to understand the
concept of adikar. We have discussed adikar earlier. It was, referred to
kanistha, madyama, uttama adikaris. Adikari means authority or qualification.
So, the dhama can be pursued based on once's adikar.

So, the universe is like a huge computer, mainframe computer, with different
levels of access, to different users, based on their adikar. That means that if
there is a huge computer, you know, like a big main frame is there, where there
are hundreds of ports and there are, users are working on it. One, it is
connected with it, and keyboards connected one, users are working on it, it is
one main big machine. So, then, now, the all the data is there on that, but not
everybody has access to the data. So, how it works is that there are, are routine
operators. They will just be given the access to. Ok, just fill in the data and
make some mo..., modifications to the data. That is all. But you cannot do
anything further. Then, there will be just like in ordinary computer, we have
user and administrator. Now, actually speaking, now, the, the user does not have
access to see certain things, does not have access to change certain things,
does not have access to certain parts of the program. You know, some, in so...,
some, some computer settings can be made in such a way that, user does not see
some part of the computer only. That means that part is there, all the data, all
the files, all the folders are there, but the user, who is an ordinary user, not
administrator, cannot see it only. So, this is something which can be set in any
ordinary computer and we experience it in many times when we are working in
organisations. But if there is a, there are multiple levels of users with
multiple levels of access.

So, this, the, the owner of the company, or the CEO of the company, that may
have complete access to everything. But those below depending on their position
in the hierarchy, and their roles, may have multiple varying levels of access.
So, similarly, the whole of existence is like that. So, different people have
different levels of access. And that level of access depends on their adikar.
So, when we are in material consciousness and in material consciousness, we go
to the dhama, then, because of impure senses, because of impure heart, because
of material consciousness, we see things only at a material level. So, just as
there are data that are hidden from the user, it is there on the computer, but
it is hidden. Similarly, in the dhama, there is spiritual reality, which is
manifested over there. But it is unmanifested to our vi..., unmanifest to our
vision. Why? Because we do not have the adikar. We are not given access to that.
So, there are advanced devotees who have access to it. Because of why? Because
of what? They have become purified. And when we become purified, our spiritual
vision awakens. Our spiritual perception is activated. We have the capacity for
spiritual perception, but not now. When our spiritual perception, they get
activated, then we can see. So, the dhama is a spiritual place. But we are
unable to see the spirituality right now.

Then, what do we do when we go to a dhama? How can we develop that spiritual
perception? That is that we have to do these things. What do we do? When we, we
go to the dhama, we integrate scriptural description with sensory perception and
pray for spiritual revelation. So, let me explain this. First of all, we have to
see with the ears. That means we have to hear. First, we look at scriptural
description, scriptural description. Hear from the, read the scrip..., sacred
scriptures. And understand what the spiritual world is. Then beyond that we go
there with the devotees and hear from them also, the scriptural descriptions, as
they have realised it, as they explain it. And then integrate that scriptural
description with sensory perception. So, we go to the same places where Krishna
has performed His pastimes, and, for example, we go to Govardhan, and we hold
Govardhan with our eyes. We go to Jamuna and bathe in the Jamuna. So, we
perceive it with our senses also. Although, at our level, we may not perceive it
entirely as spiritual, but still, the potency is there. So, we need to perceive
the senses because that way, we are engaging the senses in Krishna's service.

        hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanam bhaktir ucyate

Bhakti means to engage our senses in the service of Krishna. Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakur would say that when we go a temple, we are not going to there,
to going to temple to see the Lord. We are going to temple to be seen by the
Lord. You know, we are His servants and the Lord wants to see His servants. So,
we go there to be seen, not to see. And when we behold the deities, we are
actually simply serving the Lord with our eyes by beholding his beautiful form.
So, although we may not perceive the dhama, right now with our sensory
perception, but just by going to the dhama, we will become purified. And that is
why the great saints, throughout history, have talked about the glories of the
dhama, and have hankered to go to the dama again, and again, and again. They
have prayed for meeting Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu himself. The moment he took
sannyasi, he said, now, I have renounced the world, in terms of relationships,
now, I will renounce the world in terms of location also and  go away from home,
and that, which is the ultimate destination, which I, where I want to go,
Vrindavan, that is manifest here, so I want to go there. So, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
himself sa..., showed by his example that we should not just be satisfied with
scriptural description. Scriptural description is no doubt important, but along
with scriptural description, there is sensory perception. We go there and
perceive.

Actually, there is not so much perception, but it is sensory service and
purification. But that service and purification happen through perception. We
use our senses over there. And that is why Srila Prabhupada wanted a, the,
im..., vibrant centers of Krishna Consciousness in the dhamas. Now, Srila
Prabhupada struggled a lot to get the land in Vrindavan and even more to get the
land in Mayapur. So, when Prabhupada made Mayapur the world headquarters of
ISKCON. Why? Because that is a holy dhama. The potency of the Lord is over
there. And similarly, with respect to Vrindavan, Prabhupada said Vrindavan is my
home. And he chose to leave his body in Vrindavan. So, it is a very exalted
place. Now, when we talk about the spiritual world. And when we talk perceiving,
the spiritual world manifesting the material world as a dhamas. So, this
scriptural description, plus sensory perception, these will lead to
purification, but after that, we have to pray for spiritual revelation.

Spiritual revelation means that by our senses we cannot see the dhama. But when
we become purified, then our spiritual senses awaken. And by Krishna's mercy,
when the spiritual senses awaken, Krishna gives us the spiritual revelation by
which we can see. So, it is described that when the great Gaudiya Vaishnavas,
like say, Jiva Goswami, or Jahnava Thakurani, or others when they would go to
Vrindavan, at that time, they would be hold, they would be hold beautiful, and
sometimes, sometimes, they would hear the beautif..., a sweet flute of Krishna.
Sometimes, they would beautiful, behold the beautiful form of Krishna. And these
were all visions. So, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu got situations when he was
in, even in Puri, what to speak of when he was in Vrindavan. So, these are
revelations that Krishna gives. And these revelations conquer the heart and they
have the great, great fortune. So, we will get this fortune gradually. But right
now, when we are, we understand things from scriptural description and then
we use our body, "hrsikena hrsikesa", in the service of the Lord, and gradually
we will get spiritual perception, scriptural, spiritual revelation. And then we
will be able to perceive the dham.

So, Bha..., Bhaktivinoda Thakur says at Navadvip Dham, Mahatmi and other places,
that the dham is covered by yogamaya. And it is not perceivable for everyone.
So, that covering of yogamaya is removed by the endeavors, or purification of
the sadhaka combined with the descend of the mercy of Krishna through the
devotees. So, in this way, we can all perceive the dhama.

So, now, let us go back to the hierarchy, and look at Ma..., so, when we talked
about Mathura. Mathura is manifest in the material world. Now, Mathuri, Puri,
when it says, it is the large area, the Mathura district. So, now, within the
Mathura area itself, you could say, within Mathura district as we have it
geographically, then we have Vrindavan. Vrindavan especially refers to the
twelwe forests of Vrindavan, dvadasha-kanana. So, these are the place where
Krishna performs pastimes. So, Krishna's appearing itself is glorious, but
at the same time, Krishna did not stay for very long in Mathura. Now, after He
was born, he was immediately taken away from Mathura. And even after he came
back, he did not stay for very long time in Mathura. Because Jarason kept
attacking. So, he stayed for a few years and then immediately left after that.

So, therefore, Vrindavan was the place where Krishna performed most intimate
pastimes. Krishna, after that, went to Dwarka, and stayed in Dwarka also. But
Vrindavan, He performed the most intimate pastimes. So, therefore, higher than
Mathura is Vrindavan. Because in Vrindavan, the twelwe forests are there and
very intimate pastimes, all the five rasas are manifested in their full splendor
over there in Vrindavan. And now after that, in Vrindavan also, Vrindavan is also
large place. So within that large place of Vrindavan, there is, there are many
many holy places. All of them are extremely sacred. Here, he talks about
Govardhan. So, Govardhan, what is the specialty of Govardhan? It is that Krishna
performed, actually Krishna personally lifted, Krishna tended the cows, and
Prabhupada writes that there were meeting pastimes with Radharani over there.
So, what does it mean? Speciality of Govardhan is, that, actually, generally
speaking, when Krishna's pastimes, there would be one rasa being reciprocated
one time, but in the case of this particular pastime, actually, many rasas were
reciprocated. In the case of this particular pastime, how many rasas were
reciprocated? Because Krishna was with all his devotees at one particular time,
at one time only, for those seven days, He was accepting food from Yashoda mayi,
he was performing vatsala-rasa, he was joking, joking with Madhumangal and
others, sakhya-rasa was there, and the gopis were beholding His beauty. He was
beholding the gopis' beauty, madhurya-rasa was there. And everybody was there.

So, so Govardhan arranged for this very special occasion, when all the devotees
could relish the pastimes of Krishna at the same time. It is very special. And
beyond that, further, actually Govardhan served Krishna in the sense that
Krishna used Govardhan as an umbrella for protection. So Govardhan renders an
intimate service. And the gopis who are the greatest devotees, they call
Govardhan as Haridasa Variya, this is the greatest among the haridasas, such an
exalted devotee, Haridasa Variya. And then after that, not only the gopis talked
about, gopis exalt Krishna, sorry, the gopis exalt Govardhan, but the Govardhan
is a place where actually not only at that one particular time of cause all the
rasas, pastimes were performed, but Govardhan provides so many facilities for
performing pastimes. There are queues where Krishna can perform, could take,
tae a rest from the Sun. Or Krishna can, when the rains are there, Krishna can
take a rest over there. He could perform pastimes with the gopis, with the
gopas, and the cows can graze over there. And beyond that, the, the rocks of
Vrindavan, you know, when Krishna puts His feet on them, they just become soft
and tender, so that can be cushion for Krishna. And there are streams which
provide fresh, delicious water. And there are so many trees which provide
wonderful fruits. And there are so many flower wearing trees, and shrubs,
it is, it is splendorously beautiful place. So, because so many won..., it
provides so many facilities and it is for performing Krishna's pastimes, so it
is considered even higher.

And then, on that Vrindavan, on that Govardhan itself, actually, or around the
Govardhan, at its periphery, you know, there are Radhakund and, Radhakund and
Shyamakund, they are there. They are like the, it is said, in some ways, they
are like eyes of Govardhan. So, Gova..., Govardhan, it would be considered to be
a person, then these are the eyes. And this is the most special place. So what
is the speciality of Radhakund? So, it is, it is in the Govardhan area itself,
at the foot of Govardhan hill. And it is a place which was personally discovered
by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. So, advanced souls have, since that time, resided
there. So, now, when Krishna comes to this world, He comes in manifest the
spiritual world over here. But then, after that, when He departs from the world,
although the pa..., places and pastimes remain, but Krishna brings that by and
over a period of time, by the power of, by the passage of time itself, things go
down. So, five thousand years ago, Krishna performed wonderful pastimes there.
But five hundred years ago, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Go..., went to
Vrindavan, actually, could not find Radhakund only. Radhakund had gone lost. So,
now, in the scriptures, there is description of killing of Aristasura and there
is the mention of this place where Krishna and Radharani performed intimate
pastimes. So, speciality of Radhakund is that, actually, that what was over there
is manifestation of the love of Radharani for Krishna. Similarly, Shyamakund is
a manifestation of Krishna's love for Radharani, both way. So, it is their love
manifested in a liquid form.

Now, the pastime is very exalted. And when Aristasura was killed a..., by
Krishna. Aristasura had come in the form of a cow. And, and Aristasura, Krishna
killed him, Aristasura was terrorising all the Vrajavasis. Krishna very
heroically killed him. And then the gopis, just for sake of pastime, they said
to Krishna, Krishna, you have killed the cow. You have become a sinner by this.
So, when they heard this, Krishna heard this. Krishna said, oh, it was not a
cow. It was a demon coming in the form of a cow. He says, killing, by killing a
demon, I protected the Vrajavasis. I have not done anything wrong. He said, no,
no, no, no, no. He said, actually, you have ki..., he might have been a demon,
but he was in the form of a cow. You killed the cow. It is very sinful. Oh,
atya, it is so sinful. How... You have to attone for it. So, Krishna, just to
please the gopis, said, yes, how should I attone for it? 50:21
