Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0sZQl0gZf1A
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=0sZQl0gZf1A&redir_token=3R90jYETaYWCeWcMtJa5XvT0rPx8MTU0MTgzMDc4NkAxNTQxNzQ0Mzg2&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_037_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_7_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction, as a part of our Bhakti Sastri.

Today, we will be discussing one of the most important verses of the Nectar of
Instruction. Now, we are entering deep into the heart of sadhana. Now, we talked
about association in the previous three verses, recognition, texts. And now, we
are moving forward to discuss what do we do in association? So, one of the most
important activities that we do is chant the holy names. And this verse is
fundamental. It is most, single most important verse that can sustain us in the
process of sadhana bhakti if we just understand its essence and internalise it.
So, let us look at this text. So, this is text seven of the Upadesamrta.

        syāt kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi-sitāpy avidyā-
        pittopatapta-rasanasya na rocikā nu
        kintv ādarād anudinaṁ khalu saiva juṣṭā
        svādvī kramād bhavati tad-gada-mūla-hantrī

So, "syāt kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi", so "kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi", everything
connected with Krishna, his name, his character, his pastimes, "ādi" means
his pastimes, and other things related with him. "sitā", "sitā" actually refers
to sweetness, sugar candy, Prabhupada translated. "āpy avidyā-", "avidyā-pitto",
so there is an implied comparison here. When there is an explicit comparison, he
was, he was as powerful as a lion. That is called a simile. When there is direct
comparison, his roar was lionine. That means lionine is like a lion. So, he,
that means there is a not implied compa..., there is an implied comparison,
not a stated comparison. So, here, there is implied comparison, that is called a
metaphor. So, "avidyā-" is compared to a "pitto", and "pi...", "pitto", when a
"tapta", "pittopatapta", when the person is afflicted by "pitto", "rasanasya na
rocikā nu", "rasana" is tongue, "na rocikā nu", when the tongue is afflicted by
"pitto", at that time, the, the bi..., because of that bile infection, he has
been referred to joints disease over here, then the person cannot taste anything
sweet.

"na rocikā nu", that which is "sitā", that which is sweet, cannot be tested,
tasted, relished, because of "pittopatapta". But the treatment in, according to
ayurveda, for joint disease "kintv ādarād anudinaṁ khalu saiva juṣṭā", if
somehow, "anudinaṁ", daily, regularly one keeps taking "ādarād", respectfully,
"juṣṭā", one keeps accepting it, then "svādvī kramād bhavati", then gradually
the sugar kane juice, which is sweet, it actually acts as a therapy, a cure for
the si..., si..., sickness. Then as a person gets cured, then the person awakens
the natural taste. And, "tad-gada-mūla-hantrī", the disease is destroyed from
the root. So, the point is that, the same thing which does not taste good, if we
keep taking it, it can cure us, and it will start tasting good. So:

"The holy name, character, pastimes and activities of Krishna are all transcendentally
sweet like sugar candy. Although the tongue of one afflicted by the jaundice of
avidya [ignorance] cannot taste anything sweet, it is wonderful that simply by
carefully chanting these sweet names every day, a natural relish awakens within
his tongue, and his disease is gradually destroyed at the root."

So, the disease is destroyed at the root. Let us see how this happens. Let us
look at Srila Prabhupada's purport here. So, here, there is a chart because of
the overview of the purport. So, the symptoms of disease are that there is no
taste for the name form. And the analogy that is given is for sugar candy,
jaundice. So, ev..., every disease has its particular symptom. And from the
symptom, you have to go back to the cause. So somebody can say, oh, I do not
find Krishna Consciousness relishable. I do not care for it. So, just, that is a
problem definitely. But the deeper problem is a misdirection of our heart. It is
avidya. So, avidya is not just ignorance in terms of philosophical ignorance. It
is ignorance in terms of ignorance about the right object of love. Now, what
happens? What is the cause of this disease? That is described in the next
section. That is individual. That, the, there is ignorance, avidya. And avidya,
what it leads to? Forgetfulness. And what is the forgetfulness that is being
talked about here? The forgetfulness is that:

        jivera svarupa hoy krsnera nitya das

and

        krishna bhuliya jiva bhoga vancha kare
        nikata aste maya taare jhapatiya dhare

So, these verses from the Caitanya Caritamrta are very important. Let us look at
them. First is, "jivera svarupa hoy krsnera nitya das", you know in this one
verse, the whole import of all the vedic wisdom is summarised by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu in one concise sutra like verse. "jivera svarupa hoy krsnera nitya
das". Eternal svarupa of the jiva is to serve the Lord. And it is with this
service attitude that the living entity thrives eternally. The Lord, so, this is
the eternal relationship which we have. Now, when we forget it:

        krishna bhuliya jiva bhoga vancha kare
        nikata aste maya taare jhapatiya dhare

So, how did the soul, who is in the eternal position of loving and serving
Krishna, how does the soul lose that position? That is "krishna bhuliya", if the
soul forgets Krishna. We can apply this in our sadhaka stage also. We are
practicing Krishna Consciousness, but if we are not careful, we forget Krishna.
"krishna bhuliya jiva", and then what happens? "bhoga vancha kare", we all have
the need for happiness. None of us can live without happiness. So, if we do not
get happiness in remembering and serving Krishna, naturally, our hunger for
happiness will need to be fulfilled somewhere else. So, therefore, "bhoga vancha
kare", therefore, the desire to enjoy comes up. And this "bhoga vancha kare",
what does it lead to do? It leads to do "nikata aste maya taare". So, now, I, I
want, I have the desire to enjoy, but some, maya is right next. That means
temptations are right there in our heart, and outside our heart. You know, in
our heart means, that all the past things that we have done wrong, they are
those impressions are there. They are pushing us. And outside the heart means,
around the world, there are so many temptations, and so "jhapatiya dhare", that
maya is situated very close by, "jhapatiya dhare", just catches the soul.

And then, once the soul gets caught in maya, at that time, those impressions
become stronger because of the indulgence, and then the grip of those impression
in future becomes even stronger. And then it is, becomes very difficult to
be released. So, this is how our disease increases. So, once the disease is
increased, soul is distracted by maya. "nikata aste maya taare jhapatiya dhare",
so when the maya catches the living entity, started with maya, then false or bad
shelter. Then, we do anything, somehow or the other, by doing this particular activity,
that particular activity, I will become happy. But all of these are "duracraya",
now, these are not going to be satisfied, they are all also false shelter, and
they are, they let us down. What are these false shelters that we think that?
Wealth will make me happy, sex will make me happy, power will make me happy, and
most of all, we think that the body will make me happy, but all of these, they
let us down. Ultimately the body turns into a source of misery for us. And the
conditioned souls somehow, hope against hope, thinks that I will be able to
enjoy. So, actually, the history of universal defeat has not dampened the hope
of eminent victory for the conditioned soul, History of universal defeat,
whoever has tried in material existence to gain happiness, they all suffered,
they all died.

So that there is a history of universal defeat. Everybody has defeated. But it
has not dampened the hope of eminent victory. The conditioned soul thinks, oh, I
will just gain, I will just gain this. This is, this is a quote from Ravindra
Svarupa Prabhu's book, endless love. He says, so, we all think that, I just now,
next day, tomorrow, next week, I will become happy. Now, certainly, we need hope
in life, but we do not need false hopes. We need true hopes. Material world,
things are not going to become better in terms of dead being a permanent
settlement. Certainly, in the material world, there are ups and downs. And when
there are downs, we do need hope that things will become better. But if we focus
all our efforts on just improving materially, then we are underutilising our
intelligence, and we are, actually, in many ways, misusing our energy. Because
if we just focus, let all our energy and intelligence focused, stay focused on
improving things materially, then it is a lost cause.

It is like trying to find a comfortable situation, ocean. Sometimes, the ways
may not be so jerky and strong, and the way the ocean may seem comfortable also.
But afterwards, when the waves used to come, it is going to toss and throw the
person up and down. So, this world is like a place with waves. So, that is why,
the scriptures tell us that work, whatever is required at the level of duty to
try to im..., keep things materially stable, but focus one's energy on spiritual
advancement. Because spiritual advancement is ultimately what will make us
happy. It will take us to eternal shelter. And that comes by the chanting of the
holy names. So, now, at an individual level, the soul forgets Krishna and gets
caught. And then, at a collective level, we will see that, at a collective
level, there is atheistic leadership.

So, atheistic leadership, what do we mean by that? Now, today's politicians,
today's leaders, they do not care for God at all. They may give some nominal lip
service to God if that helps them to get votes. There, there was a famous
politician, that person was an atheists. And in one of his books, he writes, I
just cannot understand how people can bow, bow down to stone images and imagine
that, there is, that is God, when actually there is no God. But he says, anyway,
in this country, because so many believe in these, these ancient books, which
talk about this sort of things. So, it is useful to have a working knowledge of
these things. And by this working knowledge, one can influence these leaders
towards doing good, it is people towards good things. So, the approach was I
will decide what is good and I will use the scriptures, quoting them
secta..., sectarianly, to make people do good things. And actually, what the
scriptures tell us about God and everything, that is all false. So, this is
misappropriation of God's words for one's own purposes.

And it is very demoniac, Prabhupada says. Just as Ravana wanted to enjoy Sita,
Lord Rama's property for his own pleasure. So, like that, there are people who,
if they are openly atheistic, they will say that there is no God, but in a, in
places where people have religious sentiments, and saying, I am, I do not
believe in God, that will not give them political awards. So, they will not say
that. What they simply say is, just, actually, do not take this God business
seriously. And we can quote some God verses, but I will tell you my programme,
then you will act according to my programmes. So, these people, what happens
because of them is, when people are misled by these blind leaders, at that
time, Prabhupada is blaming, Prabhupada said that they misled them, they are,
they are "na maa dunkatino", Krishnas quotes in 7.15. Those people do not
surrender to Him at all, and among them, there are "asuram bhavam asritah
mayayapahrta-jnana", those whose knowledge has been stolen away and those who
are openly demoniac. Today, oppose devotional endeavors. And they personally
never surrender to Krishna.

So, what are we talking about over here? They are talking about why people are
unable to have a taste for the chanting of the holy names. There is an individual
cause for it and there is a collective cause for it. So, we are looking at the
collective cause right now. The collective cause is that there is an overall
culture of materialism and atheism which bombards people and leaves no time,
energy or inclination to turn wholeheartedly towards spirituality. Now, people
may do some things religious, just because it looks good in a particular
culture, but that is far from a transformation imbibing or adoption of
spirituality. So, now, what is, once you understand the cause, then we look at
what is the cure? So, what is the cure? The cure is chanting of the holy names.
So, now, how do we chant? The method is we have to chant attentively. Svadvi, it
is said that kaludinam:

        anudinam adarat kintva adarad anudinam kaluse vista 

So, "adarat" is respectful, with care and attention. And then, actually, this is
the easy process for us to purify ourselves. Now, how does it, how is it easy?
Chanting does not require any yogic gymnastics. It does not require anything
which was very difficult to do. "ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam", as is quoted there. So,
actually, these two are different examples. One is that the mirror is there, the
dust is there on the mirror, so one cannot see anything over there. So, the
mirror, when the dust is removed, then one can see, use the mirror for its
purpose of seeing. So, similarly, when our mind is clean, then we can have clear
perception of reality. Otherwise, the perception remains unclear. And in fire
refers to how fire is covered by smoke. There are many places where the fire
metaphor is used, but generally, fire is covered by smoke, we remove the smoke
fire also refers to that which burns away dirt. So, our things that are
obstructing, and we burn to ashes by fire.

"mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaḿ", it extinguishes. There is another metaphor there that
because the fire is the cause of suffering, and fire can also be extinguished by
the chanting of the holy names. So, with respect to fire, we can have three
different metaphors and there are many actually. So, one is, that just as fire
is covered by smoke, similarly, the consciousness of the soul is covered by the
mo..., ignorance. This comes in the Bhagavad Gita, "dhumenavriyate vahnir",
3.38. And then, that is one metaphor.

So, then, by the process of purification, there is, the smoke can be removed and the
fire can blaze forward. So, like that, one can purify oneself by chanting. The
other metaphor of fire is, so here, fire is the original consciousness and smoke
is what is covering. And purification is removing the smoke.

The other is, metaphor is that the fire itself is the purifier, and the
impurities are like the f..., like the things that we want to burn away. So,
when we practice devotional service. Devotional service is like a flame which
awakens in our heart and that purifies us, frees us of all sinful reactions.
And then we move forward in spiritual life by that way.

So, after this, the other metaphor which we could understand over here is that
of fire itself acting as the object which is burning,
"saḿsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka-", so f..., there is a blazing fire, the material
existence, and we are afflicted in that fire. So, it has to be extinguished.
That comes in the same "ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaḿ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaḿ",
That great flame gets extinguished completely. So, in this way, the fire
metaphor can be used multiple ways to illustrate spiritual truths. So, where do
we get the cure? We get the cure within the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness. So, Srila Prabhupada says that this is like a spiritual hospital
to cure us, all of us. And we will discuss the nine stages of bhakti a little
later. But the first stage is shradda. When we give, having association,
shradda. We come in the association of devotees, little faith, and then after
that, we lead to sadhu sangha. We come in the association of devotees. And then
we hear from the devotees. Then the devotees tell us do bhajani kriya, start
chanting of the holy name, start practicing spiritual life. So, chant sixteen
rounds, follow the four regulatively principles, and when we do this, anartha
nivritti happens. And so, the impurities in the heart start going away. So,
there are examples which Prabhupada gives of, how one is able to follow the
principles, which one may not have been able to follow earlier.

And then, then one gradually, gets, anartha nivritti happens basically, the
disease goes away. And then, you know, in any, every therapy, there are two
parts. The first part is removal of the negative. And then third is, second
part if the restoration of the positive. So, for example, there is, if a person
has got a terrible disease. Let us say, TB or something, which, the treatment
goes for three, four, five, six months, itself. It is an acute TB. Then for,
say, three months, a person takes acute treatment. And the germs come
under control. And the disease goes away. But because the disease was there, so
the person is internally weakened. The person is internally weakened. The person
internally is not having any energy. So sickness has gone away, and the health
has not yet come back. So, then people go to places like sanatorium, where they
just recover, and regain their health, recuperation. So, recuperation is, not
the same as being treated, because at that time, there is no acute treatment,
there necessarily. The infection has gone, but the health has not yet come. So,
the health gradually comes by doing recuperation. So, similarly, there is a
state beyond cure. What is the stage beyond cure?

The stage beyond cure is that one comes to bhava. So, actually, at, when anartha
nivritti has gone off, nistha ru..., nistha ruci have come, the by that time,
one has come to the stage of already one is more or less healed, so bhava means
one started experiencing spiritual emotions. So, Prabhupada is putting,
preliminary awakening, awakening the dormant love of Godhead. And then, that is
characterised, Prabhupada explains, by symptoms. What is that? One has, has no
bodily concept left anymore. I am not the body. One once understands it very
very clearly, we understand it theoretically now, but that time, one has no
connection only. One understands that I have eternal svarupa, and I have eternal
relationship with Krishna. And while operating in this world, person clearly
understands, this is Krishna, this is maya. And if I am going to Krishna, there
is light, if I am going to maya, there is darkness. So:

	kṛṣṇa—sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra
	yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa, tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra

One understands this very clearly. And so, one is undisturbed by maya. So,
overall, in this purport, Srila Prabhupada gives a comprehensive overview of the
process of devotional service by which one can "svadvi kramad bhavati", one can
gain access to eternal happiness. One, all of us want to be happy. And the
process of Krishna Consciousness ultimately is meant to make us happy. But there
is a process involved in that. So, we will focus here, in this class, on
happiness. You know, how we need to use our intelligence to persevere in the
process of Krishna Consciousness. All of us have a higher taste and a lower
taste. The higher taste is the happiness we get in connection with Krishna. The
lower taste is the happiness we get in connection with worldly things.
Especially if the things are immoral, they are sensual and immoral,
anti-devotional. That is even more detrimental. Now, among these tastes, the, we
have to give up the lower taste and we have to move to the higher taste. So, how
do we do that? For that, we understand that nature of material happiness and
spiritual happiness. So, let us look at it.

So, essentially, we can look at this graph of happiness versus time. So, the y
axis is happiness, the x axis is time. Now, if you see material happiness, there
is some happiness in youth when our body is young and healthy. Then, yes, we can
eat. We can do all sorts of things. We can enjoy. But then, that graph keeps
going down, down, down, because over a period of time, the body's capacity to
enjoy decreases, diminishes, and after some time, the body loses all its
capacity to enjoy. And then it goes into negative axis where we have sickness,
we have disease, and the person is practically, every moment is filled with
pain. So that is how this graph goes towards the negative axis. Significantly,
even in youth, the happiness that we actually enjoy is limited. It is not that
in youth, the person can enjoy all the time. There is some enjoyment, some of
the time, but after that, there is also suffering. So, therefore, actually, the
happiness is finite. And then, if you compare that with the graph of spiritual
happiness. So, spiritual happiness means that initially it starts from little
less. So, when we come to the temple, we chant Hare Krishna, we dance in the
kirtan, we feel happy.

But then after that, when we go back to our places, then our, the mind starts
tormenting. Oh, this, I want to do this. I want to do that. And so, the
happiness does not stay always with us. But as we keep practicing spiritual
life, as our attraction to Krishna increases, our happiness also increases. So,
how does this happen? It happens by the gradual process of purification. So,
the, so the material happiness will, the graph will go towards negative,
negative, but spiritual happiness, the graph will keep going towads positive,
positive. And ultimately, we will get infinite happiness, when we connect with
Krishna with complete love. So, now, let us look at the nature of happiness
further. This is based on Bhagavad Gita 18.37 and 18.38. We will be discussing
this again when we come to Bhagavad Gita, but that time, it will be brief.

So, here, we see that, here, P and N, some of you may have studied eletronics,
it is not PN and NP diodes. P refers to poison. N refers to Nectar. So, Krishna
explains in the Bhagavad Gita that the nature of happiness and goodness, that is
similar to the nature of spiritual happiness. And the nature of happiness and
passion that is more or less, overall, the nature of most of the material
pleasure that people chase after in life. So, the nature is different because
spiritual happiness is categorised by, Krishna says:

	yat tad agre visam iva
	pariname 'mrtopamam
	tat sukham sattvikam proktam
	atma-buddhi-prasada-jam

So, He says "yat tad agre visam iva", which tastes like poison in the
beginning. But "pariname 'mrtopamam", which takes like nectar in the end. That
is happiness in the mode of goodness. And that is the nature of spiritual
happiness also. So, now, if you see, the poison is initial, and the nectar is
long after that, but still, we have to penetrate to the poison before we can
reach the nectar. So, in that sense, there is a process that we have to follow.
And then, in contrast with that, with respect to the material happiness, Krishna
says:

        visayendriya-samyogad
        yat tad agre 'mrtopamam
        pariname visam iva
        tat sukham rajasam smrtam

He says, that which takes like nectar in the beginning, but poison in the end.
That is happiness in the mode of passion. That is the nature of most material
happiness. We have attraction to certain things, and then we want to enjoy them.
Even if we get to enjoy them, there is, then there will be a pleasure, but after
that, so much complication. You know, if people get addicted to things, then
there is so much suffering because of that, even if they do not get addicted to
such dangerous things. So, everything material is temporary. And when we lose
it, there is suffering. So, there is nectar in the beginning, but poison in the
end. So, this is a good visual image for us to keep in mind with respect to
chanting also. Because we are initially diseased, so we may feel there is poison
in the beginning. But if we keep persevering, then the poison will end and the
nectar will start. And that is what we want. We want to go beyond the poison to
the nectar. Let us look at this from another perspetive now.

How do we say that material happiness is, in a sense, false? So that it is
temporary. So, actually speaking, if we look at it, there are senses and there
are sense objects. So, the senses are temporary. The sense objects are
temporary. That is why whatever pleasure will come to them is also temporary.
This is based on Bhagavad Gita 5.22:

        ye hi samsparsa-ja bhoga
        duhkha-yonaya eva te

Why?

        ady-antavantah kaunteya
        na tesu ramate budhah

He says that the wise person understands that material pleasures have beginning
and end. That is why they are sources of misery. And a wise person does not find
delight in them.

So, they have beginning and end. Senses are finite. Senses are limited. Senses
are temporary. Sense objects are f..., are temporary. Their chart are temporary.
That is why the con..., the pleasure that comes from their contact is also
temporary. So what gives us pleasure is the desire to enjoy. The eyes want to
see beautiful forms. The tongue wants to taste delicious food. And that co..,
gives some pleasure. But that pleasure is limited. So, most people think that I
do not get pleasure because the objects are not good enough. I do not have good
enough objects. You know. People see movies and they think, oh, there are such
good looking people out there. You know, the person I have with me is not so
good looking. Or people think that I am driving a car. And, oh, I want a simple
vehicle. That person has got such a good looking car. So, most of the times, we
think that I am not able to enjoy because the objects that I have for enjoyment
are not good enough. But the fact is, even if we had the best objects for
enjoyment, our capacity to enjoy is limited.

Our capacity to enjoy, senses, you know, even if a person got, had, had one's
own five-star hotel, where the best food items are served. And the person can
eat freely, whatever is cooked over there. But how much can the person, can that
person eat twenty-four hours a day? No. So, the capacity of the senses to enjoy
is limited. And because of that, person cannot enjoy. In the past, in some
places like Egypt, there was some kings who, you know, tried to g..., pay their
physicians to make painless vomiting pills. Their was, idea was they would have
golden plates, huge plates for they would huge feasts cooked and they would eat
it all up. Now, after we eat it, the stomach gets full. One still, what happens
is we want to enjoy more, but the body does not have any more capacity to enjoy.
So, what they would get, they would have another golden bowl, and we some,
their, their physician would get some painless vomiting pills. And they take
that the pill, bloeee, vomit everything out. And they would get another feast
and eat it again.

So, in this way, they would try to expand the body's capacity to enjoy. But you
know, it is, it is not just the stomach that has a capacity. There is a whole
digestive system which has to be at the pressure. And that has not been tried
thereafter because it just harms the body terribly. So, the point is, it does
not work. We cannot expand the body's capacity to enjoy. That is the nature of
material happiness. Now, the, now as compared to spiritual happiness, how do we
get it? Krishna says:

        sukhena brahma-samsparsam
        atyantam sukham asnute

In 6.28, He says, s..., s..., s..., "brahma-samsparsam", by contact with the
Supreme Absolute Truth, who is referred to here as by, by brahma. "atyantam sukham
asnute", one gets the supreme happiness. "sukhena brahma-samsparsam", so what is
this "brahma-samsparsam"? That is the contact of the soul, ultimately with
Krishna. Because Krishna is "param brahma" as the Bhagavad Gita says in 10.12.
So, now, when we contact Krishna, we experience spiritual happiness. But that
contact is not physical. It is not just physical. That it is not that if I go to
the temple and touch the feet of the deities, I feel some current of happiness
within me. It is a ble..., it is blessing. It is very purifying to touch the
feet of the deities. But the happiness comes not just by contact. It is by
service. So, when we chant the holy names also, it is when we chant with a
service attitude, that we experience the higher happiness of Krishna
Consciousness. So, when there is a desire to serve between the soul and Krishna,
then the soul and Krishna come together. And that is how contact happens. That
contact is at the level of consciousness. Our consciousness has to experience
Krishna. And then that gives us happiness.

Now, if we see, the difference is that the soul is eternal and Krishna is
eternal as compared to both material senses, and material sense objects being
temporary. And that is why when the two come together, the happiness that will
result will be eternal. That is the happiness that we all aspire for. So, as
compared to the temporary desire, temporary happiness that comes from the
contact of sense, sense objects, the happiness that will come from the contact
of the soul with Krishna will be eternal. So, when we are chanting the holy
name, this is what we are trying to do. The soul is trying to contact Krishna.
Yes, there is a sound vibration and there is the tongue and the ear. That is
there, definitely. So, we could say it is all material. No. But Krishna is
transcendental. And ultimately, it is not just the tongue and the ears. It is
the soul who is contacting Krishna. You know, it is not that the soul does not
contact Krishna. That means if we are not attentive, our consciousness is not
experiencing Krishna, then chanting will just appear like a burden, just keep
doing it mechanically.

But when we contact Krishna, then we become purified. So, the soul is currently
sleeping. Or we could say, it, now, normally, when we use the word sleeping, you
know, Caitanya Mahaprabhu has that fame, Bhaktivinoda Thakur envisions Caitanya
Mahaprabhu saying "jiv jago, jiv jago, gauracanda bole". So, now, we often use
the, the soul is sleeping. Now, what does exactly the soul sleeping mean? Now,
is the soul actually phy..., physically sleeping? The soul does not have
physical body, so we cannot have physical sleep. But what it means is, that just
as when we are sleeping, we are disconnected from the world around us, we are
disconnected from reality and we go into a, into dream world, which seem like a
pseudo reality. So, like that, the soul has become disconnected from reality.
That is the reality of its relationship with Krishna. And it is connected with
the pseudo reality. That is the play of this world. And the soul wants, the soul
has to come out of this. How will the soul come out of it? By the practice of
devotional service.

So, the sound vibration wakes us up. So, just as in a dream also, person is
active, but it is a, it is a, it is in a dream world. So, like that, the
sleeping souls are also active right now. But they are active in an illusory
sense. Like in a dream, we are doing various things. So, we are awakened by the
sound of the holy name. So, essentially, the contact is between, when chanting
is happening, it is not a verbal activity. It is not an oral activity, although
the wor..., tongue and the ears are involved. It is not just a verbal, oral
activity. Ultimately, the heart has to be involved. So, the heart is a place,
the soul is reciting. And when the soul calls out to Krishna and hears the sound
vibration of Krishna's names. Then, the soul awakens. Then, the contact between
the soul and Krishna revives the natural attraction between the soul and
Krishna. And that increases the contact further. And the greater the contact,
the greater is the happiness. So, this is how the soul experiences spiritual
happiness by the practice of devotional service.

And it is this practice that we want to seek for, we want to pursue, we want to
cultivate in our spiritual life. Now, one of the very important things for us to
persevere in our spiritual life is to recognise that my current condition is a
disease. So, how do I understand that my current condition is a disease? Now,
one of the characteristic of a disease is, if I have joint disease, one
characteristic is, is that I am not able to taste sweet things. Another
characteristic is that actually I feel uncomfortable. You know, I feel sickly. I
feel as if I have no strength. So, the o.., the one side is that I do not get
happiness. And the other side is that I get misery. So, we will now look at how
to drive this metaphor of disease deeper in. We will try to understand how our
material existence, our material condition, material situation is actually a
place of misery.

So, we see that we all need to make our intelligence FIT. So, FIT means, we have
to make our intelligence healthy, strong, FIT. So, FIT describes the
characteristics of material enjoyment. Material enjoyment, its characteristics
are Futility, Insubstantiality, and Temporarility. So, futility means that many
times we make a dreams and, or fantasies for enjoyment and we do not get it
only. So, that is futility. So, that happens when, say, somebody dreams that I
will get a big feast to eat, that tomorrow, there is a feast, and there is going
to be gulab jamuns in there. And gulab, I love gulab jamuns. But then I go there
and I come to know that it was all, all rumor. There was no gulab jamun only
there. So, we hanker for something, and we do not get it, that is futility.
Another time is, another type of possibility is that we hanker for something, we
get it, but it does not live up to our expectations. The gulab jamun is there,
but the person who made the gulab jamun made a rec..., mess of the recipe. And
the gulab jamun does not taste good at all. So, it is insubstantial. We get the
object. First is that we do not get the object. We get the object, but it is not
good enough. That is insubstantiality.

Third is temporality. Temporality means we get the object, it gives us enjoyment,
but then after that, it gets over. So, I go there, I get the gulab jamuns. But
they get over. Or my stomach's capacity to, gets over. And then, I cannot enjoy
anymore. So, the, when we contemplate on this, then we can get rid of the
fantasies for happiness through material enjoyment. So, now, let us contrast
this material enjoyment, how it is ultimately a doomed project. Because when we
seek material enjoyment, only of these three things are going to happen. We crave
for it and do not get it. We crave for it, get it, but it does not live up
to our expectations. We crave for it, get it, it lives somewhat to our
expectations, but then it leaves us. And then again we lose everything. So, in
this way, actually it is a lost cause. It is a doomed project. So, what is the
way out for us? There is an alternative. That is spiritual happiness. So, let us
look at spiritual happiness.

This is SING your way to happiness. This is an acronym, S, I, N, G. So what does
this refer to? It refers to four characteristics of spiritual happiness. So,
first is, 'S' is special. How is it special? Because if you see, all living
beings are experiencing material enjoyment. Whatever little enjoyment there, all
living beings are getting it. But it is only human beings who can experience
spiritual happiness. So, in that sense, spiritual happiness is a special
privilege of human beings. And even among all the innumerable living beings that
are there, human beings that are there, co..., large, infinite number of, not
infinite ultimately, but so large number, out of that, the number of people who
are actually practicing spiritual life and seeking spiritual happiness are so
few. So, those who are practicing spiritual life are rare. They are special. As
Krishna says in 7.3, "manusyanam sahasresu".

So, actually, everybody wants to do something special, do, want something.
Un..., out of the way, something extraordinary, something which will make a
person stand out. Now, in materi..., material life, people try to be special by
adopting latest fashions. You know. I want to have this hairstyle. I want to
have this dress. I want to have this car. I want to have this watch, this
cellphone. And that way, I try to seem special. But ultimately, material life is
all about the same old thing, "puna punas caruta carunana", enjoying the same
old thing, eating, sleeping, mating, defending. But spiritual life offers us
an opportunity to do something very special. So, it is a special kind of
happiness. And those who want to break the mood, do something, and be
trailbla...blazers as they say, be trend setters, be, do something special, new.
They can choose spiritual happiness. That is a first point that so few people
are actually seeking it among the millions and billions of people that are there
on the, on this planet. What to speak of all the other living beings.

Then, other characteristic of spiritual happiness is, I is increasing. Spiritual
happiness, unlike material happiness, does not decrease over time. On the
contrary, it increases. Because the more we learn to love and serve Krishna, the
more our contact becomes stronger, stronger, stronger. And when our contact
with Krishna becomes stronger, then naturally by that, we experience greater
happiness. So, as we love Krishna more and more, if we remember Him more and
more. So, Krishna is like a reservoir of happiness, and if we go connect more
and more with that reservoir, we will get more happiness.

So, in material life, the happiness is like a drop. But in Krishna
Consciousness, the happiness is like an ocean. But unfortunately, we are at the
periphery of the ocean. So, we will get a little water. We are not gone into the
ocean. But the more we go into the ocean, the more water we will get. And this
is not just water. It is like a nectar. That is supremely relishable. So, the
more we connect with Krishna, the more our happiness will increase in spiritual
life. "anandambudhi-vardhanam", is "vardhan", and when there is constant
happiness, "prati-padam purnamritaswadanam", at every moment, we will experience
the happiness. So, how does this happeniness come? It, we discussed about the
soul here. The so..., Krishna here. There is a contact. And the contact happens
through the desire to serve. So, as the desire to serve will increase and the
contact will be greater. And then the happiness will also be greater. So, in
spiritual life, our happiness will keep increasing. And that is what we always
want, isn't it? So, our happiness will never go down, on down..., go a downward
curve as it will happen in material life.

Then, after that, 'N' is non-dependent. So, non-dependent means that actually,
in material life, we are always dependent on external things for happiness. How
are we dependent? Because if a person, at a very gross level, if a person is
addicted to alcohol, or to drugs, and the person is very dependent on the
alcohol or drugs for getting happiness, whatever that happi..., experience is.
We cannot call it happiness. But even if somebody called it happiness, that
person is so terribly dependent on that for happiness. But even if a person,
note, somebody is a sports fan, then that person is dependent on the favorite
team winning, and even if he says, oh, I just love the sports, I do not care who
wins, but still the person is dependent on either going to the stadium to watch
the match or he is dependent on the television programme that comes, and that
broadcasting that happens, electricity being there, and the television set being
there, for the person to see and enjoy. So, any material enjoyment that we take,
it makes us depend onto external things. And because external things are not in
control, they may be there today. They may go away tomorrow. Then our happiness
will also go away with that.

But with respect to spiritual life, we become non-dependent on any system. We
use the word non-dependent, not independent. Because we do not become
independent in the sense of we become separate from Krishna. Actually, to be...,
become dependent on Krishna, it is the supreme form of independence. Because
when we become dependent on Krishna, we become depe..., independent of
everything else for our happiness. We depend only on Krishna for happiness. And
that gives us supreme happiness. Because Krishna is always in our heart and he
will never leave us. So, the more we co..., connect with Krishna, the more we
experience spiritual happiness and the less we need to depend on externals for
happiness. That is how we become happy. We become non-dependent on anything
else. Devotee can go anywhere, chant Hare Krishna, think of Krishna, speak about
Krishna, and be happy. Srila Prabhupada went to America. But wherever he went,
he was glorifying Krishna. And because he was connected with Kri..., love with
Krishna, he was happy everywhere.

And last 'G' is generous. Generous means what? That actually, this is the
happiness, our happiness will make others happy. That is the wonderful thing
about spiritual happiness. That, when a, when a devotee relishes Krishna
Consciousness and the devotee gets taste in Krishna Consciousness, realisation
in Krishna Consciousness, vigor in Krishna Consciousness. Then, the devotee
shares that with others. And by that, others also learn. Others also feel
inspired. Others will also get benefited more towards that happiness. If you
contrast that with most forms of material happiness. Actually, if there are, if
there are fifty rasgullas and there are f..., two, twenty-five devotees. Then
everybody will get two. But if somebody wants more, one person takes ten instead
of two, then what happens is, four other people will not get any rasgullas, or
ot..., many other people will have, they are going to share, then they will get
less. So, in material life, because the enjoyment is limited, so one person's
enjoyment is at the expense of other's, person's enjoyment. Whereas in spiritual
life, our enjoyment, the more we chant, dance, become purified, develop love for
Krishna, the more, not only we relish happiness, but we share that happiness
with others. And that way, we become not only ourselves happy, but we share that
happiness with others. So, it is generous sort of happiness. Generous in the
sense that we relish happiness and we can about, we can share this happiness
with others. So, that is why the gopis also say "bhūri-dā janāḥ", those who
speak about you Krishna:

	tava kathāmṛtaḿ tapta-jīvanaḿ
	kavibhir īḍitaḿ kalmaṣāpaham
	śravaṇa-mańgalaḿ ...

So, it describes that those who speak about you, they do auspiciousness for all.

	bhuvi gṛṇanti ye bhūri-dā janāḥ

sri...

	śravaṇa-mańgalaḿ śrīmad ātataḿ

That those who speak about you Krishna, they r..., they offer nectar that
reduces the burning hearts of the conditioned souls. And those sound vibrations
about your glories, they are filled with spiritual power. And they bring
auspiciousness of, life of the, all those who hear it, and in this way, they
have the greatest welfare workers. So, it is, so tho..., when we experience
spiritual happiness, actually, we help others also to become happy. So, in this
way, when we are chanting Hare Krishna, we have to actually be convinced. It is
not just for our own good. Sometimes, we feel, oh, there are so many problems in
the world. What is my chanting going to do for my problems? I should be doing 
something practical. Actually, our chanting is the most practical thing that we
can do. Because by our chanting, we become purified. And when we become
purified, when we experience spiritual happiness by that, we can share that
spiritual happiness with others. So, attentive chanting is not just something we
do for our own purification, not just for the pleasure of our spiritual master
and Krishna. But it is also for the benefit of the world. Because when we chant,
we experience spiritual happiness. Then, we do not co..., ourselves come under
the control of lust, anger, greed. And when we come under the control of lust,
anger, greed, then we are dragged about, and we do things which harm others, and
which trouble others, which harm ourselves and harm others also.

So, we want to become free from such troubles. And the way we will become free
from such troubles is by chanting. So, we minimise the problem and we make a
positive contribution towards the solution. So, we need to understand that, by
chanting, what is going to happen is, it is special. How many people are
experiencing the happiness of the holy name? It is going to increase as we
develop more and more attraction to the holy name. And it is non-dependent. If I
just develop a taste for the holy name. I have a permanent gulab jamun on my
tongue. Whenever I want, I chant, and I get happiness over there. You know, so, that
is how a devotee will be. In fact, it is not just the gulab jamun. Rupa Goswami
says that this happiness is practically so great that I cannot even conceive of
it, I:

        no jane janita kiyadbhir amrtaih krsneti varna-dvayi

How much nectar is there in the holy name, I do not know. And then, it is
generous. When we, when we sing in kirtans, when we glorify Krishna, others will
also benefit by that. Now, let us look at how we proceed in pursuing this
happiness. So, there is intelligence and there is the mind. So, 'I' refers
intelligence. 'M' refers to the mind. So what happens this is, intelligence can
understand all this. Oh, this is all good. This higher spiritual happiness,
higher is better, I want to pursue. The mind does not understand. Our mind
just says, oh, I want to enjoy this. So, actually to make the intelligence
high, greater, stronger than the mind, we have to do things.

There is conviction and there is commitment. Conviction means we
philosophically understand clearly. You know, this is a pleasure that will lead
me to misery. I do not want to go in this direction. And this is a path where
there may be poison in the beginning, but there will be en..., en..., nectar in
the end. So, I will persevere in that. So, we need conviction.

And then after conviction comes commitment. We all have to make commitments.
Yes. Ev..., like when we take initiation, we take the commitment that come what
may, every day, I am going to chant sixteen rounds. And this commitment ensures
that we keep practicing. So, now, we may wonder that, we may see sometimes
devotees just chanting unattentively, looking here, looking there, and chanting.
We may think, you know, what is the use of such chanting? You know, better
chant lesser rounds, but chant them attentively. What is the need of chanting
sixteen like this so unattentively? Actually, the point is, it is not that
quality will automatically come by its own efforts, by, by, by its own accord.
Sometimes, we may get taste in the holy name. But even if there is no quality,
in many ways, the commitment to quantity acts as a big impetus for the
development of quality. The commitment to quantity acts as an impetus for the
development of quality. How is that?

Actually, when we start chanting regularly, then we decide to chant sixteen
rounds. Now, if we are even using our intelligence a little bit. Then, we will
understand that, ok, now, I have made a vow to chant sixteen rounds. And if I am
going to chant sixteen rounds, I am going to spend two hours in it, one and a
half hour if somebody is a fast chanter. If I am going to spend that much time,
then better let me spend it properly. If I am going to be inattentive, then I will
be bored. And if I am going to spend one and a half hours, two hours every day,
then if I stay inattentive, then I will be, have, going to spend two hours every day
for the rest of my life, for how many years, ele..., every day, I will spend two
hours in wood. So why spend two hours like that in boredom? Let me put a little
effort in this. If I put in effort, by struggle to be inattentive, by that I
will become purified and then I will get taste by it. So, actually, the
commitment to quantity acts as a strong impetus for developing the attentiveness
that will bring quality. So, quality is not something that will just magically
drop in our lap one day from the sky. Quality even in chanting is two way.

Quality in chanting is, one way is that we concentrate. We force ourselves to be
attentive. And then we get taste. That is one way quality comes. Another is
sometimes it may just come by Krishna's mercy. Sometimes, we chant and we feel,
oh, this is, chanting is so good. I want to do this. I want to be seriously
attentive. I want to be focused on the holy name. This is, the quantity can come
both ways. Sorry, the quality can come both ways. But that occasional quality,
whenever it comes, sometimes we just feel inspired to chant. That will, that is
fleeting. And if we depend on it, then our spiritual adva..., our spiritual
journey will be erratic and sporadic. Sometimes, we will move forward, sometimes
we will stop. And when material desires come, then we will just make a u-turn
and go back away from Krishna towards sense gratification also.

But if we want steadiness, then we make a commitment. And then if I decide, I
have to spend two hours every day, then letter, better let me be concentrate.
Let me be attentive. And the more we struggle to be attentive, then the more we
get the taste in the chanting. And by that, we move forward. That is the
commitment. What. So, there is concentra..., there is conviction and there is
commitment. When both of these are there, then we make rapid spiritual
advancement.

So, again, going back to the disease metaphor, which is the theme of this verse
that actually, when we go to a doctor. First is, we have to be convinced. I am,
I am sick and what is doctor is telling me is a treatment. So, once I get the
conviction, then after that comes the next part. It is a commitment. Convinced,
ok, doctor told me take this medicine morning, afternoon, evening. Avoid this,
this, these things. So, I have to make the commitment. The conviction alone is
not enough. The commit..., conviction and commitment, both combined together
lead to the cure. So, similarly, with respect to our spiritual life. We study
the philosophy. And the purpose of studying the philosophy is to understand
that, ok, this, this, this is what is wrong. You know, I am a soul. And I
commend to get happiness, and loving Krishna, but I am now attracted towards
matter. Then the commitment is, I will regulate my attraction to matter and
material enjoyment, and I will, as a discipline, connect myself with Krishna.
This is the commitment.

You know, there is a combination of conviction and commitment, then we make
steady spiritual advancement. Now, among these two, what actually brings
transformation is the commitment. You know, it is, when the patient takes the
medicine, the patient gets cured. But what is important for the taking of the
medicine is that the patient have conviction. Is this treatment will cure me?
And if the patient does not have the conviction, then he will not take the medicine.
Now, similarly for us, you know, it is our remembrance of Krishna, it is our
connection with Krishna, our service to Krishna that will purify us. But we all
need philosophical conviction for that. That is why when we regularly hear
classes, when we study the philosophy diligently, then we understand that this
is what is going to purify me. I must wait. So, we will see that if we stop
studying scripture, if we stop hearing classes, then we will find our impetus to
chant, impetus to stu..., impetus to connect with Krishna go down. So that:

        kintva adaradara duradanam kalusa dhusya 

So, that "adar" should be there in chanting. That "adar" will come when we
stu..., have philosophical conviction.

So, I will conclude with one more metaphor to understand how we should practice
spiritual life and especially chanting. How to make the intelligence stronger
than the mind. So, here, there are four aspects, continuing the disease
metaphor. The intelligence should be like the mind, like a mother. The mind is
going to be like the child. A child sometimes likes one thing and after some
time does not like the same thing. So, the child is very restless. Child is not
very intelli..., not very mature to understand the gravity of situations. So,
for example, imagine this child is sick. Then, the child is sick. Then, the
mother takes the child to the doctor, to the doctor is like the guru. So, when
we are suffering in material existence with our intelligence, we go to the
spiritual master. Now, now, the spiritual ma..., the doctor, when the mother
brings the child, the doctor may just speaks, smile, smile at the child, and
maybe give a chocolate, and be gentle and kind. But the serious discussion will
be with the mother. You know, the child, the doctor will explain to mother. Ok,
this is the disease. And then you have to make sure that the child takes this
treatment, morning, afternoon, evening. So, now, the doctor will primarily speak
to the chi..., the mother, and then, then they will leave. Then, actually making
sure that the child takes the medicine, is the responsibility of the, is the
responsibility of who? The mother. The mother has to take the responsibility by
which the child will take medicine.

Now, similarly, the spiritual master may speak some kind words, may embrace us,
touch us, smile at us, maybe touching on our forehead, and all that, we think,
oh, this is very nice. The spiritual master loves me so much. He is so loving.
He is so kind, so caring. Now, actually that is good. But that is like the
doctor smiling at the child. That is good. But that is not going to cure the
child. And sometimes, we may think, oh, for my spiritual master touched my
forehead. Oh, that means I have got mercy. And now I am going to make spiritual
advancement. No. That is, that is not going to lead to spiritual advancement.
Yes, we got mercy. That is fortunate. But actually, that mercy should encourage
us to take shelter of the mercy of the process of devotional service that the
spiritual master is giving us.

So, when we take shelter of that mercy, then we truly get cured. So, the
spiritual master's philosophical instructions, the, I mean the practical
instructions, how we should mold our life, they are like the doctor speaking to
the intelligence. Spiritual master speaks to our intelligence and by that the
spiritual master helps us to become inspired to practice the process of
devotional service. So then, when we take to the process of devotional service,
and especially centered on chanting of the holy names, then that is like the
mother giving the medicine to the child. And when the mother keeps giving the
medicine to the child, then the child slowly, but surely, becomes cured. You
know, the child may sometimes say, I do not like this medicine. I do not want to
take the medicine. So like that, the mind will say when we are chanting, no, I
do not want to chant. I do not want, I do not want to chant. I do not want to
practice anything. And what does the mother have to do? Be gentle, but firm.
Mother, gently, but firmly, the mother makes the child take the medicine.

Similarly, gently, but firmly, we have to use our intelligence to make sure that
the mind takes the medicine. And by this, we become cured. And slowly then, we
develop the natural spiritual taste. So, the medicine has been given. That is
the holy name. And when we follow this process and take the medicine, then
"tad-gada-mula-hantri", the disease will go away and the natural taste, "svadvi
kramad bhavati", the natural taste for devotional happiness will arouse. And
then bhakti will become "susukam kartum avyayam". Bhakti will become joyful.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
