Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m8o4qMp8EuA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=imM3uMtGHU9z6wiRm0DuvtZfUgt8MTU0MTgzMDU4N0AxNTQxNzQ0MTg3&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_031_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_3_Part_3_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=m8o4qMp8EuA&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction.

We are today going to complete the third of text:

        utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt
        tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt
        saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ
        ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

So till now, we discussed till "tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt". So, last class we
discussed about patience. How we have to practice bhakti patiently knowing that
just as in cultivation, the results come in its own new course. When a woman
conceives, the conception takes its own course. We cannot accelerate it
artificially.

Then, we discussed "tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt". We elaborately discussed how
Srila Prabhupada's statement that neglect of the devotion, the regulative
principles can destroy bhakti. So, in that way, we discussed how the masses are
the opium of religion in the sense that in order to be populistic with the
masses, there is, the problems that first surface in religion becomes diluted,
contaminated, and perverted.

So, now, we will move on and discuss about "saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ". So, it is
interesting that some things are revealed not just by hea..., what is stated,
but in what context it is stated. So, for example, in the Brhan-naradiya Purana,
when it is talking about the chanting of the holy names, it is said that "harer
nama harer nama harer nama", so three times the name of Hari comes, and then
"iva kevalam". That is also an emphasis. You could say fourth and fifth
emphases if you want, and "nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva", so that is three more
emphases in a sense that there are eight points, eight wa..., eight times, this
is emphasised.

So, it is difficult to conceive how in a single sentence, the same point could
be emphasi..., made more emphatic than this. If one message is to be given. This
is given in the, probably, this is probably the most emphatic way in which a
person could give that message. So, once we understand this point "nasty eva
nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha", so like that, when we see something
repeated, that repetation need not necessarily indicate carelessness in speech,
or incoherence, especially when it is coming in a revela..., in a sacred book,
then it means that is a profound meaning over there.

And that profound meaning involves a lot of things. So, here, when we see the
"saṅga-tyāgāt" coming, earlier we had seen that in the previous text, Rupa
Goswami had made the same point, in a different way. What had he made the point
there? There, it was the point of giving up bad association. Now, the same point
is being said over here, "saṅga-tyāgāt". So, actually speaking, giving up bad
association is considered to be a means by which one can advance in devotional
service. So, having bad association will cause destruction of devotional
service, and giving up bad association will cause the development of devotional
service.

So, what does this imply? This simply implies that actually, the, su..., such an
important principle that Rupa Goswami considered it fit to be repeated twice.
So, the double repetation serves its own purpose. It reminds us that it is a
cardinal principle which cannot be neglected. Now, we discussed in the, last
time, when we discussed about bad association, how bad association can influence
us in terms of desires. It can pollute our desires. It can pollute our
intelligence. It can pollute our faith.

So, similarly, good association can purify our desires. It can strengthen our
faith. And it can s..., clarify our intelligence. So, like that, it works both
way. So, in, where all the other points are being talked positively, "utsāhān"
niścayād", "dhairyāt". These are positive does. So why within a positive list, a
negative point is brought about? So, "utsāhān", "niścayād, "dhairyāt",
"tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt", and "sato vṛtteḥ", all these are positive points,
but within that, "saṅga-tyāgāt", that a negative point is brought about,
"saṅga-tyāgāt", giving up bad association. Why such a point is given?

Because this is such a cardinal point that just by giving bad association, the
negative desires that keep coming inside us, will decrease. And we will become
more open to positive spiritual desires. So, we can consider that we are souls.
We are small units of consciousness. And we are present in this vast material
world. And this, this is filled with souls like us. But all these souls
are contaminated by material consciousness, material desires. And we are all
interacting with each other. So, this interaction produces many many material
desires. And those material desires get produced more and more and more, the
result of that is, the spreading, expanding of material existence.

So, when one wants to minimise one's material desires. There are two ways in
which material desires come. One is from inside, from our own memory from the
past. The other is from outside, from the culture. So, now, those which come
from inside, we have to individually fight. That means we do not nourish them.
We do not cherish them. But we fight them and curve them. And those which come
from outside, that also we have to minimise them. So one of the most powerful
ways of minimising bad association, bad, the contamination due to negative
desires, is to avoid those people who are carriers of those desires.

So, this is not so much a looking down at materialists. That I am pure. You are
impure. And because you are impure, I will not associate with you. This
perspective is not based so much on moral superiority of ourselves or others. It
is based on simple and essential understanding of spiritual health. You know, I
have to try to recover my spiritual health. And if somebody is infected, it is
not that person is necessarily lower than me. But that person's infection should
not come to me.

So, therefore, I have to protect myself. So, when we avoid non-devotee association,
that does not mean that we have to look down at non-devotees and we treat them
as if they are lower than human beings. No, we have to respect everyone.
Caitanya Mahaprabhu said we should respect even a tree. Shou..., a devotee
respects even an ant, what to speak of a human being. So, certainly, human
beings need to be respected, but more important is that we recognise that we
have to protect ourselves.

When a patient is sick in an infected area, or in a, patient is in an area,
person is in an area where there is an epidemic, then the patient, per that
person, who may or may not be a patient, that person has to be careful that,
careful so that the infection does not come up on him or her. So, how will that
ta..., care be taken? That will be by the practice of caution. So, one has to be
cautious. Ok, that some people are infected. I have to keep a safe distance from
them. Similarly, we have to protect ourselves.

Naturally, when we say why should we not feel moral superiority? You know, I am
superior to them. That they are fallen. I am not. Actually, if we look in
our hearts, privately, we recognise that we ourselves are also fallen. The only
difference is that we have been given a process by which we can fall ourselves
from the fallen state. And maybe we have risen ourselves a little bit. And that
is how we have come to a particular state now. So the important point is to
recognise that we are all trying to heal ourselves. And whatever is favorable
for our healing, we have to do.

So, if we look at the healing metaphor, then "utsāhān", "niścayād", "dhairyāt",
we discussed how one has to have faith that the medicine will cure, may have the
enthusiasm to take the medicine, and the patience that, ok, it is not that I can
expect the healing to happen overnight. So, I have to be patient enough for the
treatment to take its course. Then:

        utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt
        tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt

So following the regulative principles means the doctor may say that these are
these things that you have to do, these are things you have to avoid. So,
especially when the things to avoid are told, they have to be followed. Then,
that we discussed earlier about how spiritual life can be practiced at different
levels. That means, you know the standard should be that if a person has
diabetes, it is best the person does not take sugar at all, and just focuses on
taking medicines and healthy food.

But if the person is unable to give up sugar, then it should not mean that the
patient should not be allowed any treatment only. If you are going to eat sugar,
I will not treat you at all. Doctors cannot say like that. Doctors also
have to accommodate and provide some system by which while taking sugar, or, so
that person can take the medicine and at least tain some semblance of health,
surely that person will not recover as well or as fast as someone who follows
the treatment fully and avoid sugar entirely, or minimise sugar to bare level,
bare minimum, but such a person who cannot live without sugar, that person is
allowed sugar, but is also told that to take the medicine.

So, there, the point is not to cure the person, but to prevent the worsening of
the condition of that person, and to help that person to make some minimum,
minimal elevation. Similarly, some people are so materially contaminated
that they cannot approach transcendence immediately. So, for such people, there
is a progression given. And for them, the partial treatment may be given, where
they may be told that you can practice, you can just take these medicines, but
avoid that. So, yes, no, we cannot avoid those. Ok, at least take the medicine.

Now, is that a compromise? It is a compromise if the standard is not told. There
is a difference between a compromised principle and a principled compromise. A
compromised principle means that the principle is there, and one just makes a
compromise and neglects the principle. Whereas a principled compromise means
that one understands, ok, this is the principle, and thinks how this principle
is to be applied, and how if somebody ca..., is not up to that principle, then a
lower level principle has got. So, a compromised principle means that a
principle is neglected or rejected. But a principled compromise means when a
person is not capable of following a higher principle, then a lower principle is
given.

So, for example, in the scripture sometimes, those people are attached to eating
meat, they are given a facility to eat meat on specific days within religious
regulation. They can go to a Kali temple and do that. So, that is an example of
a principled compromise. That means rather than rejecting the principles of
following scripture, following God, one accepts that principle, but one finds a
level of instruction that is suitable for one's practice. And, in that way, one
advances. So that way, one is able to stay within the recovery program.
Although, one may not be in the fast part of recovery.

So if a person is not allowed, if you do not give this up, then you will not be
allowed any treatment only. Such a person is, if the person cannot take this
strict treatment, the person is just kicked out of the treatment, of the
recovery program. So, the re..., the problem is not that the slow recovery
program is given, but the problem comes when the slower recovery program is not
told clearly as that is. This is the level you want to follow. This is going to
take you a long time for to progre..., to cure, to become cured. This is the
level you want to follow. You will get cured much faster.

So, when that is not told that you are going to face problems because you are
not doing properly, and your recovery will be much slower. Then the lower
principle will become the standard principle. And that is where the problem
comes. So, if as long as that does not happen, that the lower principle does not
become the standard principle. When understand that this is the standard
principle. But car..., I am not able to follow at this level. So, I had been
given a lower principle. Then, that is not a compromised principe. That is a
principle to compromise.

So, sometimes, scriptures give us this principled compromise. So that principled
compromise can be applied in various fields of our spiritual life. So, for
example, you know, those who are in the householder ashram, grihasta ashram,
and those in the brahmacari ashram, the amount of time, the amount of energy,
the level of sadhana, the level of seva, that the two ashrams provide
facilities for are different. So, in terms of time and our direct engagement,
the grihasta ashram cannot offer all as much, cannot allow as much time as
brahmacari ashram. But that does not mean that necessarily, the grihasta ashram
is a compromise. It can, it is not a compromised principle. It is a principled
compromise.

That means one understands that my goal is Sri Krishna. But I cannot take this
track. I take this track. And both are valid tracks on the spiritual path. So,
if one just says, ok, if I cannot buy brahmacari, there is no glamour in my
spiritual life. Therefore, I will not practice spiritual life only. I will go
back to sense gratification. I reject the principle entirely. Then, what is
happening? That is not just a principle compromised. One compromises the
principle entirely. And that is a loss.

So, how to practice at what level? The acharyas are needed fo..., to tell us
that. And they tell us according to time, place and circumstance. So,
"saṅga-tyāgāt" is also a principle that has to be applied according to time,
place and circumstance. How much can we avoid the association of non,
non-devotees? That is not something which can be told for everyone as a standard
rule.

First point, I said is, avoiding the association of non-devotees does not mean
that we look down upon them. Because nothing alienates people faster than the
feeling that they are looked down upon by others. So, when somebody looks down
at us, we look away from that person. You know, we do not want to look at that
person. We would not care for that person. So, we want people to care for
Krishna. We want people to come to Krishna's lotus feet. And how will they come
if we do not care for them? If we look down upon them, we are not really caring
for them. Because we are not respecting them as human beings. We are not
respecting them as parts of Krishna. We are not respecting them as lost souls
who are potential devotees.

So, therefore, when we talk about avoiding bad association, we will, it
essentially means that association which is harmful for our devotion, that we
have to avoid. We discussed earlier about the three degrees in that, there can
be devotional association. There can be non-devotional association. There is
anti-devotional association.

So, non-devotional association mean..., can more or less be, like, they are
people in the ignorant, "ishvare tadinesu balisesu du satsusa". We discussed
this in the Isopanisad that madhyam adikari sees Supreme Lord as a goal, object
of affection, the devotees, that is devotional assocation, that is, they see
that as a dose source of friendship. And "balisesu", those who are ignorant,
those who are innocent, for them, there is "krupa". So, those sou..., that, then
there is "dusatsu", those who are envious, for them there is "upeksa". That
means if we have these three levels, we can put Krishna outside in a different
circle entirely, try to love Krishna.

But the dev..., with devotional association, there is friendship. With
non-devotional association, if it is innocent, then there is, we try to show
mercy. We try to give Krishna knowledge. We try to be instrument for Krishna's
love. And then for the anti-devotional association, one has to neglect it, one
keeps a safe distance from it, so one does not entangled and contaminated.
"saṅga-tyāgāt" refers primarily to anti-devotional association, the association
which makes the practice of our spiritual life extremely difficult. Because
there is a direct and strain attack on our faith.

Sometimes, the whole attack may be intermittent and indirect. But still, if
there is attack on our faith periodically, then we understand that that is
anti-devotional association. And we have to protect ourselves from it. So, how
do we protect ourselves from the anti-devotional association? That brings us to
the most important point that that is by coming to devotee association. Because
we are social creatures. And being social creatures, we all need association.
So, if we do not have an association where we can share our values, then we will
have to find some other association, and we will start sharing the values of
that association.

As devotee..., as human beings, as social beings, as spiritual beings, we all
need a sense of belonging. I feel that I belong to a group, whose values I can
respect, and whose members respect me. So if that, we can find such a group, a
group whose values I respect. Ok, these people stand for this. And I respect
those values. And as an added boost, if those people are also respecting us.
This is potential devotee. This is good devotee. Yes, he is a very pre..., he is
precious member of our community. We care for him. Then, when both are there.
That means we care for the values that the group stands for. And one of the
values of the group is that it cares for its members. Then such a group is
wonderful.

And Srila Prabhupada established ISKCON just for creating such a group. It is a
forum where people can come together and reciprocate affection, reciprocate
love, and thereby go closer and closer to Krishna. So, now how do we do this
in our specific individual lives? "saṅga-tyāgāt", we do it primarily by making
circles of association, in many ways. Circles of association is one way. That
means if say, I am here, at the origin. Then I create a circle of my closest
associates, then close associate, close friends. Then, I make another circle of
those who are formal, corradial, but at the same time formal. And there are
outside that, there are friends who are entirely formal. I do not talk much with
them, but I, we do not have anything negative. And beyond that are people with
whom we have some flyers coming up, some spark flying, whenever there is
contact. The sparks may be direct or indirect. That means there may be open
conflicts at times, or there may be co-hold conflicts of values.

So, at such times, we have to protect our bhakti. That is the most important
thing. So in the circles of association, we try to keep ourselves as close to
Krishna as possible, in the circle of association. So, that way, we stick
elevate with Krishna even through association. And when we have to associate
with non-devotees, whether it is in professional environment, whether it is in
a family situation, whether it is in any other responsibility that one has in
the world, that one, we should also recognise that whatever we, way we dress,
whatever we, way present ourselves, ultimately, we are presenting Krishna like
that.

Because people know that we are all the children of Krishna, so..., sorry,
people know that, we know that everyone is the child of Krishna, and
people, who is not related, come to know that we are representing Krishna. So,
by our behavior or misbehavior, we can attract people to Krishna, or we can take
people away from Krishna. "saṅga-tyāgāt" means we choose the association that
nourishes our bhakti and by staying in that association, besieging ourselves in
that association, we do not have much time left for asat-sanga, for bad
association.

So, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is talking about the importance of this principle so
much. And that is why he has stated that "asat-saṅga-tyāga-ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra"
that a characteristic of a devotee is "asat-saṅga-tyāga". He is giving up the
association of non-devotees. And that is what Rupa Goswami is repeating over
here. Now, it is interesting how Rupa Goswami led his own life. Rupa Goswami
actually lived in the association of "nhab" for quite some time. And that
association was not on Rupa Goswami's terms. It was on the terms of Neha
Pasricha. And Neha Pasricha was known to be quite a brutal person. At one
time, he had got some architects to build a magnificence palace for him. And
then when the palace was done, Neha was very happy. And the archi..., chief
architect was also there. And he was praising him. Oh, it is such a wonderful
palace that you have made. I am very pleased. So at that time, that architect
said actually I could have made an even better palace. And, as soon as Neha
Pasricha heard it, his hand went into his fore, this fore came off, chop, cut
off the head of the architect.

So furious, he said, if you could have made a better palace, why did you not
make a better place? I am the Neha. I deserve the best palace. If you are not
your be..., made your best work, then you will never make your best work. This,
for sure, it will remain your best work. So, what he did? Chop, he has chopped
off the head.

And the king at that time was an obstructor, an autocrat, a dictator. Nobody
could challenge. So, this was the kind of person. And he was just going around
on a rampage, plundering people, plun..., devastating farms, plundering whoever
he, and desecrating temples, he was persecuting the devotees also. So what did
they do? Rupa and Sanatan? Because they were so intelligent and so talented that
they were widely known in their community. And now what happens with conquerors
is those who, those, those warriors, those kings who have that blood lust, or
power lust we could say, territory lust, those who like to fight wars, came more
power, or exhibit their power, and conquer territory, that lust for blood, power
and territory, normally, they want to be on the more expanding, more and more.

They do not like personally spend too much time at one place. So, they are not very
good at administrators. So, they need people who are good administrators. When
Bengal, especially that area of Navadvip and other places, around Ramakeli. That
was actually a place where many devotees were living. Now, many, the brahmanical
culture was very strong, so they were on their rampaging spree, the muslims for
some time, but they realised there are so many temples, so many deities, so many
holy places, holy people, seriously minded people, and holy people, holy people
are there.

What can we do about it? They decided we cannot go about killing everyone and
desecrating every temple. So then, they decided to have some kind of compromise.
That you should not do any public practice of religion. And you do your
religion only in your home. No public practice at all. That was the rule that
they had imposed, more or less. Because often, base rules were known to be
so violent, so nobody dared to do any public performance. Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was the person who broke that corfu, that religious corfu, and started
practicing openly harinam sankirtan.

So, the point which we are building up over here is that actually, Rupa and
Sanatan Goswami were sarasvati brahmans, very respected position in their
culture at that time. And they left it all, just to join the nabaobs army, and
they became mohamedian, practically speaking. Actually, when they joined the
nabaobs army, he, he renamed them. Their names were sakar, sakar, Rupa Goswami
was and Sanatan Goswami were called as Sakar Malik and Dabir Kas. So both of
them, they actually, we could see they chose bad association. You know, that, the
muslim rulers, they we..., they were the worst kind of association, we could
say, at one level.

Why did they choose such a bad association? Because that is what was required
for service. You know, when they became the nawabs of that pla..., when they
became the ministers of that area under the nawab, then they were able to offer
a safe and clave to all the citizens, especially, those who were religiously
inclined, so brahmans and vaishnavas from various parts of the Bengal, who would
come there, and they, some of them would stay there also. Or they would come
there at least to hear Bhagavat Katha, to hear Krishna Katha. And in this way,
they provided a safe and clave for the practice of devotional culture, based on
the principles of Krishna bhakti.

So in this case, we see that were they taking bad association? At one level, it
will seem that not only were they taking bad association, but they were affected
by the bad association, so much affected that they were converted, they gave up
the Vedic path, and became maleca, somebody may say. But here, we see the
profundity of the principle of association. Although, they were in the
association of nawab, Husain Shah, they were not affected by that association.
Why? In their hearts, they were cherishing Krishna bhakti. And they were writing
private letters, secret letters to Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and begging him. Please
come. Please guide us. We have fallen in material existence. Please guide us how
we can be delivered.

So their heart was always in the right place. Their heart was not at the feet of
the nawab. Their heart was at the feet of Krishna always. And they were longing
for Krishna's mercy through Caitanya Mahaprabhu's mercy. And Caitanya Mahaprabhu
would read their letters and would appreciate the sincerity, and finally after a
long time of correspondence, sometimes Caitanya Mahaprabhu was not able to
respond letter correspondence. Now, at that time, responding to letter
correspondence was quite mercy.

And now, we just type an email and press a send button, and tuck, email goes to
anyone and everyone in the world. But at that time, correspondence was very
difficult. You know, first, one has to write one's thoughts down and then if
someone wants to edit it, very difficult to edit. There is no facility. You
cannot do cut-paste on hard paper, so you have to actually write the final
draft. So that is, that makes things very difficult.

So in such a situation, that they, and then, even after the messages ready, one
has to send someone. Because at that time, there was no technology as we
discussed. So then that sender was the person who take their messages to
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. And Caitanya Mahaprabhu sometimes not respond also.
Caitanya Mahaprabhu had no tedder sincerity to their seeds, and when he came
there, to Ramakeli, he blessed them. And he got them back into the devotional
fold. Now, he accepted, and not only accepted them as devotees, but as among the
topmost of the devotees. You know, on the foremost of the followers of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, were the Goswamis.

So, what we see from this example is that sometimes circumstancially a devotee
may not only be forced to stay in bad association, but actually may be forced to
enter deeper into bad association. So bad, for staying in bad association means
for, at that time, enable to stay in Bengal area, anyway, devotee, under the
rule of Navasesha, and that devotee may be told that you cannot practice your
religion. It will be quite irritating for many people. But other people feel
yes, it, there should be, not be the public demonstration of religion.

So that person, that person reach the people, who actually, at that time could boldly
oppose the king where nearly no one, so they offered that safe and clave, and
that is a very important service, for every..., for those who were trying to
protect the Vedic culture, for them to have a safe and clave. So, they were not
association with the king. They were associating in their heart with Krishna.
And they were chef, creating facilities and support systems by which that
message can rea..., lead to many more people and those people can also take
action.

And in that way, gradually, the spiritual culture will be protected. So, they
were not in any way, we should not think contaminate, materially, when they took
certain decisions. We have to understand the transcendental principle. And the
transcendental principle is that actually the Lord wants to take care of all of
us. When we turn towards the Lord. In a way, if I feel, I have this, I have this
counselor, but now I have gone somewhere else, and now I do not have any
counselor. You know, I was very happy in this group of devotees. But now, I have
to take one of the job, which will put me in another group of devotees. What
should I do in such situations? So there are no clear answers for this because
each situation is different and we have to apply time, place, circumstance.

But the important point is that, in all situations, one can keep practicing
bhakti. Even if one goes in non-devotee association, by keeping our heart in
devotee association, by being determined in the practice of bhakti, we, we
will be able to cross through the situation. So, we do not have to feel lonely,
because the association is bad, our bad association. Because we can be, we can
be surrounded by devotees, who are all very good association for us. That is how
we move forward in our spiritual life. So now:

        saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ
        ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

So, "sato vṛtteḥ", "sato vṛtteḥ", means that actually, "vṛtteḥ", "vṛtteḥ" means
inclination. "sato" is the devotee, the transcendentalist. Those who pursue
"sato". "sato vṛtteḥ" means the tendency of those who are pursuing higher
spiritual knowledge, higher spiritual truth in their lives. And for those people
who are pursuing such a truth, the important point is to recognise always that
their desires change. Because everyone has their own kind of desires. But for
those who know that things in this world are temporary, their desires change.
So, actually, that is a guru. And that, this guru of that teaches us this point
that, actually speaking, sato and asato, so those who are asato, those who do
not know about their inter..., e..., eternal existence, those who do not pursue
their eternal existence, they are asato. And their ritiks, tamasic or
rajasic, their "sato vṛtteḥ", "sato vṛtteḥ" means the inclination towards higher
value of life, towards love, towards selflessness, towards honesty, towards
integrity, so that is the direction in which the saints inspire us to move.

And the saints actually stay at that level also. And from that level, they take
us up. As it is said, we discussed also, the guru is one who knows the way,
shows the way, goes the way. So, the guru is one who is actually the example
sato. And we try to incorporate the "vṛtteḥ" of that sato in our lives. So how
much will we be, implement? That will depend on time, place, circumstance.
For each individual, it will be different. So, we shou..., we cannot worry about
what is not possible for us to practice right now. "sato vṛtteḥ" sometimes
frighten us. Oh, how will I be able to do it? It is not possible for me.

But we have to understand that in spiritual life, there are stars and there are
stairs. And there are stairs which take us to the stars. Normally, in life,
there are stairs, they can just take at one floor, two floor, three floor, but
if you consider stars. Stars means our ruttis becomes sato. There is no bad
vrutti inside us only. Vrutti is inclination, the tendency, the default
direction of the mind. So the bad vrutti has gone off, "sato vṛtteḥ" has come
about. That means even when our mind is left alone, the mind will go, gravitate
towards Krishna. Because that attraction the mind has developed. "sato vṛtteḥ"
means by associating with devotees, seeing their attitudes, getting, trying to
share their emotions, we ourselves are able to develop, dispel a lot of
misconceptions, and a lot of obstacles in the path of spiritual life for
ourselves as well as others can be countered.

"sato vṛtteḥ", this is a very important principle in the Upadesamrta that we
have to follow what has the example, the inclination that is shown with satas.
So, in general, for us, for new devotees especially, it is not so easy for us to
give guidance. Because even if there is a plan, that devotee who has a plan may
be very busy. And th..., therefore, if we may not get association at the right
time. So, we have to be cher..., careful and then even if we do not get
association at the right time, that does not mean that devotees do not care for
us, that does not mean that we are all alone. No, we, there are always devotees
with us, but there are certain times, when it is difficult for us to get the
right association.

So at that time, when we o..., when we observe devotees, whenever we get the
association, learn from them, so then in that sense we just do not learn from
it, then we catch it. You know, there is an English phrase, catch it, so that
means, you know, somebody throws a ball and we catch it. So, like that,
whenever we have devotee association, if we are attentive, if we are careful,
then Krishna gives us, catch it, Krishna gives us insights, Krishna gives us
ideas, Krishna gives us inspirations, and all these make our spiritual life
richer and sweeter.

So, that is how, there is a gradual progression in our spiritual life. That
progression centers on following the incidence of satas. So, of the devotees, it
is said in the Srimad Bhagavatam that those who do not cultivate the "sato
vṛtteḥ", do not try to develop themselves, a..., attracted to the eternal, no
matter how much they try, there will not be spiritual advancement.

        parabhosta vada bhoda vabyato
        javani jigyasta atma tattva
        javat kriya bi manovey

So actually, as long as one's mind does not get attracted to Krishna, until that
time, one should not try to apply such a point, that oh. Unless we have become
adequately purified, unless we have become adequately internally motivated,
self-motivated our spiritual life, we should, we cannot avoid the association of
devotees. From any, I feel, I can practice better spiritual life. So, sometimes,
devotees may feel that, ok, you know, devotee association means not so much just
chatting up, and someone happens and I better, say, so actually, we have to
check, you know, if loneliness were the solution, and all of us could become
spi..,  pure devotees all alone. It is not that loneliness is a solution. It
is actually we have to find out those devotees, even those the association of
devotees at different levels. So, not all devotees are equally committed.

So, so, in general, as compared to non-devotees, we prefer the association of
devotees. That is "sato vṛtteḥ". But even in devotee association, not everybody
is exhibiting "sato vṛtteḥ" at equal seriousness. So, we have to find out, which
are the devotees, who exhibit that "sato vṛtteḥ" and have their association. And
in their association, our "sato vṛtteḥ" will increase. Otherwise, even in
devotee association, our "sato vṛtteḥ" might increase and by that, we may say,
see trap in material existence, and we will not be able to make much spiritual
advancement to preclude that possibility, to avoid that from happening, we have
to always try to be cautious. So by being cautious, to make sure that we are
associating with those whose value we admire, whose values we would like to
emulate. Then, by that, we will make spiritual advancement much faster than just
by some random hearing from here and there.

So, "sato vṛtteḥ", so when we study scriptures, the purpose of studying
scripture is to understand "sato vṛtteḥ". "sato vṛtteḥ" can actually have broad
meaning. Srila Prabhupada gives a relatively simple meaning for us, but this
illustrates the point that, we, it is important for all of us to fo..., to
actually live according to the example of devotees. Now "vṛtteḥ" refers to the
tendency of the mind, so for the "vṛtteḥ" to get attracted to Krishna, it is
important that we, we cultivate consciously because it will take time.

It is not that all love is developed at first sight. Actually, generally, what
is available at first sight is not love. It is usually lust. Now, later on, when
the people choose to unite dharmically, then some love may develop in that
relationship. But initially, it is bodily infatuation. Just as we can have these
artificial relationships, these temporary self-serving relationships, in
material life, we may have that kind of relationships, even in devotional life.
That means we are relating with some devotee, just at the material level to get
whatever we want from that person. This sort of interrelationships are not going
to be of much help. They may help a little bit. They may, they are at least
better than non-devotee association. But they confuse us about what is the
ultimate principle.

And we see lacking goes on in practicing, and we see, Srila Prabhupada is talking about
very serious principles. So, then, we do not know what to do. And often, we air,
so hear in this particular context, Srila Prabhupada will explain "sato vṛtteḥ"
as the practice of devotional service by looking at the examples of the previous
acharyas and imbibing those example. So, the process of bhakti is eternal, and
whatever we practice in this process stays with us forever. Now, let us look at
this "utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt" from another perspective.

So, here, we see, person's conscious, that person's more, that whatever level
a person is situated at, the person has no enthusiasm, and no patience, and no
faith, and that is ignorance. "utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt", none of them are
there. That person is super tama guna.

A person has enthusiasm, but no patience. That means that a person just does a
lot, but does not do it for very long. Start one thing and then get bored with
it, and give it up. Start another thing, get bored, give it up. Enthusiasm, but
there is no patience. Then one needs to come to the mode of goodness.

When there is enthusiasm, patience and faith, all three together, in one's, one
place, in one heart. You can, that heart is very well situated to rapidly move
towards pure goodness. Now remember, when we were talking about faith over here,
we are not talking about ordinary faith. We are talking about the kind of faith,
which Krishna Das Kaviraja Goswami defines.

    'śraddhā'-śabde—viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya
    kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya

That is the kind of faith that is required for the practice of bhakti. So,
somebody may say, oh, I have a lot of faith in Krishna. But what is the faith
that you have in Krishna? If I unfairly go to his temple at Janmashtami and do
seva, then the next year will be happy for me. See, if that is the idea how we
should be practicing bhakti, then we do not understand what bhakti is. So that
way, we, we, we deprive ourselves of the fruits of bhakti. So, "utsāhān niścayād
dhairyāt", when all three are there together, then we understand that there
is a hand of fallover there. But actually, the more involved over there is pure
goodness. And all devotees can try to aspire to come to this development of
goodness.

And, we prac..., we do not have to consciously go about cultivating various skills,
like people do in the material life. Of course, if we have some specific
specialised service, and for that, we have to learn some skills, that is ok. But
in general, devotees do not care much, for example, for the academic study of
religion, for the contemporaries ouklets of, outlets of information, like the,
like the newspapers and the movies, and if actually, the devotees cons...,
connect themselves with Krishna instead of these things, then their disposition
will be much, be much more secure. Because without a positive connection with
Krishna, one often gets dragged down by material desires. And even against one's
will, one falls:

        atha kena prayukto 'yam
        papam carati purusah

That Arjuna asks what is it that drags me away? That then, Ar..., Krishna
answers it is lust only. It is uncontrolled desire. It is a desire that when we,
when we give desire too much power, then it becomes a power that makes us
powerless. Let desire not become a power, that makes us powerless. How is that?
If we give too much thought to the desire, the desire keeps growing, growing,
growing, growing, growing, and eventually it goes to such a point that we are
just not able to take care of it. So, that is the sort of final breaking point.

But that happens if we are not able to take care of, then, our overall spiritual
life has gone bala..., off balance. So, of course, then we have to s...,
endeavor, pray, strive, and then we will be able to get the who..., situation
back on track. So, when there is enthusiasm, patience, and faith, then we are
more moving towards goodness, and we are going further towards transcendence
thereafter. So, Srila Prabhupada also quotes this verse, "nehabhikrama-naso
'sti", to indicate how the assets of bhakti are eternal.

Then, he talks about how the mahatmas are constantly engaging in devotional
service. And Prabhupada concludes this verse saying: "utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt
tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt, enthusiastically executing the regulative activities
of devotional service with patience and confidence".

So, "niścayād" and "dhairyāt".

"In this way, one can advance in devotional service without hindrance."

So, the more we commit ourselves to the practice of bhakti, actually, there are,
there are obstacles which prevent us from committing ourselves to the practice
of bhakti. But if somehow, we can commit ourselves to that practice, then that
commitment is so powerful that it can overpower all our other condit...,
conditionings. So, all of us have a default momentum of the mind and senses just
going downwards. And it is going downwards from where we are into matter. And the
only alternative that most people know about is an alternative where it seems
all very lofty. It is, is it practical for me? Or in some other places, they
took it so materialistic, some other religions.

So, solution is in Krishna Consciousness that actually every person is a soul.
The vision is soul encompassing. That nobody is neglected. And that is why
everybody deserves Krishna's respect. And if that person has come for a
confrontation, then the confrontation can be ended. But every person has a right
to deal Krishna's wisdom, and to be enriched by the experience of Krishna's love.

So, that happens by following the principles, just as every patient has a right
to be healthy. There is no doubt. And the doctors cannot take that right away
from the child. In fact, it has this concept that it is so strict that if a
doctor is treating a patient for cancer. And when treating a patient for cancer,
the doctor writes, that, ok, you have your cancer in your left lungs, and to
remove that we have to do this case surgery. Now, while doing the surgery, the
doctor finds that there is a cancer in the right leg also, right heart also. So
what should the doctor do at that time?

So, the doctor has the right at that time, ok, I find the cancer here. I find a
cancer here. I just remove the cancer from here also. Like sometimes, we are
deleting some files on a computer and we find some other extra files, so tuck.
We delete them also. So, can somebody do like that? Actually, according to law,
one cannot do like that. Whenever patient is doing, undergoing surgery,
actually, doctor needs the written statement. If there is some risk in the
surgery, I am ready to take the risk. And then, if that is not possible, then
the person cannot be treated for anything more than what has been offered.

What has been originally offered, when the relationship was formed. The same
applies to the principles of devotional life also. The same hierarchy that had
he, so when we, there are multiple levels of devotees. And we recognise that,
ok, that, this is our, the "sato vṛtteḥ" of this devotee is much higher, "sato
vṛtteḥ" of this devotee is, is lower. Then the, if I associate with those who
are of higher "sato vṛtteḥ", then by that, we make much more rapid spiritual
advancement. Otherwise, our spiritual advancement stays disfocused. It does not
become focused. It does not become strong.

So, these are six principles that can help us to advance nicely. So, going back
to the medicine metaphor, we also understand that, I have to appoint the affect,
the free mixing with those people who are infected, or those people who may
infect me. So, that is why Srila Prabhupada would recognise, would urge us to
minimise the association of the opposite sex. So, why? It is not that every
member of the opposite sex is infected by lust. Now, if a man feels agitated to
a senior women. That does not mean that women is necessarily infected. Actually,
that person is getting infect. The woman may not have any intention of agitating
the person. But just by the way, she is. She may get agitated the man's minds.
Then, we cannot blame the woman.

The point is, it is not whom to blame. Sometimes, when we talk about
"saṅga-tyāgāt", so there can be association of mayavadis. There can be
association of materialists, Prabhupada talks about association of women, and
association of those who are attached to women. Now, when we talk about that, it
raises the question, actually in this world, fifty percent of the population is
wom..., women, and the remaining fifty percent is men. And men are generally
attached to women. So, if we are not associa..., not associated, if women are
bad association, and men, men attached to women are bad association, then what
is left? Whom are we to associate?

So, the point of this Bhagavatam verse is to emphasise that, actually, the same
point is talked about in Bhagavatam as well as in Caitanya Caritamrta, and the
point of this is to recognise that there is great danger. And good association
is so precious and so rare that, we, wherever we get it, we have to cherish it.
So in that sense, what this verse is recommending is the association of those in
the renounced order, and they were trying to develop their attachment to
Krishna. And when we associate with them, then the intoxication, the
infatuation, that comes because of worldly association, even the association,
it, worldly desires, decreases.

So, in general, the important point in "saṅga-tyāgāt", that we will see
sometimes verses, which talk about, Caitanya Mahaprabhu quotes a verse that
actually:

    sandarśanaṁ viṣayiṇām atha yoṣitāṁ ca
    hā hanta hanta viṣa-bhakṣaṇato 'py asādhu

He says if one associates with the "viseya", sense gratifier, sense gratifier.
That is worse than drinking poison willingly. You wonder, how can I apply this
verse? You know, if I associate with the sense gratifier, and then I am drinking
poison, but actually, this world is filled with sense gratifiers. In fact, I am
also a sense gratifier in many ways. So, what do I do in such a situation? So,
here the point is, see, every verse has a context. There is emphasize over
there. So, we should recognise that there is danger, and then for, for
functional purposes if we have to associate, for professional purposes, we
have to associate. We cannot avoid that association. But, so even if there are
sometimes if we are working in an office, and there are anti, there is
anti-devotional association over there.

There are some people who just as soon as they come together, they will talk
against ISKCON, or they will talk against Krishna, they will talk against
Krishna's mission, Krishna's devotees. Then what do... If we may have to work
over there, we may have to work. But in such situations, we can become, we can
be official. And we do not have to become emotional. We official means, we
formal, weaker it is, we functional, do whatever is required. But do not become
emotional. That means we do not have to, see, the bond between people happens
not just by physical con..., proximity, does not happen just by walking together
also. The bond between people happens by sharing joys and sorrows together.

So, if we are not getting into the emotions of material enjoyment, with the
materialistic people around us, we may not really be associating with them. So,
when it says that is worse to drink, it is worse than drinking poison, to
associate with materialistic people. The point there is, that in the association of
materialistic people, we will get un..., infected by material desires. And when
we get infected by material desires, then that infection is very harmful for our
spiritual life.

That infection in fact, it is said that in "viṣa" and "viṣayi", "viṣayi" is more
injured than "viṣa" it is said. Why? Because "viṣa" kills only for one life,
whereas "viṣayi" kills for many lives. "viṣayi" keeps us suffering in material
existence life after life after life. And "viṣa" actually kills by con...,
consumption, but "viṣayi" can destroy us by contemplation. Therefore, one has to
be extremely careful. So, just by thinking about sense objects, one can get,
one's intelligence can get eroded, eroded, and destroyed. So, we have to be
careful, very very careful.

Now, that we, we do not have to be rude. We do not have to be standoffish.
Standoffish means thinking that I am superior to others. But we have to be
cautious. You know, if there is an inf..., epidemic, and there are people who
has infection. So, I have to protect my health. And whatever is required for
that protection, I have to do. So, if I have to work with people who are
materialistic. Well, I will work with them. Because that is what is obligation.
That is what is required. But I will not get involved in theirs joys and
sorrows. I will not get caught up in their inebrieties. If they are going to
talk about various matters which are just mundane, just, which are illusory,
which are anti-devotional. Then, I will avoid that talk completely.

If they are talking about non-devotional subject matters, then I might just be
nominally present over there. But I will not get my heart in by doing that. I
will use it in Krishna's service. So, as devotees, we want to care for everyone.
But we want to care for everyone because they are connected with Krishna. So,
our greatest care should be for Krishna. And when we care for Krishna, naturally
we care for our relationship with Krishna, we care for Krishna's feelings about
us. So naturally, anything that harms our relationship with Krishna will
displease Krishna.

And therefore, if associating with some people is harming our relationship
with Krishna, then keeping a distance from that association is important. That
is helpful for us in the practice of bhakti. Without that, we will not be able
to practice bhakti in a very intense way. The effect of non-devotee association
is that, because non-devotees are not practicing devotional service at all, when
we practice devotional service, we start feeling, why should I be doing this?
Should I be doing this? So many people all live without this fine. I am
tormenting myself. You know, doing chanting so many rounds, doing this, doing
that, doing that. That is how the mind can get contaminated. So when we come in
the association of devotees, we see that there are so many people who are
practicing, and they are practicing more seriously than me. Why do I have to
practice seriously? So:

        sangat sanjayate kamah

Through association, desires develop. So by associating with devotees, and by
cultivating the values that they are cultivating. So, actually:

        saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ

What is the co..., co...? What actually in a sense? These are, these are
complementary. So when we avoid non-devotee association, then naturally, how
will we avoid it? By associating with devotees. But it is not just seeing
associate with devotees, it is seeing "sato vṛtteḥ", develop the "vṛtteḥ" of the
"sato"s. It is not just staying in the associa...,  physical proximity of devotees,
but by doing as much as possible. But more importantly, by contemplating,
cherishing, and cultivating the values of the devotee stand for. How they make
Krishna the topmost priority. How they orient all their life around Krishna. How
they center all their relationship on Krishna. And that is what we can all
aspire to do. And when we do that, then "bhaktiḥ prasidhyati", our bhakti will
flourish.

Thank you very much. Sri Upadesamrta ki jaya. Hare Krishna.
