Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NIdTVKZdTBg
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=SZ5y3tIGhpbyymvefo_SHUi613x8MTU0MTgzMDU0MEAxNTQxNzQ0MTQw&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_030_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_3_Part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=NIdTVKZdTBg

Hare Krishna.

So, today, we will discuss the aspects of dhairyāt and niścayād, among the
principles that are favorable for devotional service. So, we discussed utsāhān
elaborately yesterday. And we discussed, started discussing niścayād also. So, now,
utsāhān, niścayād and dhairyāt. So, what this means is that actually there is
enthusiasm, patience and faith, all three together take us towards
transcendence.

So, when I am going along a journey. If..., journey metaphor is very good for
understanding the role of these three. If I have to go from here, say, by
vehicle to Pune. I am in Mumbai. I want to go to Pune. Say, then, I have to have
confidence, ok, this is the way that will take me to Pune. So then, along with
that, I have to have enthusiasm to drive.

And then, even if I have enthuasiasm, it is not that in five minutes, I am going
to reach Pune. Even if I go very fast, it may take a couple of hours, three
hours. So, now, I have to have that much patience. So, that means, the
confidence or faith is, this is the right way. Enthusiasm is the energy to go
along that way. And patience is the continu..., commitment, the persistence to
keep going even if we do not reaching it immediately.

So, similarly, if we are here in the material world and we want to go back to
Krishna. So, faith is, the faith can be of various types. Here, niścayād is
something very specific. It can be, faith can be, I am not the body, I am the
soul. The faith can be that, Krishna is God. The faith can be that there is a
spiritual world. The faith can be that my spiritual master is my greatest,
greatest well-wisher. There are various kinds of faith that we can have. So,
these are all faiths which are important. But the faith which is being talked
about over here is specific.

Here it is being talked about how the faith, in the process of bhakti, that the
process of bhakti will take me back to Krishna. So, that is the faith that is
being talked about over here. That niścayād. So, ok, now, that means like, I
want to go from here to Pune, this is the path that will take me to Pune. That
faith I have. So, the path of bhakti is what will take me back to Krishna.

Now, after that, I have to have the utsāhān to go along that path. And when I am
going along that path, still it is not going to happen overnight. My
transformation from being a, a lover of material things, to lover of Krishna. It
will be going to take time. From spi..., materialist to becoming a spiritualist.
So, for that, I have to have patience.

This is how the journey metaphor can help us understand the interrelation of
these three things in our practice of spiritual life. So, we discussed about
"utsāhān". We have to keep practicing enthusiastically. Especially yesterday, we
discussed, as, as a background, to our discussion of "utsāhān", "niścayād", that
bhakti is cultivation. So the word cultivation means activity. We often use the
word cultivation. In other word, cultivate is normally used with respect to,
say, crops. We plough the field and then by ploughing the field, sowing the
seeds, watering the seeds, fencing the farm, protecting the farm in various
ways, then gradually, there is growth and then the crops appear, or if it is a,
a fruit orchard, fruits appear.

So all this happens, this whole process is called as cultivation. So,
cultivation involves various activities by which a particular change is
happening. Sim..., similarly, with respect to the heart, you know, we have to do
various activities, cultivation of the right atmosphere, the protection, the
nourishment, within our heart by which the bhakta-lata-bija will grow. The
cultivation is important. Because that enables what is there within to grow.

Now, in this cultivation, we discuss enthusiasm is for what? For watering them,
the tree, for protecting the tree, whatever is required from our side to do.
Along with that, we have to initiate, yes, actually, if I do this, if I sow the,
cro..., crops over here, then they will grow. The land is good. The crops, the
seeds are good. The land is fertile. When I put the sand seed, seeds in the
land, they will grow, and the crops will come. That is the faith that is
required. And with respect to patience, now farmer may be enthusiastic, sup...,
the farmer can be super enthusiastic. But super enthusiasm does not mean that
nature will reciprocate the soil faster.

It is not that if a farmer sows the seeds today, the crops are going to come
tomorrow. It will take their own time. There is a whole patience is required.
So, faith is that the land is good, that the seeds are potent, then enthusiasm
to do that doing of cultivating their land, and patience for the crops to grow.

So, in this way, by this whole process, the bhakti-lata-bija will grow in the
heart and will give the fallow of prema, of love for Krishna. So, because it is,
centered around activity. We discussed a lot about anusilanam, cultivation.
So, these three are required for the cultivation to give the results. So,
enthusiasm is a special way to cultivation because we have to do activities.
Now, today, we will let, let us look at faith. So, we will talk about faith over
here. We will move over here, "utsāhān", "niścayād" and "dhairyāt". So,
"niścayād", we will see that there is confidence only in bhakti.

So, Krishna Das Kaviraja Goswami defines bhakti in the Caitanya Caritamrta, and
ra..., so rather, he defines faith, and Prabhupada quotes that definition quite
frequently:

        ‘śraddhā’-śabde — viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya
        kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya

So "‘śraddhā’-śabde" that, what is the meaning of this "‘śraddhā’-śabde"? So, as like
I said earlier shradda can be of multiple levels. But Krishna Das Kaviraja
Goswami is talking about shradda at a particular level. That when a person has
come to the path of religion. In religion, there can be so many activities that
a person can do. Or even at the level of morality, a person can do various
activities. But the faith that is required is "kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile" that if one
does "kṛṣṇe bhakti", then "sarva-karma kṛta haya". That all work will be done.
That means by serving Krishna, whatever other duties are there. They will be
perormed. So as the example is given in the Bhagavatam:

        yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena
        tṛpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ
        prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇāṁ
        tathaiva sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā

So "yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena". It just says when you water the root of the
tree, all parts get watered. So the tree, the tree's twigs, branches, leaves,
fruits, flowers, trunk, all of them get watered with watering the roots.
Similarly, all living beings are satisfied when Krishna is satisfied. And just
as we nourish the stomach, the whole body gets nourished. Similarly, when we
satisfy Krishna, everyone will be satisfied. How does this happen? This is
actually the mysticism of bhakti. Mysticism of bhakti is not necessarily that we
will get some magical visions, or we touch our hand to the deities and some electric
current flows through us. These are not the, this magic of bhakti. The magic of
bhakti is that, that heart which could not find satisfaction in the grossest of
pleasures of this world, in the biggest of achievements in this world, by the simple
activities, centered on remembering and serving Krishna, the heart finds a great
satisfaction, in fact the greatest of all satisfactions. So:

        sukha-taram aparam na jatu jane
        hari-carana-smaranamrtena tulyam

Kulasekhara Maharaja was a king, powerful, wealthy, charismatic king, but he is
telling that whatever pleasures I have enjoyed as the king, they are nothing.
They cannot be compared with the pleasure, "sukha-taram aparam na jatu jane", I
do not know any pleasure that compare with this pleasure. What is this? Here, 
"hari-carana-smaranamrtena tulyam", the joy of remembering the lotus feet of
Lord Hari. Nothing that can compare with that. This is the extraordinary nature
of the happiness of Krishna Consciousness. Now, how this comes? That is the
mysticism of bhakti. That because at a, at a level at which we cannot analyse or
perceive with out material intelligence, we are all connected with Krishna as
His parts. So, when we satisfy Krishna by remembering Him, by serving Him,
glorifying Him, then we become satisfied. So, this faith that:

        kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya

That if I just serve Krishna all my duties will be done. Everything that I
desire to achieve will be achieved. Specifically with respect to Kali Yuga, it
is said that the same thing can happen by the chanting of the holy names. Ka...
In the Fifth Canto, there is a prayer of praising the virtues of Kali Yuga.
Normally, we talk about the wises of Kali Yuga. "kaler dosa nidhe rajan", so
ocean of faults, but the Fifth Canto says:

        kaliṁ sabhājayanty āryā
        guṇa-jñāḥ sāra-bhāginaḥ
        yatra saṅkīrtanenaiva
        sarva-svārtho 'bhilabhyate

So, "kalim sabhajayanty arya", that pe..., the wo..., "arya", the wise people
worship Kali Yuga. "guna-jnah sara bhainah", those who are "guna-jnah", those
who know about the two nature of qualities, those who are the knower of the
qualities, "sara-bhaginah", they look at the essence. And what is the essence
they see? Yes, there are many faults in Kali Yuga, but "sankirtanenaiva", by
glorifying the Lord, "sarva-svartho 'bhilabhyate", everything that one desires.
Here, the word "svartho" is not used in a selfish sense. It is "svartho". It is
one's actual purpose, one's actual meaning, one's actual interests. As Prahlada
Maharaja says:

        Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi vishnum

That actually, our, if we truly understood our "svartha", our "artha", then we
would become devoted to Lord Vishnu. Because in loving and serving Him, we will
gain real satisfaction. That is where real svartha is. So that is "svartha".

Now, as Srila Prabhupada writes, bhakti is the life, the soul, the desired goal
and perfection of the conditioned soul. Bhakti is life, soul, desired goal and
perfection. That means it is our be all and end all. Then, bhakti provides its
perfect, its ultimate aspiration. Ye atma, superseeding. Become fully satisfied
with bhakti, devotional service. Then bhakti, when we surrender to Krishna, we
gain protection.

So, actually speaking, there are, there are various points, which, in the
purport, which have been put together on the table over here. So, we will talk
about, essentially, what is the protection? There can be, in any spiritual path,
there can be a fall. And that is possible always. Bhakti does not guarantee
against falldown. Because it is the free will of the soul, which the Lord never
infringes on. So, that free will, if it is misused, can lead to fall. But the
protection of bhakti is that, there is a very, comparatively speaking, easily
available and deeply relishable, deeper higher taste. That higher taste is,
comparatively speaking, easily available.

You know, on the path of jnana, what is the higher taste? Om Brahmasmi, om
Brahmasmi, om Brahmasmi. I am Brahman. I am Brahman. I am Brahman. Our
contemplating, that I am not body. I am soul. I am soul. I am soul. That
contemplation itself is difficult. So, such contemplation is very difficult to
get. And even if oneself succeeds their contemplation, actually, there is, that
is no extraordinary overflowing joy, meditation on Brahman, actually there is
shanti. Whereas, meditating on Krishna, there is:

        "anandambudhi-vardhanam prati-padam purnamritaswadanam"
        
There is an ocean of happiness which keeps expanding. So, in that sense, the
bha..., joy of bhakti is much greater. And it is that joy that we are all
aspiring for on the path of bhakti. So, when we understand the protection is
what? This higher taste is easily, relatively speaking, easily achievable, and
it is readily relishable. That is not the case with other paths. Now, beyond
that, there is the profit. What is the profit? Prabhupada makes a memorable
quote over here. He says that the process of:

"Devotional service is so pure and perfect that once having begun, one is
forcibly dragged to ultimate success."

"so pure and perfect that once having begun, one is forcibly dragged to ultimate
success.", So how does this happen? What does it mean? We just now discussed,
and it is a universal philosophy and principle that Krishna never exerts
force. Krishna never interferes or over..., overwhelmes, overpowers, rules over,
overrules the free will of the soul. So, what does it mean that one is forcibly
dragged? Actually, there is a verse in the Srimad Bhagavatam, where rasat
graha at, rasat grahijanah, in the First Canto, in the instructions of Narada to
Vyasa, chapters four, five, and six, there Narada Muni is telling Vyasadeva, why
have you talking about all this karma kanda in the Vedas? Talk only about pure
devotional service. Because that alone will satisfy.

And somebody may say that, oh, but by practicing spiritual, pure devotional service,
somebody may fall away from that. He says that does not matter. Even if the
person falls away, whatever attraction that had been developed to Krishna during
the practice of bhakti, that will stay. And moreover, because that attraction
will stay, there is no loss. And secondly, because that attraction is so rich,
so deep that after some time, even if a person goes back to material life, will
not get any happiness in material life. And because of not getting any
happiness, one will again return back to Krishna.

So, therein in this purport to this section, Visvanatha Chakravarti says that a
bhakta is haunted by the ghost of rasa. So, what does this mean? Actually, the
rasa, paramdristua nivartata, the higher taste of bhakti is so rich, so deep
that we cannot forget it. We may feel, well, oh, what, actually, I cannot forget
sensory material enjoyment. I want to forget it, but tho..., those memories are
hunting me. There is the higher taste of bhakti. We have to understand that
bhakti is connected with the soul. Whereas, all sensory material enjoyment is
connected with the body.

So, if we consider memory as having layers, the, because our, we realise we are
actually bodily conscious, so the memories connected with the body, stay at the
top of our memory. They are what are directly, easily recallable. Whereas, the
memories that are connected with the soul, they stay deeper down in our memory,
and thus slightly subconscious sort of level. So that is why whenever we think
of enjoyment, quite often, we think about material enjoyment. Our mind goes to
various thoughts about material enjoyment, and we try to get involved in that,
and we enjoy that.

But when we talk about Krishna Consciousness. That enjoyment is there. It is
richer and deeper, but it is deep down. So, at the concious level, we may be
struggling, against material desires. We want to chant Hare Krishna, but some
nasty images are coming in the mind, some temptations are coming, and we may be
pulled away from all that, from the desires for enjoying. But if we try to enjoy
the material pleasures, we will find them pale and stale, that no real happiness
in that. Why? Because we already experienced something so rich, so deep, that
this thing will not give us any pleasure.

Now, that means, at a, at a deeper level, in a deeper inner level, we are
subconsciously comparing what we are enjoying right now with the fulfillment,
with the satisfaction, enrichment that we got in remembering Krishna. And the
material thing pales apart. And that is why we do not get any happiness.
Unfortunately, when this happens, rather than understanding that actually by the
satisfaction is because only Krishna can satisfy me, and I have already tasted
that you are loving Krishna. We think that, oh, the material enjoyment I have
got is not good enough. So, we have to go deeper into material enjoyment.

And then I go deeper, and deeper, and deeper, and deeper. But nothing helps. No
matter how deep we go into enjoyment, still, actually, we will not get any
pleasure. Because the pleasure of Krishna Consciousness is very deep rooted.
Prabhupada would sometimes say that Krishna Consciousness is like a terminal
disease, you know, not in the negative sense. Terminal means what? Actually all
of us suffer from disease, and the disease of material existence.

You know, material existence or material life is a sexually transmitted disease.
It is through sex, we can, getting, we appear in this world. We are born.
We get our body. And it is a terminal sexually transmitted disease. We are all
going to die. It is terminal. It is unavoidable. But when we are talking about
Krishna Consciousness being a terminal disease, talking in a positive sense that
it is going to terminate our material existence. That is for sure. Now, how long
that termination will take, that is up to us. So, that means, I am rea..., can
understand that there are three levels, I am enjo..., I can get Krishna
Conscious pleasure if I apply myself. Think of Krishna. Serve Krishna. Be
attentive. Be prayerful. I will get Krishna Conscious happiness.

But when I am not that attentive, not that prayerful, then I do not get that
happiness, and then I, by default, my mind gets attracted to sensual pleasures.
Now, when I go into sensual pleasures, at that time, sensual pleasures also
dissatify me because they are peripheral, they are superficial, and they are
nothing, they are pale and still as compared to what I have relished. But when
th..., I do not find this satisfactory, what do I do at that time? My mind will,
ne..., very rarely, just as I go up to Krishna. My mind will say go down for
the, that you have not been satisfied, you try more something, try something
more gross, more titillating. And that way, if you go down further, go down for
the tama guna and raja guna, but even when you go down, this pleasure can never
compare with this pleasure. This is spiritual happiness. This is sensual
happiness. This is even grosser, when this is even more debased form of
sensual pleasure.

So when we go down, down, down, we can go down a lot. And if you go down a lot,
all the distance that we go down, eventually we will have to come up. And
eventually come up, come up and finally we will reach Krishna. So, it is a
laborius journey. And like, looking at the metaphor of the dwell, where a
person is fallen. So, I have got the rope, and I have, I can hold onto the rope
and I will be pulled out. But what happens is, I let go of the rope. Now, the
rope is such that the rope just extends all the way down. So, when I let go of
the rope, I start falling, falling, falling. Why do I let go of the rope?
Because I think there is some pleasure below.

Now, no matter how much down I go, the pleasure will always be nothing compared
to the pleasure on top. So, I can keep going down, down, down, and all the
distance that I have gone down, I will have to go up again. So, I am simply
actually increasing my trouble by engaging in material enjoyment now.
Especially, material enjoyment that is devo..., anti-devotional. So therefore,
what bhakti does is that by giving us an incomparable higher taste, even if we
do not comprehend it right now fully at a conscious level, bhakti gives us such
a wonderful higher taste that we cannot live without it. And, we will get
attracted to again. This is a ghost one's heart, keeps coming, keeps coming
back.

Similarly, Krishna's remembrance, the sweetness of his service keeps coming back
to us. And that is how we are dragged. This is of course one way to understand,
it is. Another is that once we come back to Krishna, Krishna does not let us go.
Krishna loves us. And Krishna does not want to miss us. Krishna does not want us
to go away from Him. But somehow, once we went away from Him. So now that we
have come back to Him, or at least started the journey back to Him, Krishna does
not want to lose us. So, Krishna will do anything and everything to ensure that
we return back to Him, whatever is required, he will do.

So, because Krishna makes personal endeavor, none of these involve infringing or
overruling our free will, but he will give us far far more opportunities than
anyone, than other people for the practice of devotional service. And by that,
try this, try this, try this, try this, try this, through various way, Krishna
will try to pull us to devotional service. And that is how he ensures that we
come back to Him.

So, this is also a faith of a devotee that bhakti offers me protection. Actually
protection from what? Protection from the person who needs to be protected. That
means protection from me myself. Actually, I am my worst enemy. How can I be my
worst enemy? I should, there is one I, that is the soul. And the other I is the
I who thinks that I am the body and the mind. So the I who thinks that I am the
body and the mind, is the greatest enemy of the real I, the soul. That is how
Krishna talks about these two "I"s, or two con..., selves.

        uddhared atmanatmanam
        natmanam avasadayet
        atmaiva hy atmano bandhur
        atmaiva ripur atmanah

In 6.5 in the Bhagavad Gita, He says one should elevate the soul with the soul
and not degrade the soul with the soul. Because the soul is the friend of the
soul, and the soul is also the enemy of the soul. You wonder, what is the soul,
you may wonder? But what is the soul is, Krishna is referring to what we think of
ourselves as the soul. What we conceive of as the self. So, objectively, it is
the atma that is the self. But I may think of the body as the self. So, the
person who is the self actually, the soul, should be elevated by the person who
I think I am right now.

So, right now, I may not realise I am the soul, but at least theoretially I
understand that there is a soul, and that soul is the source, is, is who
actually I am, and that soul consciousness is revived, and there will be real
happiness in my life. So, therefore, I forbidded soul, maybe almost like
abstract conception. It may not be, so it is almost like when we read about the
soul. "Nainam Chindanti Shastrani", it is almost as if we are reading about
somebody else sometimes, we feel like that.

So, yes, we may not, right now, identify with the soul directly, but we
understand that I am the soul, and then whatever I think I am, I know actually I
am the soul. That is the soul that I have to purify. So I then, when I purify
that soul, I will realise that actually I am that soul. Now, it is not the soul
that we purify. It is the conditionings around the soul that we purify. But when
we do that, then we realise that I am that soul. So, we need protection from
ourselves, from our own lower side which keeps dragging me down towards sin,
depravity and suffering.

Now, another aspect of the faith in bhakti is that, it is powerful. What is the
power of bhakti? It does not depend on any material circumstances. No material
qualifications are needed. It is, once we develop divine qualities of the
demigods. So, no material qualifications are needed means what? That anybody
from any position can practice bhakti, As discussed earlier, bhakti is a matter
of disposition, not of position. So, if I have the disposition of serving
Krishna, then whatever be the position I am in, it does not matter. I may be a
brahmana or sannyasi. I may be a sudra. I may be a woman. I may be antajar. I
may be outcast. It does not matter, all these things. If I have my disposition
that I am attracted to Krishna, then that is my greatest qualification.

By that, I can make rapid spiritual advancement. And the material qualifications
can help in the practice of bhakti, but they can also hinder in the practice of
bhakti. If somebody has intelligence. Somebody has good appearance. Somebody has
wealth. Somebody has high parentage. All these can be used because all of these
bring some influence with them. And that influence can be used for the practice
of bhakti. But all of them can also be pitfalls. All of them can also distract
us from the practice of bhakti. Because they can pull us down. They can make us
think that we are ourselves great and we do not need Krishna. As Kunti Maharani
prays:

        janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir
        edhamāna-madaḥ pumān
        naivārhaty abhidhātuṁ vai
        tvām akiñcana-gocaram

She says, you are "akiñcana-gocaram", your name can be called out wholeheartedly
by one who, one who is not possessed by one's positions. That means one does not
think that oh, I am, this is mine, this is mine, this is mine. Therefore, I am
great. If that is what we think, then we become possessed by our positions. The
infatuation with our possessions is possessing our mind and leaving us no place
to invoke Krishna's presence. So, one who is not possessed by the possessions,
such a person can actually call out to Krishna nicely. And one who is possessed
by these things, four things, "janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir", high parentage,
wealth, learning and good looks, person cannot actually call out to Krishna.

So, material qualification can in fact bring disqualifications. But if somebody
has them, and that person does not become crowd, proud, then they can be used in
Krishna's service wonderfully. So, whatever we are, we should know that, in
material life, there may be difference, if I was intelligent in my class, I may
have had comforts, if I have not su..., I have good memory, not so good
intelligence. I might have been among the labors in my class. All that does not
matter on the path of bhakti. On the path of bhakti, whoever practices spiritual
life wholeheartedly, who tries to love Krishna, whatever be the material
situation, Krishna accepts their service.

And we see that in the Tenth Canto, the Srimad Bhagavatam, in Chapter
Twenty-Three where Krishna actually accepts the service of the jagik brahman
patnis. They, now, the brahmanas themselves are exalted, and wives are exalted
as the assistance of brahmanas. But the brahmanas actually, do not understand
Krishna's glories and the, wives understand. And they become lest by that
understanding. They go to Krishna and surrender their lives to Him. So, we see
that Krishna accepts them joyfully. So, in this way, what blesses us is our
disposition. Or, that does not, that itself is a blessing, and that  opens up
our heart for further blessings. So, if we have the disposition of being
attracted towards Krishna, then that is very auspicious for us.

Now, bhakti enables us to develop all divine qualities. And then, it is further
described that it is pure. Pure means that there are no tinge of material
activities in it. That:

        mahatmanas tu mam partha
        daivim prakrtim asritah

That the mahatma practices bhakti wholeheartedly. And because, of, now, why is
Prabhupada quoting this verse? There is 9.13 and 9.14. They are actually
related. The point of shradda comes because "bhajanty ananya-manaso".
"ananya-manaso" means the mind is not dis..., distr..., distracted anywhere
else. Krishna and Krishna alone. By loving Krishna, by serving Krishna, I will
be fully satisfied. I do not need anything and anyone else. "bhajanty
ananya-manaso", so the mind can be ananya, when anyone is completely confident.
This is what I want, and this is what I need, and there is nothing that I will
want of need. Only when one has that ananyata, when one has complete confidence
that this will satisfy me, one can become ananya, one can become completely
focused on what one is doing. And that brings auspiciousness. "bhajanty
ananya-manaso".

"jnatva bhutadim avyayam", you know, that is the source of all living beings,
imperishable. There is no else greater that person. So, this understanding is
the basis of all auspiciousness. So, now, how do we translate all this
glorification of bhakti in our day-to-day life? In our today situation, often,
our life has become so fast paced, and there is so much economic insecurity. We
may lose our jobs, or even the whole economy come down because of recession.
In some parts of the world, there is political instability. There are rights. And
there is violence. And there are coops happening. There are governments have
been overthrown, or in our own family, sometimes there can be severe bitter
misunderstandings. Sometimes, families, or in the urge of falling apart,
generation gaps.

So, at such a time, you know, when there are so many crises all around us, at
that time, we feel that how to deal with all this? What is this I am doing,
sitting and chanting Hare Krishna? But actually, sitting and chanting Hare
Krishna is the best thing that we can do. Because we have to understand that
ultimately, no matter how well we t..., how well we plan and try, we are not the
controllers. And we are at best cooperators. Krishna has His plan. And we can at,
best thing that we can do is cooperate with His plan. That will bring good
results for us.

But how do we cooperate with His plan? For us, to be able to cooperate with His
plan. We have to understand His plan. And then understanding of the plan
requires pure consciousness. So, when we chant Hare Krishna, when we say, please
engage me in your service. That means we are asking Krishna. Krishna, I want to
serve you. I, please let me know how I should be serving you. So, that is the
mood in which a devotee chants.

So, imagine that, there is some very difficult work to do. So, if there is a war
going on, and there are two parties fighting.  You know, two, both the parties
are almost equal in power. So, what will happen is, that both will be fighting
fiercely, and who will win will not be, cannot be asserted and, because both are
almost equal. So, if both, say, have ten thousand soldiers on their side. And
then, say, one of them, if they send a message. And they send a message. And they
have a reserve force of hundred thousand, warriors just waiting. They start to
be sending a message, they will come. And if they come, bum, this ten thousand
goes on other and just crashed completely. So, now, what should be done?

Here, we may say one person also goes away, it is a fierce battle. But we do not
know whether we will lose. Well, yes, but if that person goes, the chance of
winning increase so much. So, like that, you know, fear fighting our daily
battles in our homes, in our offices, in our running traffic along the way to the
offices. So, we are fighting in battle in our own minds, with our own lower
desires, our anxities. So, amidst all these battles, it sometimes appears the,
that the external forces are far too heavy, and we are getting cross sometimes.
We feel we are getting upper hand. Oftentimes, it is just like a tough battle
which just goes on and on, day after day after day. Since such a time, you know,
actually we can have access to Krishna's power. And Krishna is the supremely
powerful being.

So, it is like, He is, He is not just a hundred thousand soldiers. He is
infinite in strength. So, if we can get His power on our side, then we can win
any battle. And getting His power on our side means, not so much that He will do
what we want us to do, but getting His power on our side means we place
ourselves on His side. So, we, we place ourselves on His side, then
automatically, His power is there. So, we place on, how do we place ours...,
ourselves on His side? By chanting Hare Krishna, by serving Krishna. By this, we
learn that Krishna is our greatest well-wisher. And all that we need to do is to
serve Him.

So, His power comes to, and how His power comes is sometimes mysterious.
Sometimes, power may not seem to come immediately also. It may take a long time.
But that should not worry us too much. Because we see that Srila Prabhupada
himself was a pure devotee and he was calling out to Krishna. But it seems that
for almost fourty years of his preaching life, until 1922 he met Srila
Prabhupada, until 1960, 1961, 1962, and practically he got no results. 1922
onwards he was getting money to publish his Bhagavatam. Those were his, those
were the first major successes. Getting the Bhagavatam, three volumes
published and giving it to the prime minister, the president. And after that,
the last fifteen years of his life, especially the last eleven, twelwe years,
la..., especially after he started ISKCON in 1966, the kind of success that he
got was fabulous, unparallel in the world history.

So, it is not like that success came just as like a fluke at that time.
Throughout his life, Prabhupada was beseeching the power of Krishna, and then
Krishna manifested His power in such an extraordinary ways that so many people
became attracted, thousands and thousands all over the world. So, this is how
the cause of bhakti invokes Krishna's power. And when we are faced with our
daily problems. At one level, we have to do what is practically required to
deal with them. Say, if I am facing a job threat or a job loss, then I defintely
must work to try to get a new job. I must definitely work to make sure that I
perform better so that the job threat decreases. Whatever, whatever is required
at a material level, we have to do.

But even our, even our most demanding, most emergency material situations, it is
not that we can work twenty-four hours a day. We need to breaks to refresh
ourselves, to rest ourselves. And we can spiritualise those breaks by taking
shelter of Krishna. Now, initially, taking shelter of, we think of break, with just
relax, but taking shelter of Krishna seems to be strange and chant Hare Krishna
attentively. It is a struggle. However, it is a struggle that gives shelter. It
is a struggle that enables us to experience a very deep shelter of Krishna.

So, a devotee sees adversity as an opportunity to experience the magic of
Krishna Consciousness. Magic of Krishna Consciousness, not that, by some magical
van, Krishna, Krishna plays His flute and just the obstacle just disappears.
That may, that can happen if Krishna wants, but Krishna may not do that all the
time. Instead, Krishna actually plays His flute in our heart. He attracts us to
Him. And as we become attracted to Him, more and more, slowly, but surely, the
worldly attachments fall away, and we move free and fast towards Krishna.

So, that is how, what we need to do as sadhakas is recognise that bhakti will
offer us a supreme perfection. Just keep moving forward in bhakti. Now, let us
look at "dhairyāt".

So, "dhairyāt" is patience. So, here Srila Prabhupada talks about three things
over here in "dhairyāt", taking instructions from guru, execute devotional
service, and depend on guru and Krishna for results. Let us look at this. We
will look at it, vari..., various metaphors.

First is the metaphor of the doctor and the patient. So when the patient is
sick, first thing that the patient does is goes to the doctor, and takes
instructions. Doctor explains that this is your disease. This is the prognosis.
The doctor gives a diagnosis and a prognosis.  What is wrong and what is likely
to happen in the future. If one does not take the treatment, and if one takes
the treatment. Doctor outlines future trajectories of events. And the patience,
when, and, after understanding this, what does the patient have to do? He thanks
the doctor, pays the fees, and then goes back to his home. But when he is in the
home, he or she is in the home. What does he have to do? He has to take the
medicine. So th..., and then after taking the medicine, it is not that, I, I have
stomach pain, or I have lap pain, and tuck, the medicine goes in the mouth, and
automatically, tuck, the pain goes away. It does not happen like that. It takes
time.

So, once we have started taking the medicines, there has to be some patience.
Similarly, with respect to "dhairyāt", with respect to practice of devotional
service. So spiritual, Guru is like the spiritual doctor. First, I go to the guru,
and I learn from him. Ienquire, and I learn. And once I learn, the basic
philosophical principles, then I start practicing. Spiritual master says chant Hare
Krishna. Remember Krishna. Serve Krishna. So, when I understand this, I may start
doing it. Then, slowly, the association of devotees influences me. The
associaton of devotees starts attracting me more and more towards Krishna till I
have fallen love with Krishna, and ultimately I return back to Him.

So, this is how the process works, but three stages, that means. First is we get
the prescription from the doctor. We get the instruction from Krishna. Second
is, we apply the principle, prescription, take the pro..., process of devotional
service seriously. And third is, after that, we become purified and we return
back to Krishna. Now, when will that happen? That we cannot say. Sometimes,
devotees ask, you know, if, if by chanting sixteen rounds life long, I will go
back to Krishna, maybe after thirty years. So if instead, I chant more than
sixteen rounds every day, say, I chant sixty-four rounds every day. Maybe I will
go back to Krishna faster. You know, we are not fighting the race in terms of
the number of rounds we chant. If at all there is a race, it is the race to take
our heart towards Krishna.

So, it is necessary that chanting more rounds will necessarily attract our heart
more to Krishna. It can, but it need not. If our attitude towards chanting is not
positive, then chanting can even make us offensive to the holy name. Because
when we chant more and more, and we find that, this chanting is not giving me
any taste. But still, somehow because of our ego, or whatever, we have made the
resolution I am going to chant every day, come what may. Then, what happens is
we chant, but we feel irritated with the holy name. Why do I have to spend so
much time on you? And chanting sixty-four rounds every day, but those sixty-four
rounds, most of the rounds are simply, cur..., my mind cursing the holy name,
and calling out to Krishna, Krishna, please engage me in your service, I am
saying, hey, hold on, when will they get over?

Sometimes, we are chanting and then the round does not seem to get over on us.
So sometimes, devotees take the beads out of the bead bag, they try 108 beads,
or 1008 beads over here. It is not rendering, what should I do? So, bhakti is
not mathematical. Bhakti is reciprocal depending on the way we offer our love to
Krishna, Krishna reciprocates. That is why we have to depend on Krishna for
result. Depending on Krishna means, just as after we start taking the medicine,
we ask the doctor, how long will it take to give the result? And then we are
patient for that duration.

Similarly, we have to be patient. So, here Prabhupada uses an example of the
mother and the child. The mother, or a, or the husband and the wife, the wife
may decide to have a child, but she cannot get the child immediately. She has to
wait. She has to serve the husband, please the husband. And the husband gives
the seed. And after, the child is born. So, now, child is for both of them, but
especially in this context, with respect to bhakti, it is said that, actually
the gurus lead the husband, disciple is in the wife. And the guru gives
transcendental knowledge. So, the womb, the ears are like the womb, and the, the
ears that the guru gives, is not physical. It is spiritual. It is the sound
vibration.

So, the sound vibration comes from the guru to the sisha, through the ears, to
the heart. The actual field is not the ear. The actual field is the heart. We
of course, that the heart may require some physical fineness also, and that
is a different issue. That has to be provided for the sake of practical
requirements. But the important point is that when we practice bhakti, we are in
a way offering ourselves to Krishna. So, when we offer ourselves to Krishna,
Krishna offers Himself to us. And then Krishna reveals His all attractiveness to
us. Krishna is always present in our heart, at all times. But sometimes we
forget his presence. When we recollect his presence by the practice of
devotional service, that recollection becomes constant. It starts increases more
and more in frequency till it becomes constant. At that time, we become
completely purified. So, this is the "dhairyāt" of a devotee. When a devotee has
faith that Krishna will protect me, at all times.

        utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt
        tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt
        saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ
        ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

So now "tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt". What is the "tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt"?
This means the practice of the rules and regulations of bhakti. So, Srila Prabhupada
writes in the purport, if we see, chant sixteen rounds, follow four regulative
principles. Neglect of the regulative principles will destroy devotional
service. Prabhupada was saying. Very strong statement here. Neglect of the
regulative principles will destroy devotional service. So, what does it mean
neglect of regulative principles? Prabhupada was saying so many things that, I
do not chant sixteen rounds, I have become an advanced devotee now. I do not
need to follow the regulative principles, no, that will not work. That is the
recipe for disaster. Each of us, whoever we may be, we have to practice
devotional service wholeheartedly. Now, when we practice in this
"tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt", then we can make steady and swift spiritual
advancement.

Now, where do the principles of bhakti come from? Sometimes some people say that
religion is made by men. And they say that, actually, some people in the past
thought that then there should be morality in society, so therefore, there
should be some conception of God, who will punish the sinful, and reward the
pious. Therefore, people came up with the idea of God. So, this is a favorite
way of explaining how religion came about. Now, it is, now, the problem with
this is, it may explain how religion came about, it claims to explain, but it
does not explain how people came about.

So, for people, to emerge, then the..., they believe that there is this whole
idea that the whole universe has appeared extinct hero, came out of nothing.
Then, how it came out of nothing is a very serious philosophical mystery that
nobody has been able to resolve. So, the Vedic scriptures tell that actually, it
is not that, this, certainly man is created by God, but even religion is created
by God. Now, human beings for their convenience, may take up some own sample,
some of their own processes, some of their own concoctions. And that way, may
that, they may dilute religion. They may dilute it, contaminate it, or pervert
it.

Let us understand what may happen. When Prabhupada says, neglect of regulative
principles will de..., will destroy devotional service. What does it mean?
Actually, the masses are the opium for religion. Now, what does this mean? Now,
there is a well-known saying of Karl-Marx that religion is the opium for the
masses. His idea was that if people are just given the hope, oh, in future, next
life, you will be happy. Then, they will work very hard and in this world,
in whatever position they are. But they will not try to improve themselves
materially.

And in this way, the upper classes, the priest and the kings, they have made
people artificially docile passive by talking to, about religion. So, Marx
reenvisioned all of world's history, in terms of class struggles. So that was
his concoction. But the fact is that religion gives, create hope to people. Even
when there is suffering, it is unsolvable suffering in this world, still, the
answers are available. It is not just it is no matter what happens, just keep
plea..., keep pleas..., keep be.., believing in God. Please keep believing in
God. Please keep behaving yourself in way that pleases God. Why?

No matter what happens, we just keep believing in God? No, it is not exactly
like that. Actually, religion is not made to stratify our heads. It is made to
stimulate our heads, to help us understand that it is, that we, we you can do to
cure purified by the practice of bhakti. So, religion is not the opium for the
masses. The masses are the opium for religion. What does it mean?

Religion refers to the laws of God as Prabhupada would say. It comes from the
word "religio", which means to bind. So that which binds humanity to divinity.
That which binds people to God. That is religion. So when talk about religion,
we have to understand that there are many different fields with which religion
is related. So, rather than caught up in any of these innumerable fields,
because all of them, some of them may even be, may have been popular in their
hay ay, but now, they are considered obsolete. They are considered judeus.

So, do we need to make ourselves adept at things, at which we are not really
going to be using for a long time? For one brief life time and for its own time,
in the, some short time during that life. So, "tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt" means
that when we practice bhakti, we need to understand that there is a process to
be followed. Only, when we follow that process, the result will come. When we
neglect the regulative principles, I will be lost. How will I be lost? Because I
will be doing something which I am myself come up with.

I am not following, it is like say, if I am coming to a mouth treatment, then
that will not work. So, religion is definitely a treatment. It is not the opium.
It is the elixir. It is that which offers nectar and frees people from all
suffering and elixir is like one cure for everything else. So religion is the
elixir. But the masses are the opium for religion. What does that mean the
masses are the opium? That many times when people in general start practicing
religion without understanding what the essential principles of religion are.
Why do they practice? Because they want to feel good, and they want to appear
religious, but they do not, but they do not seriously understand the philosophy,
and they do not want to seriously commit themselves to the practice. Then, in
such a situation, they dilute the principles of religion.

Hey, why do you have to do so much, you know? Like people say, when there is,
when there is opium acts in three ways. It can dilute, it can contaminate, it
can pervert. Through dilusion means, oh, you have to chant. You have to chant
sixteen rounds, you know. When you wake up in the morning, after you have taken
bath, chant the names of God two, three times. Before sleeping, remember God.
After all, throughout the day, whatever you are doing, you are doing for God
only. And anyway, cannot you see me? Actually, I am chanting the names of God
twenty-four hours a day in the heart. So, just follow my process. He does not
say that so directly. But that is what the idea is.

So, the idea is, the masses are the opium of religion. That means when general
people take up religion and they come up with their own ideas about religion is,
and then certainly, leaders also crop up. Who are actually not spiritual
leaders. They are, they are, they are self-appointed teachers who do not teach
according to scripture, but who teach that which will make them popular. So,
when this happens, then they will dilute religion.

Yeah, yeah, you do not have to do all that much, you know, just a little bit of
chanting of guru enough. And yeah, it is good if you do not eat meat, but, but
you must give donation to me, you know, that is very important. Which if you cannot
eat meat, if you cannot give up eating meat, that is ok, but make sure that you give
donation to me. So what happens is dilute the principles.

But dilution is for populism. Populism means in order to become popular, people
cut things down. People dilute things down. So, this is, so dilusion, what
happens is, it is like docto..., the doctor has told take this medicine, and do
not take sugar. So, he says ok ok, if you want to take, you can take sugar also,
but take this medicine also. Now, what happens by this? The person has cured, the
person has got diabetes, the person is taking sugar that it will be difficult
for another person to get cured. So dilusion means the same process will work
very very slowly, if at all it works. That is one way.

When we neglect regulative principles, because we feel that they are too
fanatical, too high level, then there is the, the contamination. Contamination
means not only do we dilute things. That means what has been prescribed, we do
not, we take it, do it lesser, but we add certain things in it. Contamination.

For example, Srila Prabhupada told us to worship Krishna, but, and the Supreme
Personality of God. People say, ok, but we can worship that devata also, that
devata also, that devata also, and then this sort of thing become contamination.
Now, contamination may not always be sinful. It can be pious contamination also.
Say, say, it is definitely not sinful to worship devatas, but the point is, we
want to keep our devo..., Krishna service ananya. We do not want it to be
distracted. So, if we do not want it to be distracted, then we have to focus on
Krishna only.

"mam ekam saranam vraja", Krishna says. Therefore, serious devotees, who are
serious devotees, they do, and they want to live according to Bhagavad Gita,
they should not worship. But then, this sort of contamination, worship this
devata, so that devata also. You know, I want to chant Hare Krishna, but, you
know, I want to remove obstacles. So, I will worship some other devata who will
remove obstacle, then I can chant Hare Krishna.

No, that is not the process. Krishna Himself is empowered in the devata who is
removing obstacles. So, you do not need to go to devata. If you go to Krishna,
Krishna will remove more obstacles. So, in generous contamination that can
happen. This is also one way we can neglect.

And then there is perversion that can happen. Perversion means what? The whole
process of bhakti can get just completely distorted. So, for example, somebody,
some religion says I am God, and then you do not have to chant the names of God.
You can chant my names only. And then some follower will come up, what happens
is, that is Kali Yuga is the age of cheaters and cheaters, so sometimes some
intelligent people also, many people think that when you come to spirituality,
you should keep your intelligence aside. And people just go according to their
feelings. What I feel is good, that I feel must be spiritual.

So, as if the, the people think that if I go for spirituality, I should send my
intelligence on a vacation. So, intelligence becomes quiet, and peaceful. It
does not think about anything. And then it just go according to the feelings. So
the feelings are so unpredictable that anything which makes them feel good, they
become, they, they, ah, this must be the path. Temporarily, it feels good. But
this path be the path. And they start using their intelligence.

Sometimes, what happens is, some, some teachers speak some sweet words, and that
person starts thinking, and claiming that I am God, and some people get some
good feelings by that. See, good feelings can come from anywhere. People can go
to a musical show, and they can get good feelings. Just good feelings alone are
not a test of spiritual advancement, or even of spiritual truth for that matter.

So, actually, spiritually truth is adjusted. Feel..., feelings are important.
But those feelings should be transformational. Those feelings should make us
detached from everything else. But when the spiritual master also says, you can
do whatever you are doing, but also chant Hare Krishna. But also, also, do some
bhakti. Also give some charity. Then people start doing that. And, now if there
are many Godmen. You know, some of their followers, they are made sasaranams for
that God, and people memorise all the thousand names of that particular Godman.
And they start chanting those names. And they say I am doing very great dharmic
activity.

It is actually perversion, chanting the names of ordinary human being, maybe an
extraordinary human being, but that is, that is perversion. That is extremely
unfortunate. 55:51
