Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uavFfImKavM
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=uavFfImKavM&event=video_description&redir_token=F201tesjO5Mf8160GXH_nNuDbB18MTU0ODQ4ODU3NUAxNTQ4NDAyMTc1&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_093_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_08_Text_01_to_07_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. So, now, here, we are discussing the Eighth Chapter of the
Bhagavad Gita. The Seventh Chapter concluded with a descripi..., description of
Krishna's glory by the introduction of three new terms. "adhibhūta".
"adhiyajñam". And "adhidaivam". So, Arn..., now, Eight Chapter will begin by
Arjuna's question. What do these terms mean? And then, Krishna answers. And the
answer to the last term, you know, takes a significant amount of, you know,
description. In fact, the whole chapter is centered around to the last question.
How can one remember Krishna at the time of death? You know. So, you know, the
question-answer is in itself, if we see in a constructed way, the
question-answer ends at verse eight. But the elaboration of the answer goes on
throughout the chapter. You know. You know. So, verses one and two, you know,
are the questions. And then, you know, three, four are the answers to first six
questions. And f..., verses five to eight, remembrance of Krishna at death. That
is the answer to the seventh question. Then, verses nine to thirteen are
remembrance of Krishna. Remembrance by yoga-mishra bhakti. Then, fourteen to
fifteen is remembrance by shuddha-bhakti. Hmm. Then, sixteen to twenty-two is,
you know, remembrance of the Supreme Lord by comparing natures of material and
spiritual world. So, we are attracted to the material world when we think that
the material world will be a place of enjoyment for us. But when we understand
that, actually, the material world is not the place of enjoyment. Then, we turn
towards the spiritual world. So, remembrance by bhakti-yoga is easier than by
ashtanga-yoga. That is the conclusion of this chapter. Which is twe..., verses
twenty-three to twenty-eight. So, essentially, the chapter talks about
remembrance at the time of death. So that we can attain that Absolute Truth.
It is Krishna. Now, so, Prabhupada no wonder gives the chapter title as
"Attaining the Supreme". The other title for this, Akshara Brahma Yoga. That
is based on, you know, you know, the first verse, that is, Krishna speaks in
this chapter. "akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ". Now, you know, let us look at the
questions of Arjuna. These are a little technical questions. And we will focus
on the broad principles without going into technicalities. So:

        arjuna uvāca

        kiṁ tad brahma kim adhyātmaṁ
        kiṁ karma puruṣottama
        adhibhūtaṁ ca kiṁ proktam
        adhidaivaṁ kim ucyate

You know. You know. So, what is Brahma? What is "adhyātmaṁ"? What is "karma", o,
"puruṣottama"? Krishna, you are the best of people. So, you are competent to
tell me what is this ultimately. And "adhibhūtaṁ ca kiṁ proktam". "adhibhūt...",
what is "adhibhūtaṁ"? And what is "adhidaivaṁ"? So, these are the words which
Krishna has, in, used in verses 29 and 30. So, "brahma". "adhyātmaṁ". And
"karma". They were introduced in 29. And "adhibhūtaṁ", "adhidaivaṁ" are
introduced in 30, you know, of the Seventy, Eight Chapter. Seven. Now, we may
wonder what is the, you know, point of question, like say, asking what is karma?
Actually speaking, we already know what is karma. Isn't it? You know. The word
karma has come so many times in the Bhagavad Gita. So, yes, it has, it has come
many times. But here, you know, you know, Kri..., Arjuna is asking a specific
question in the context of Ar..., Krishna's use of that word. So, you know, you
know, you know, in the twenty-ninth verse, Krishna had used this word karma in
a, in interesting way. The 29th verse was:

        jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya
        mām āśritya yatanti ye
        te brahma tad viduḥ kṛtsnam
        adhyātmaṁ karma cākhilam

So, "jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya". So, for the li..., a, s..., getting freed from old
age and death. "mām āśritya yatanti ye". Those who take shelter and then, they
strive. "te brahma tad viduḥ kṛtsnam". They come to know brahma. They, they are
themselves brahma actually. And:

        ... viduḥ kṛtsnam
        adhyātmaṁ karma cākhilam

And actually, all their activities become transcendental. So, there, the word
karma was used in an interesting way. So, what is the meaning of the word karma?
Krishna is asking. You know. Krishna is being asked by Arjuna. Now, you know,
you know, what, you know, what is brahma? So, let us look at the next verse.
Then, we will come back to these terms. When Krishna explains them.

        adhiyajñaḥ kathaṁ ko ’tra
        dehe ’smin madhusūdana
        prayāṇa-kāle ca kathaṁ
        jñeyo ’si niyatātmabhiḥ
        
"adhiyajñaḥ kathaṁ ko ’tra". What is "adhiyajñaḥ"? Hmm. Hmm.

        ... kathaṁ ko ’tra
        dehe ’smin madhusūdana

And how does he live in the body? So, now, you know, it is generally understood
in the Vedic culture that there is, there is a manifestation of the Supreme Lord
who stays inside the body. So, even the gopis in their Gopi Gita say
"antarātma-dṛk". That you are the inner seer. "antarātma". You reside in,
in-dwelling witness. So, he is asking similarly over here. "dehe ’smin
madhusūdana". What is the, you know, how does that Absolute Truth reside in the
body? And, you know, "prayāṇa-kāle ca kathaṁ". You know. So, "prayāṇa-kāle". At
the time of death. "jñeyo ’si niyatātmabhiḥ". How can one know that Absolute
Truth at the time of death? So, you know, hmm, now, Krishna has mentioned:

        prayāṇa-kāle ’pi ca māṁ
        te vidur yukta-cetasaḥ

He concluded Seven, you know, Seven Chapter. 7.30 with that those people can
even at "prayāṇa-kāle" remember. So, he is asking how exactly will this happen?
How can one remember You at the time of death? So, you know, you know, now,
after the, asking this question, "adhiyajñaḥ". So, now, He, Krishna, whenever He
is addressed, you know, by Arjuna to ask for some questions, he usually adds,
along with those questions, some glorificatory n..., name of Krishna. So, here,
he is using the word "madhusūdana". In the previous line, he has used,
"puruṣotta", previous verse, "puruṣottama". So, "madhusūdana". You are the
killer of demons. So, kill, please kill the doubts of misconceptions of lack of
understanding there is there in my heart. So, you know, you know,
"prayāṇa-kāle". Now, let us look at, you know, you know, Krishna's answers.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ
        svabhāvo ’dhyātmam ucyate
        bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo
        visargaḥ karma-saṁjñitaḥ

So, "akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ". So, this, you know, actually, this is among the
most, you know, you know, technical, and, you know, difficult, you know,
sections of the Gita. Especially this terminology which is there. And, you know,
different acharyas have explained this quite differently. And, you know,
moreover, you know, you know, not only is this very brief. And not only is the
explanation quite diverse of the different acharyas. But along with that, this
terminology is not, you know, referred back later anywhere in the Bhagavad Gita
again. So, we have to understand that, you know, the Bhagavad Gita is a
transcendental book. At the same time, it is also contextually presented.
Contextually presented means, I, it, it was presen..., it was spoken in a
particular culture. At a particular time. So, you know, you know, when it is
spoken thus at a particular time, what is the result of, you know, having spoken
at a par..., being spoken at a particular time? So, certain terms, you know,
that were involved and used at that particular time, you know, we, they are used
over there. And they are clarified in, from a devotional perspective. See, you
know, when Arjuna is asking, you know, w..., Ar..., he wants to know. Should I
practice karma-yoga? Or jnana-yoga? Bhakti-yoga? Now, actually, Arjuna knows
about karma-yoga. Jnana-yoga. Bhakti-yoga. But these are seen as various paths.
And the integrated understanding of these paths is not so readily available. So,
what Krishna offers Arjuna is an integrated understanding which is, you know,
you know, culminating in a theistic devotional, you know, climax. So, how all
the aspects of Vedic culture, you know, coalesce together. Unite together. You
know. W..., to form a, you know, coherent whole with Krishna, the personal
all-attractive divinity as the acme. As the summit. As the pinnacle. That is hot
is the, rev..., revelation of the Bhagavad Gita. So, you know, now, in the
Bhagavad Gita, there are many terms. Which are contextual. And that particular
time, they have been used in that way. And, you know, you know, if those terms
are not used again repeatedly in the Bhagavad Gita. If they are not very central
to the overall development of thought of the Bhagavad Gita. And if they are not,
e..., especially, if they are not elaborated upon by Srila Prabhupada much, then
we will not go into the technical categories, you know, of what the different
acharyas say about these terms. You know. You know. Because even scriptural
knowledge is o..., oceaniac. And we have to have, you know, we have to focus on
the relevance. So, unless we focus on relevance, we can get caugh..., caught up,
in nitty-gritties. In the technicalities. In hairsplitting over different
meanings of different words. That we can f..., we may forget the overall purpose
of scriptural study. The purpose of scriptural study, you know, like the purpose
of everything else is to help us to develop a..., attraction to Krishna. You
know. You know. You know.

        dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ
        viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ
        notpādayed yadi ratiṁ
        śrama eva hi kevalam

So, "śrama eva hi kevalam". If we do not increase our attraction to Krishna,
then "śrama eva hi kevalam". It is waste of time. Now, we may wonder. Is
studying Bhagavad Gita a waste of time? Not at all. No. What we are saying here
is that, you know, so, we certainly should study Bhagavad Gita. But in the
Bhagavad Gita itself, there are so many commentaries available. You know, in the
Madhva Sampradaya itself, you know, one dev..., one devotee is called Avashvemi.
You know. They have got book which is big book. You know. It is bigger than our,
you know, Bhagavatam set. Bhagavatam volume. First Canto volume. And that big
volume is look at it, do the, actually, just, chapters one and two of the
Bhagavad Gita. It is wondering what it is. Then, it was actually, it was the
sanskrit verse. And then, Madhvacharya has explanation of that verse, if he has
given, Madhvacharya has not commented fully as a book on the Bhagavad Gita. But
he has given comments on different verses of the Gita. That was Madhvacharya's
commentary. Then, there was some other acharya's commentary. And then, there was
some other acharya's commentary. And then, some other acharya's commentary.
Then, Vyāsatīrtha's commentary was there. And, you know, like that. Various
acharyas' co..., you know, Madhvacharya's commentaries were there. And this book
was, big book was just two chapters. And like that, there are nine books. Each
into two chapters. And all of this is in sanskrit. So, now, if we just want to
go into technicalities, each verse can be elaborated so much. So, in this
particular study, you know, I am focusing on an overall understanding. You know.
Srila Prabhupada wanted Bhagavad Gita to be studied. Not just in Bhakti Shastri.
But also in Bhakti Vaibhava. And also in Bhakti Sarvabhauma. You know. Why is
that? Because, you know, actually speaking, you know, Bhagavad Gita is not just
a foundational. Yes, definitely. It is a foundational book. But Bhagavad Gita is
non-different from Krishna. And Krishna reveals Himself more and more as we, you
know, approach Him properly. And when we approach Him with greater and greater
devotion, then He reveals Him more and more though. The:

        ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

So, as our overall scriptural understanding will increase, our appreciation for
Bhagavad Gita will also increase. So, we will not be going very much into
technicalities of the Bhagavad Gita. You know. Generally speaking, when I was
taking the Bhagavad Gita. I focus on five different points. First, as focus on,
you know, you know, you know, word explanations. If there are some significant
words, I explain those words. Then, I focus on scriptural parallels. In the
Bhagavad Gita or in other s..., books. If there are some significant conc...,
you know, important concepts. I talk about them. Then, I talk about conceptual
clarifi..., conceptual clarification. What is a concept? Essentially, concept
talked about in the Gita? I will. You know. That section. That verse. I will
explain that. Then, I will focus, explain the co..., contemporary relevance.
So, if something is related, if that theme, how it can be related, applie...,
you know, in today's world view. To..., today's world view. Today's social
situation. Today's global situation. And then, I talk about personal relevan...,
personal application. How can be applied this Bhagava..., this verse in our, you
know, application. In, in our life. Now, it is not necessary that every single
verse, I will be speaking on all these things. No. I said, certainly, just, I
might ju..., might just speak on conceptual clarification. And some, I may speak
only on personal application. But these are the brad five things. Now, in
conceptual clarification, you know, we will focus on an overall understanding of
the Bhagavad Gita. Just their conceptual clarification can itself become a
whole, you know, you know, not just a class. It can become a course. Similarly,
when we talk about personal application, say, when we say, if we come to
pradpadyate. We should surrender to Krishna. Now, surrender itself can become
"saranagati". Each limb of "saranagati". "anukulyasya sankalpah" can become one
class. "pratikulyasya varjanam" can become one class. Full class. And like that,
single, six limbs of "saranagati" can become a six-day course. You know. That
will not be relevant for our, you know, Bhakti Shastri course. In Bhakti
Shastri, you know, personal application will be one level. It is important
aspect, ultimately. Going to apply scripture. But for applying scripture, we
also have to understand scripture. So, other w..., aspects are also important.
And we want to see the world in scripture, for, you know, eyes. Through the eyes
of scripture. That is why we have to have contemporary relevance, also, to be
seen. So, therefore, you know, you know, I will, I will not go into what the
previous acharyas say about, you know, this particular verse. You know. I will
just focus on how Srila Prabhupada is explaining it. And, you know, we will move
forward based on that. So, before I, you know, take this point further, let us
look at one more point here. You know. You know. How does understanding occur?
So, understanding occurs when we connect objects with concepts through words.
So, objects are external. Concepts are internal. And words are the linking
tools. Let us try to understand this. You know. You know. When a child sees a
bird flowing for. What is that mommy? The child asks. And the mother says, that,
beta, is a parrot. And that is a parrot. Oh. So, now, what has happened? There
is external object that the child has seen. And there is a concept in the mind.
Maybe, the child has earlier seen some other birds, has seen a sparrow. So,
then, he is thinking, oh, this is, this, what is that bird?

So, yeah, at least understand there is a bird over there. That conception is
there. But then, now, within that conceptual category of birds, there is a
sub..., you know, there is a sub..., entry further, is entry which is like a
subcategory. Or, you know, which is, you know, one more type within that
category. So, what is that type? Oh, this is a bird called a parrot. So, then,
the words act as, words play many roles. You know. What exactly words are. And
how they plow..., play role. That itself is a whole branch of study. It is
called as semantics. But simply, you know, without our context, there are co...,
objects. There are concepts. And we establish the link between the objects and
the concepts. Or, or, it, an external objects and internal concepts through
words. So, words are, you know, the tools by which we, you know, express
thought. That means whatever the concepts within, we bring them out. But words
are also the p..., you know, tools, by which we, you know, observe and
categorise objects. And thereby, we link the two. So, now, why are we talking
about this? Here, the words can have many meanings. So, now:

        kiṁ tad brahma kim adhyātmaṁ
        kiṁ karma puruṣottama

So, brahma, you know, what does brahma refer to? You know. What, when a word
brahma as we know. "Aham Brahmasmi", if we say. The may..., impersonalists say
brahma ref..., I am brahma. So, the Vaishnava acharyas explain that this brahma
refers not to Parabrahma. Parabrahma is the Supreme Lord. And the Supreme Lord
is transcendental. So, you know, this is not referring to Parabrahma. This is
referring to the living entity. So, you know, you know, now, "Aham Brahmasmi"
means I am brahma. I am this. I am spirit in quality. So, that way, the word
brahma can have many meanings. We already seen this multiplicity of meanings of
the word atma in six point, you know, 5 and 6. Where we discussed:

        uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ
        nātmānam avasādayet
        ātmaiva hy ātmano bandhur
        ātmaiva ripur ātmanaḥ

We discussed how, you know, you know, the word, one, "ātmanā" refers to mind.
And, one, "ātmānam" refers to the soul. So, let us look at the verses here now.

        akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ

So, "paramaṁ" refers to transcendental, Prabhupada translate. "akṣaraṁ brahma
paramaṁ". So, the indestructible transcendental living entity is called Brahman.
So, Prabhupada is using the word brahma, you know, to refer to, you know, the
living entity. Now, some other acharyas have explained that brahma refers to the
Supreme Lord. And it is fine. We will not go into those translations right now.
Let us focus on the way Srila Prabhupada is explaining to us. So, wheth..., what
was the context?

        te brahma tad viduḥ kṛtsnam
        adhyātmaṁ karma cākhilam

So, those living entities, Krishna says, in the Seventh Chapter that when they:

        mām āśritya yatanti ye

When they take shelter of Me because of "jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya". Because their
desire for freedom from old age and death. Then, they attain the spiritual
platform. They regain their spiritual status as living entities.

        akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ

So, Krishna is saying, what does the word brahma refer to? It refers to the
"akṣaraṁ". So, you know, the jiva is also "akṣaraṁ". Ultimately, the jiva is
also tra..., tran..., indestructible. So, just as the soul is, the Supreme Lord
is indestructible. The soul is also indestructible. Therefore, "akṣaraṁ brahma
paramaṁ". Then, "svabhāvo ’dhyātmam ucyate". Now, Prabhupada translates
"svabhāvo" as eternal nature. And what is "adhyātmam"? The eternal nature of the
soul is called as "adhyātmam". So, now, the w..., this, this particular
explanation that Srila Prabhupada gives, of "svabhāvaḥ", refers to spiritual
nature. Normally, the word "svabhāvaḥ" is used to refer to material nature. In
the 18th Chapter, Kri..., Krishna will talk about, in 18.59 and 60, when He
wants to urge Arjuna to make sure that he does not give up the fight. There, He
uses the word "svabhāvaḥ". "svabhāvaḥ", word, will come many times in the
Bhagavad Gita.

        svabhāva-jena kaunteya
        nibaddhaḥ svena karmaṇā
        kartuṁ necchasi yan mohāt
        kariṣyasy avaśo ’pi tat

M..., so, you know, He, here, He, Krishna is telling, you are bound by your
"svabhāva".

        svabhāva-jena kaunteya
        nibaddhaḥ svena karmaṇā

You will be bound by your "svabhāva" to "svena karmaṇā". So, you are a ksatriya.
You will be bound to f..., will be bound to fight. You may tell now, I will not
fight.

        kartuṁ necchasi yan mohāt

Now, because of "mohāt". You are saying you will not fight.

        kariṣyasy avaśo ’pi tat

But helplessly, you will be forced to fight. You, Arjuna, will not be able to
avoid fighting. Because fighting is your nature. And you will have to act
according to your nature. So, there, you know, so, there is this, an example how
the word "svabhāva" is used to refer to one's material nature. And material
nature is temporary nature. So, a, a person may be a ksatriya in this body. But
if the person acts like a shudra, the next lifetime, the person may be a shudra.
Of course, the person can also go to a devolved, to a non-human specie..., also.
But the point is, our "svabhāva", our material nature is temporary. It is not
eternal. So, Prabhupada explains "svabhāvaḥ" here to refer to eternal nature.
That is why I was saying earlier that words can have multiple meanings. So,
"svabhāvaḥ" can refer to material nature. "svabhāvaḥ" can refer to spiritual
nature. You know. Now, after that, Prabhupada describes that, you know, now,
Prabhupada explains the rational for using the word, you know, brahma as living
entity. He says. You know.

"In Vedic literature the living entity is called jīvātmā and Brahman, but he is
never called Para-brahman."

The "Para-brahman" title is used generally to what? The Supreme Lord. So, we
will see in, you know, response to Chatur Sloki Bhagavad Gita in 10.12. You
know. After Krishna's fixed the Chatur Sloki. 10.8 to 11. "paraṁ brahm...".

        paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma

Krishna ref..., you know, Arjuna refers to Krishna's "paraṁ brahma". Now, you
know, then, you know, h..., the point which is being made over here is that, so,
"bhūta-bhāvo".

        svabhāvo ’dhyātmam ucyate

The nature is "svabhāvaḥ". So, "svabhāvaḥ". When it is referring to eternal
nature. It can refer to our svarupa in the spiritual world. Where all of us have
our svarupa. In the material world, it can refer to our conditioned nature. So,
word, "svabhāvaḥ" can have both meanings. So:

        adhyātmaṁ karma cākhilam

So, in seventeen poi..., 7.29, you know, they know everything about
transcendental activities. So, here, it is referring to, in, if, if we take what
Srila Prabhupada is explaining. Then, what it says is that actually "adhyātmaṁ"
is a "svabhāvaḥ". The nature of the living entity. So, in this w..., when the
soul has become spiritually realised. And the nature will be, they will know,
according to their nature. So, those souls will know what is their role. What is
their service in the spiritual world. That will be revealed from within. And by
that revelation, they will be able to serve Krishna. Whole-heartedly. So:

        bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo

Now, "bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo" is, you know, "bhūta-bhāva-udbhava". "udbhava" is
crea..., "udbhava" is creation. Production. "karo". So, you know, you know, 
"bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo". "bhūta" is the material body. "bhāva-udbhava". So,
that which leads to the production of material bodies. "visargaḥ
karma-saṁjñitaḥ". What is "karma"? "karma" refers to, as Prabhupada translates
very concisely and precisely, action:

"Action pertaining to the development of the material bodies of the living
entities is called karma, or fruitive activities."

You know. So, "bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo". Action. So, pertaining to the
development. So, what is the development? "bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo". Of the
material world is, living entities, called as karma. So, here, the word,
karma is used to refer in a generic way. You know. Earlier, we had discussed,
how the word karma can have multiple meanings. Karma can mean action. Karma can
mean reaction. Karma can mean the system of action-reaction. And karma can refer
to one particular category within the different kinds of action. Karma. Vikarma.
And akarma. So, karma can refer to the "puṇya-karma" that we do. "sukarma". So,
here, Prabhupada is using karma in a gene..., a, here, a, Prabhupada is exp...,
Krishna is explaining. And Prabhupada is elaborating. Karma in terms, you know,
the activity that leads to the production of material body. So, it can be
"puṇya-karma". Or it can be "papa karma", both. So, this karma will be
contrasted with akarma. So, when we do akarma. When we render devotional service
to Krishna, at that time, we are not doing anything which will lead to, you
know, the production of further material bodies. In fact, you know, this is the
reason given by Rishabhadeva to his sons in his instructions in the Fifth Canto.
Fifth Chapter. You know. Fifth Canto, he is describing how, you know, you know,
actually:

        nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma
        yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti
        na sādhu manye yata ātmano ’yam
        asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ

So, do not engage in sense gratification. Why? Because if someone engages in
sense gratication, h..., then "asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ". We already got a
body which is temporary. And it is "kleśada". It is, gives misery, also. So, a
temporary body and miserable body we have already got. If we get that body
again, then how have we, you know, how have we, we acted intelligently? You
know, i..., if somebody, say, you know, rides a bike. Leaving both the hands.
You know. Trying to f..., such fool-heartedly. And then, gets a terrible
accident. Gets many fractures. And next time, when the person recovers, and as
soon as sits on the bike, again, tries to do the stunt. Again, gets the same
accident. So, if somebody has done which has led to suffering in the past. Then,
what is the point in doing the same thing again? So, like that, you know, you
know, Kri..., you know, "Rishabhadeva" is saying that what is the point in
acting similarly now? Do not act similarly. So, avoid this. And by this, you
will stay, you know, you know, free from, you know, you know, a, a bondage. You
will not get another body. So, here, karma is referring to the activity which
leads to as a reaction, the production of other bodies. Next bodies. So, now,
here, Srila Prabhupada explains. Now, Srila Prabhupada started explaining the
Vedic sacrificial process. Hmm. You know. You know. 

"The Chāndogya Upaniṣad describes the Vedic sacriﬁcial process. On the
sacriﬁcial altar, ﬁve kinds of offerings are made into ﬁve kinds of ﬁre. The ﬁve
kinds of ﬁre are conceived of as the heavenly planets, clouds, the earth, man
and woman, and the ﬁve kinds of sacriﬁcial offerings are faith, the enjoyer on
the moon, rain, grains and semen."

So, what is this referring to? We may wonder about, how, you know, what is this
actually? Here, the Upanishads often talk things metaphorically. So, we have
discussed the, you know, a, literal meaning of sacrifice. And the meaning of
sacrifice in principle. So, sacrifice would literally mean, you light a fire.
And then, we do yajna in which we put physically some object. You know. Ghee. Or
grains. Or silk. or whatever. So, that is sacrifice. You know. That is also an
important, you know, act, practice within Vedic culture. But Krishna has
explained how sacrifice is not just an action. It is also a principle. And as a
principle, sacrifice means that, you know, that which we could have used for our
pleasure. We sacrif..., we give it up for the sake of the Absolute Truth. Or for
the sake of dharma. For the sake of some higher grain. For higher purpose. And
of course, a higher purpose will give us some gain, also. So, that is how, we
discussed how, even Arjuna's, you know, fighting in the war is also a battle.
And the acharyas explained in, in connection with 4.24, how the, you know, the
"yajna-s...", the Kurukshetra war field is "yajna-sthali". Arjuna is the person
who is doing the yajna. And his b..., Gandhiva is the ladle. The spoon with
which he, the whole thing is offered. And the "ahuti" that is to be offered, you
know, is the, the "ahuti" that is to be offered is the Kauravas. So, the
Kauravas are to be offered into the fire. That is, so, you know, overall, the
whole metaphor, metaphorical explanation is based on the understanding that
y..., yajna is not just an action. It is also a principle. And that principle
can be imp..., implemented in various ways. So, that way, the, you know, you
know, the fire will be the war. So, the war field is the "yajna-sthali". The
f..., war is fire. And then, Arjuna is th..., Arjuna's bow and arrow are the
spoon. And the offering is the, you know, you know, Kauravas. The enemy forces.
So, like that, now, here, also, a different kind of sacrifice is described. So,
for example, you know, if a woman is considered to be a, you know, the, you
know, fire, you know, fire. Sacrificial fire. Then, the sacrificial offering
will be, you know, the semen. So, even dharma can be seen in religious terms.
You know. So, dharma. Artha. Kama. So, even kama. Sense gra..., you know, what
we call sense gratification. That can also be seen in religious term. When it is
done in:

        dharmāviruddho bhūteṣu
        kāmo ’smi ...

As we discussed earlier in the Seventh Chapter. So, you know, when a man and a
woman are uniting. At that time, their union is also a form of yajna. Similarly,
it is said that man is a sacrifice. And grains are yajna. That means when we are
eating food. We are actually doing yajna. How is that? Actually, the body is
ultimately meant for the service of the Lord. So, when we eat, when we ta...,
eat, restrict our eating to prasad. Then, what we are eating is going contribute
to the service of the Lord. We will have to give the body en..., energy. And
that energy will be used for the service of the Lord. So, that is also
sacrifice. So, actually, Sri..., once, Srila Prabhupada was asked that, you
know, when you take prasad. So, at that time, there are so many, you know,
living entities in the stomach, also. There are germs. There are worms. So,
actually, when you take prasad, what happens to those living entities who are in
the stomach? Prabhupada said, they also get benefited. You know. They are coming
in contact with Krishna's remnants as prasad. So, Prabhupada said that,
actually, when you take prasad, you are doing social service. We are doing
service of all the living entities that are in the stomach. Of course, that is
not the only way to do social service. You know. We should not think that I will
just take prasad. And not do anything else. That is civil social service. No.
A brahmana is asked, is meant to take food. Brahmana is also meant to speak.
Speak about Krishna. And share spiritual rea..., scriptural wisdom. Spiritual
wisdom. And help others. So, similarly, here, these are different kinds of
sacrifices. So, you know, you know, the earth is the sacrifice. And the rain is
the offering. So, earth is "Bhūmī-Devī". She is the consort of the Lord. So,
when the rain falls on the earth. So, the rain is like sacrifical offering. And
the "yajna-sthali" in which it is offered is the earth. Similarly, when, you
know, similarly, there are others, also. Each of them. So, the heavenly planets.
Somebody wants to go to the heavenly planets. So, at that time, the faith. With
which we are doing sacrifice. That is also the sacrificial offering. You know.
So, like that, there is sacrificial offerings. You know. You know. And
Prabhupada explains that, now, the process of re..., reincarnation or
transmigration can happen in various ways. So, in "Chāndogya Upaniṣad", one
particular process is described. So, in the Bhagavatam, another process is
described. So, we have to understand that the postmortem journey and destination
of the soul is not necessarily like an assembly line process. Everything is, you
know, stereotyped. No. There will be individual customisa..., individualisation,
and customisation depending on s..., every specific living entity's karma. So,
in s..., case of some living entities, things may happen in a particular way. In
the case of other living entities happen, is they may be happen in a different
way. So, Prabhupada explains that, you know, the living entity, so, here,
Prabhupada explains one particular process. So, you know, you know, the living
entity does specific sacrifices. 

"In the process of sacriﬁce, the living entity makes speciﬁc sacriﬁces to attain
speciﬁc heavenly planets and consequently reaches them. When the merit of
sacriﬁce is exhausted, the living entity descends to earth in the form of rain,
then takes on the form of grains, and the grains are eaten by man and
transformed into semen, which impregnates a woman, and thus the living entity
once again attains the human form to perform sacriﬁce and so repeat the same
cycle."

You know. Now, the whole point of this purport is that, actually speaking, you
know, the process of t..., how one gets material body. That is described. So,
here:

        visargaḥ karma-saṁjñitaḥ

So, Prabhupada is giving one example from "Chāndogya Upaniṣad" of how karma
might be happening. So, when the living entity does karma-kanda. Does fruitive
activity for the sake of going to heavens. And then, coming back to the earth.
The living entity may not want to come to back to earth. But that will happen
eventually. So, that is one way in which karma can happen. So, other ways, also,
you know, karma happens. And whatever we do, you know, that leads to a
production of new bodies. So, now, Krishna will describe the other terms. You
know.

        adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ
        puruṣaś cādhidaivatam
        adhiyajño ’ham evātra
        dehe deha-bhṛtāṁ vara

So, now, He gives further definitions over here. "adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ". So,
"adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ" is the physical manifestation, is constantly changing.
It is called as "adhibhūtaṁ". "kṣaro bhāvaḥ". "kṣaraḥ" means change. So, now,
interestingly, Krishna has used the word "akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ". So, what was
brahma? He said that which is "akṣaraṁ". That which is unchangeable. So, now,
unchangeability is the characteristic of spirit in general. You know. Un...,
here, change, it does not m..., ne..., it does not mean, refer to inner changes.
You know. Soul's emotions may change. You know. The soul's, a, the sou...,
Krishna's emotions may also change. But here, unchange..., unchangeability
generally refers to the change in intrinsic substance. Now, material nature, we
see that there is, there is growth. There is a, you know, you know, there is
deterioration. There is destruction. So, these are six kinds of changes which
material nature undergoes. Whereas the spiritual nature does not undergo these
kind of changes. So, you know, this is what is referred to. So, brahma, is
"akṣaraṁ". Brahma does not undergo changes. It is not, it is not destructible.
Whereas "adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ". "adhibhūtaṁ" is "kṣaraḥ". It keeps changing
constantly. And that is the characteristics. So, Krishna describes "adhibhūtaṁ".
Now, you know, here, you know, Krishna has used three words. "adhibhūtaṁ".
"adhidaivatam". And "adhiyajñaḥ". So, these are different words from what we
normally use. Or let us try to understand this briefly. So, "adhibhūtaṁ" refers,
in this particular definition, to material nature. And what is the
characteristic of material nature? It is constantly changing. Now,
interestingly, Krishna has said earlier as:

        sādhibhūtādhidaivaṁ māṁ
        sādhiyajñaṁ ca ye viduḥ

So, one who understands Me to be the "adhibhūtaṁ". One who understands Me to be
the "adhiyajñaḥ". And one who understands Me to be the "adhidaivatam". That
person will attain, you know, you know, that person will be in knowledge. And
will be well-situated for remembering Me. Remembering. For remembrance of the
time of death. So, what is Krishna meaning once? "sa-adhibhūta". So, earlier,
Krishna has said understand Me to be the "adhibhūtaṁ". And now, He is saying,
what is "adhibhūtaṁ"? "adhibhūtaṁ" is "kṣaro bhāvaḥ". So, actually, we have to
understand the concept of "acintya bheda abheda" over here. "acintya bheda
abheda" means there is simultaneous oneness and difference. Which is
inconceivable. So, Krishna has His own, you know, independent, you know, you
know, self-existence in the spiritual world. Where He has got nothing to do with
material nature. That is His transcendence. But even the material nature is His
energy. And in one sense, the energy and the energetic are non-different. And
because the energy and energetic are non-different, therefore, you know, they
are interrelated. So, "adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ". So, in one sense, they are one.
So, Krishna is telling that yes, understand Me. A m..., the material nature also
to be Me only. "adhibhūtaṁ" to be Me. But what is the characteristic? That when
Krishna manifests as His material energy, the material nature ha..., energy has
the characteristic of constant change. And then, "adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ".
Then, "puruṣaś cādhidaivatam". So, "puruṣaś cādhidaivatam". "adhidaivatam"
means, you know, you know, so, Prabhupada explains:

"The universal form of the Lord, which includes all the demigods, like those of
the sun and moon, is called adhidaiva."

So, "adhidaiva", Prabhupada explains, refer to the virata rupa. So, "puruṣaś
cādhidaivatam". So, the word "puruṣaḥ" can be used for many purposes. So, we can
have "puruṣaḥ" avataras. We have the Mahā Vishnu, Garbhodakaśāyī Vishnu,
Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu. Prabhupada referred to them in the, you know, you know,
Seventh Chapter purport. You know. So, you know, then, I think he referred to in
7.4. One of those purports, he refers. Where he is talking about material
nature. Then, you know, again, "puruṣaḥ" can refer to the, you know, virata
"puruṣaḥ". The "puruṣaḥ" can refer to, in general, the enjoyer. You know. The
conscious enjoyer. Conscious principle. The person. As contrasted with
"prakṛtiṁ" who is unconscious. So, here, "puruṣaḥ", Prabhupada explains, refers
to the virata "puruṣaḥ". So, the universal form. Now, when the universal fo...,
we will discuss more elaborately what exactly is the universal form. That
universal form is ete..., that universal form is m..., a conceptual, you know,
you know, tool for directing thought from nature to the Lord of nature. So, when
we see the grandeur of nature, at that time, one contemplates. Oh, this is so
big. So, the sun and the moon are the eyes of the Lord. So, this is actually
described to be "kalpitah". In the Bhagavatam. "kalpitah". And Prabhupada
explains that, you know, the great thinkers imagine. Prabhupada uses the word,
clearly imagine. So, the point of using the word imagine is it is a conceptual
tool. So, Prabhupada is explaining. So, Krishna is explaining over here,
"puruṣaś cādhidaiva". So, what is "adhidaiva"? "adhidaiva". The term "adhidaiva"
refers to "puruṣaḥ". So, when Krishna is saying understand that also to be Me.
So, what is He saying? Actually, when we consider the virata ru..., "puruṣaḥ".
Ultimately, you know, the chapter which describe the virata "puruṣaḥ" in the
Second Canto of the Srimad Bhagavatam, it is called as "The First Step in God
Realization". So, ultimately, even that is meant to help us to move closer to
God. To understand God. And to love God. So, this is "puruṣaś cādhidaiva". So,
one moves progressively towards attaining that "puruṣaḥ". Attaining that
Absolute Truth. And then, you know, after that:

        adhiyajño ’ham evātra
        dehe deha-bhṛtāṁ vara

So, Krishna is also referring to Arjuna very respectfully here. "deha-bhṛtāṁ
vara". You are the best among those who are "deha-bhṛtāṁ". "vara" is the best.
"deha-bhṛtāṁ". Those who have accepted l..., the body. So, "dehe deha-bhṛtāṁ
vara". Among those who have accepted the body, Arjuna, you are the best. So,
now, Srila Prabhupada explains that, so, now, what is he saying? "adhiyajño ’ham
evātra". So, Krishna, you know, He has earlier identified Himself directly with
all the t..., a, three. But, you know, He is saying that one has to understand
all three are Me only. But now, He is also explaining that these are, there is a
difference. So, He says that the material nature is not direct..., material
nature is act..., so, "adhidaiva". "adhibhūtam" refers to material nature.
Material nature is also Krishna's energy. In that sense, it is Hi..., Him.
"puruṣaś cādhidaivatam". So, the "adhidaiva" is "puruṣaḥ". And virata "puruṣaḥ"
is also He. Because it is a conceptual representation of Krishna. And then,
"adhiyajño ’ham evātra". So, "adhiyajñaḥ" is also Krishna. Now, Krishna is
telling here, "adhiyajño ’ham evātra". I am directly the "adhiyajñaḥ". Why is He
saying this? Because, actually, as we will describe this in the Ninth Chapter
later:

        ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ
        bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca

So, Krishna will describe that ultimately, all yajnas, in 9.24, He mentions
that, ultimately, all the yajnas are meant to be sa..., you know, sacrifices for
Him. So:

        adhiyajño ’ham evātra

I am the lord of sacrifice. Sometimes, when people may think that Indra is the
lord of sacrifice. Shiva is the lord of sacrifice. Yes, they are. But they are
subordinate lords of sacrifice. Krishna is the superordinate, is the
superordinate means, subordinate is below. Superordinate is supremely above. So,
He is the ultimate Lord of sacrifice.

        adhiyajño ’ham evātra
        dehe deha-bhṛtāṁ vara

And, you know, you know, I am situated in the bodies of all living beings. So,
this point of Krishna being situated in the bodies of all living beings. This
will be elaborated. This will mention again. Several times in the Bhagavad Gita.
And we will discuss whenever it comes along. But here, Krishna is telling that
ultimately all sacrifices are meant for Him. And that is the, you know, you
know, that is the, m..., way this living entity can move closer to Him. So, now,
the next verse, where Pra..., now, Krishna starts answering the next question.
What is the next question? Last question is, how can one remember Krishna at the
time of death? So, first, Krishna gives the specific direct answer. And then, He
gives the general principle. So, fifth verse is the direct answer.

        anta-kāle ca mām eva
        smaran muktvā kalevaram
        yaḥ prayāti sa mad-bhāvaṁ
        yāti nāsty atra saṁśayaḥ

So, "anta-kāle ca mām eva". If at the moment of death, one remembers "mām eva",
remembers Me. Then, "smaran muktvā kalevaram". If one remembers Him alone. Now,
Him. Certainly. "eva". Then, "smaran muktvā kalevaram". One then become
liberated from the body. And becomes liberated from the body. Then, "yaḥ prayāti
sa mad-bhāvaṁ". "yaḥ prayāti". So, when one lives like this. "sa mad-bhāvaṁ".
Such a person will attain My nature. You know. I..., "yāti nāsty atra saṁśayaḥ".
"yāti nāsty". Of this, there is no doubt. "yaḥ prayāti". Such a person will
attain My nature. B..., but of this, there is no doubt. So, Krishna is telling
over here something very significant. What is He saying? That, actually, if you
want to attain Him, then attain the supreme destination. Attain the spiritual
nature of Krishna. Then, we have to remember Him at the time of death. So, you
know, the importance of the momemt of death, we have discussed repeatedly. In
the Isopanishad, we discussed that. And again, in the Nectar of Instruction,
also, you know, we discussed that. So, I will not elaborate, t..., t.., you
know, much on this. But Prabhupada would often quote this Mukunda-Mala-Stotra.
Kulasekhar Maharaja's prayers that: you know:

        kanthāvarodhana vidhau smaranam kutaste

He would say that, you know, actually, at the time of death. "kanthāvarodhana".
That the "kapha vata pitta". The "kapha", especially, comes up. And when it
comes up, then, you know, "smaranam kutaste". How will it be, you know, possible
to remember You, my Dear Lord? So, therefore, what does he say? My Dear Lord,
he, he, is he saying that I want to die immediately? That is how, you know,
often this verse to understood. Specifically, what Kulasekhar Maharaja says is
that let my mind become entangled in the tangle of Your lotus feet. You know.
The lo..., the lotus feet that my mind get entangled in it right now. Just as
sometimes, when a swan wants to get lotu..., you know, get the honey that is
there at the bottom of a lotus flower. So, swan puts its head inside. And goes
so deep inside. Deep inside. Deep inside. That actually, its neck goes in, its
neck and it heads go inside. And then, it wants to get the nectar. So, it goes
so deep inside that it may, may be difficult for it to come out, al..., it may
difficult for it to come out, also. So, like that, so, my Dear Lord, I want to
get so entangled in You. Exactly as if I will not be able to come out only. Does
not matter. But I want to, so, one just gets so absorbed in Krishna. It is as,
it is almost like a material death itself. Because ultimately, what is death?
That is cessation of material activities. So, you know, let me get so absorbed
and entangled in Your lotus feet that nothing will remain for me. And then, "yaḥ
prayāti sa mad-bhāvaṁ". So, if one can do like this. If one can get absorbed in
remembrance of Krishna. Then, one is remembering Krishna at the time of death.
But then, ok, Krishna says you will come back to Me. And now, generally
speaking, you know, you know, you know, you know, when we are not able to see
something, and, it is often likely for us to have doubts. You know. We always
want evidence. So, ok, what is this? What is the result of, you know, wha...,
what is the guarantee that this will happen? So, then, Krishna is to k..., to
give us the reassurance. Krishna is saying, there is not even any doubt about
this. Not is slightest doubt. Slightest shred of doubt about this. Yet, there is
no doubt at all. "atra saṁśayaḥ". In this, there is no doubt. Now, how can w...,
you know, you know, we understand this? Actually, you know, Krishna is here to
help us. Krishna is not there to, you know, encage us. You know. Krishna is not
here to fail us, also. Krishna is there right in our hearts to help us. And to
he..., help us attain. Help, gain a, to assist us in gaining success. So, if we
are thinking of Him at the time of death, then that means we have actually
developed love for Him. You know. W..., at the moment of death is so dramatic
that will be impossible for us to think of anything else. Except the things that
which we love the most. In which, we have got the greatest shelter. So, you
know, when we have got the shelter at that time. Then, naturally, we will, you
know, if we have got, taken the shelter of Krishna very deeply before death.
Then, even at the moment of death, we will take shelter of Krishna. And if we
take shelter of Krishna at the time of death, naturally, Krishna wants to take
us back. You know. Krishna is eager for us to come back. So, if we, you know,
show Krishna. Krishna, I am thinking of You. Please, I want to come back to You.
Then, Krishna will take us back. You know. So, therefore, there is no doubt. It
is not that Krishna wants to keep us here. Krishna wants us to come back. He
simply wants to s..., to see whether we want to come back to Him or not. If we
show Him, we want to come back. Then, definitely, He will help us to come back.

So, now, the significant word here is "smaran muktvā". It is not just, you know,
you know, you know, you know, it is not just, say, "kirtan muktvā". You know,
just, you know, you are, one can just do, Krishna. Krishna. It is not enough.
Somebody might just put a gun on the head and say, now, I am here. It is enough
of life. So, I will come at, I enjoyed this life, after which, as I wanted. But
if I just remember Krishna at the time of death, I will go back to Krishna. So,
therefore, let me just put a gun on my head. Krishna. And shoot the gun. I will
not go back to Krishna like that. We cannot cheat Krishna. Now, actually, it is
"smaran". Even if we say Krishna, we will not be able to remember Krishna, you
know, if we had not develop attachment to Him. So, now, we will see
significantly, there are so many times repeatedly that Prabhupada quotes the
full Hare Krishna maha mantra in this purport. Now, you know, this is so
significant. Prabhupada is emphasising the Hare Krishna maha mantra is, you
know, the app..., the means by which we can remember Krishna. As far as I know,
in what Prabhu..., Bhaktivedanta purports I have read, there is no other purport
in all of Srila Prabhupada's books where Prabhupada quotes the full Hare Krishna
maha mantra twice. So, here, it is once. And again, it is once over here. So,
you know, Prabhupada always emphasises the Hare Krishna maha mantra. But to
quote it full. And to quote it twice. That, you know, through that, Prabhupada
is conveying to us. How important the remembrance of the, you know, how
important the holy name is, and specifically, the Hare Krishna maha mantra is
for us to be able to remember at the time of death. So, by diligently chanting
the Hare Krishna maha mantra, you know, throughout our life, we will be able to
remember Krishna at the time of death, also. So, now, Krishna will give us
general principle.

        yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ
        tyajaty ante kalevaram
        taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya
        sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ

So, Krishna says, "yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ". So, whatever "bhāvaṁ" we
remember at the time of death. "tyajaty ante kalevaram". So, at the time when we
are giving up the body. "taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya". That one will attain. "sadā
tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ". So, you know, the word "bhāva" has come in the previous
verse, also. So, in 8.5, you know, you know, so, "mad-bhāvaṁ". Krishna has said
they will attain My nature. Those who are remembering me at the time of death.
You kow. Krishna says, yes. You know. This is, this is the best, supermost
application of the principle. But the principle is that, whatever we remember,
that is what we will attain. So, whatever "bhāva" we have, that is what we will
ultimately attain. "yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ". You know. So, if, so, we see
that Bharat Maharaja remembered a deer. Then, he got the body of a deer. "taṁ
tam evaiti kaunteya". That is what we will attain. "sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ".
So, "tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ". That means, here, Krishna is telling that which is,
"bhāvitaḥ" is remembering. And eventually, becoming. So, you know, the subtle
becomes m..., subtle is the template for the gross. You know. In the Bhagavatam,
it is said that by looking at the state of the subtle body, one can understand
what one's past was. And what one's future is going to be. That means if I look
at my subtle body. And I find a lot of lusty thoughts over there. Then, that
indicates that in my past, I must have engaged in lust. That is why I am having
that kind of thoughts now. And it also indicates that if this is the kind of
thoughts I cultivate, a, cu..., continue on. Then, accordingly, I will have to
get another body, wherein I am, fulfill the lusty desires. So, of course, now,
the lusty thoughts may be there. But the point is, are we, you know, you know,
encouraging those thoughts? Or squelching those thoughts? You know. Are we
stimulating those thoughts by further imagining things? Or are we, as soon as
they come, nothing doing? Get out? I do not want to think about these things.
What is our response? That is important. So, but anyway, the point is, the, the
subtle is the template of the gross. So, whatever is the state of our subtle
body, accordingly, we will get a gross body in the future. "tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ".
So, Krishna is giving this general principle. You know. These two verses are
often referred to as the law of last thought. The law of last thought. What is
that? You know. We may have heard of laws of motion. Laws of gravity. Laws of
electromagnetism. They are laws in the gross realm. But here, we are talking
about the law which actually intercedes the spiritual subtle and gross realms.
So, this, actually, principle at the subtle level. But because the soul is
involved. Soul is transmigrating. And the soul is getting a gross body. So, it
involves all three. A law of last thought is whatever we think about at the time
of death, that is what we will attain. And that is why the last thought is so
important. You know. You know. You know. Now, when we talk about the last
thought. Again, Sri..., we see Srila Prabhupada here. Hare Krishna. Prabhupada
quotes the full maha mantra again. Once more in this purport. Just previous
purport, he has quoted. And now, he is quoting it again. And then, you know, you
know, a, now, what is the solution? You know. We have to remember Krishna at the
time of death. How will we remember? For that, we have to remember throughout
our life.

        tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu
        mām anusmara yudhya ca
        mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
        mām evaiṣyasy asaṁśayaḥ

So, "tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu". Therefore, at all times, oh, Arjuna, "mām anusmara
yudhya ca". Remember Me. And fight. So, now, actually, there is a, m...,
progression, a deepening of the devotion. In 3.30, Krishna had said that you do
your work. And offer the fruits to Me. So, that means the offering comes after
doing the work. But, you know, here, Krishna is saying, in 3.30, He says that,
you know, actually, you offer the work to Me. M..., you know, but, offer the
fruits of your work to Me. But here, He is saying that, first, you think of Me.
And then, do your work. So, it is not just a post-action offering. It is a
pre-action offering. It is a pre-action meditation. Pre-action connection. "mām
anusmara yudhya ca". So, why, you know, why do we remember Krishna? Not just
that He is the fruit of my offering. Actually, He is the ul.., Lord of my heart.
He is my be all and end all. Everything that I do is for Him. And the, even the
"yudhya". "yudhya" here, for Arjuna is, prescribed duty is fighting. For a,
different people, their prescribed duty may be different. Whatever the
prescribed duty, we do that. "mām anusmara yudhya ca". So, in this way, when we,
you know, you know, offer ourselves entirely to Krishna. And we also do our
prescribed duty, then naturally, our prescribed duty will also be directed
towards Krishna. "mayy arpita-mano-buddhir". So, Krishna says, if you keep
remembering Me, then what will happen? Not only is your work offered to Me. But
also, the subtle body becomes offered to Me. "mayy arpita-mano-buddhir". The
mind and the intelligence are offered to you. And when, you know, whe..., or, or
will be offered to Me. And then, if you do this, that means, throughout your 
life, you are actually living to develop love for Krishna. And when we are
develop, a, living to develop love for Krishna. We are living for Krishna. Then,
naturally, you know, we have the opportunity for pleasures. But we turn away
from those opportunities. And focus on Krishna. Eventually, we will attain
Krishna. "mām evaiṣyasy asaṁśayaḥ". So, Srila Prabhupada explained in the
purport that:

"This instruction to Arjuna is very important for all men engaged in material
activities."

So, which is all of us are engaged in material activities. But, you know, while
being engaged in material activities, if we can remember Krishna. And how can we
remember Krishna? For that, our sadhana is very important. You know. It is not
that if we do not do any sadhana. Just while doing our work. All day, we are
doing work, are staying with family. And doing other material activities.
Suddenly, we will think of Krishna. No. Actually, you know, we have to give
exclusive time for quality connection with Krishna. And then, when Krishna is in
the foreground of our consciousness, at that time, through our prayer. Through
our meditation. Through our scriptural study. Through our deity worship. Through
our devotee association. Through our going to pilgrimages occasionally. Going to
the temples regularly. Then, by that, Krish..., at least, during these times,
Krishna is the foreground of our consciousness. Then, when we are doing wordly
activities. You know. The worldly activity have to be in the foreground of our
consciousness. But Krishna will at least be in the background. But if we are,
of all the time, we are just doing worldly activities. And the wordly activities
are simply in the foreground of our consciousness, then Krishna will not even be
in the background. Just be out of the ground, only. And that is not of much use
for us. So, we want to remember Krishna constantly. At least, for some time, we
should remember Krishna primarily. If not exclusively. And by that practice, we
will be able to remember Krishna constantly. And then, Krishna again reassures
Arjuna. "asaṁśayaḥ". So, two successive verses with just one verse in-between.
In 8.5, Krishna says there is no doubt about this. And again, 8.7, "asaṁśayaḥ".
So, this is Krishna reassuring Arjuna. Guaranteeing Arjuna. That if you do this,
you will come back to Me. You know. That is what Srila Prabhupada told us. If
you follow the process of Krishna Consciousness as is given us lifelong. You
know. Even if we have many disqualifications. Even if we have many
conditionings. It does not matter. We will all be able to return back to
Krishna. By faithfully adhering to the process that He has given us.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
