Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UsSo3O_mq2c
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=UsSo3O_mq2c&redir_token=J4HRmRriCibQTbSMoOIX-ugydsx8MTU0ODQ4ODQ1NEAxNTQ4NDAyMDU0&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_089_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_07_Text_08_to_12_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. So,
today, we are continuing with the Seventh Chapter. Knowledge of the Absolute. We
discussed in 7.7, in our previous class, how Krishna is transcendent as well as
immanent. There is no reality higher than Krishna. He is the highest reality
existing in His supreme glory. At the same time, He is pervading the whole
world. Just as a thread pervades the necklace. Now, in the next series of
verses, Krishna will give examples of how He pervades material existence. So,
let us look at these verses. Hmm. Hmm. Hmm. Hmm. Hmm. Hmm. So, it is seven
point, we start with 7.8.

        raso ’ham apsu kaunteya
        prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ
        praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu
        śabdaḥ khe pauruṣaṁ nṛṣu

So, "raso ’ham apsu kaunteya". I am the taste of water. Krishna says. Then,
"prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ". I am the light. The effulgence of the sun. And the
moon. "śaśi" is moon. "sūryayoḥ" is sun. "praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu". I am the
"praṇavaḥ". Omkar that begi..., is at the beginning, the invocation of the
Vedi..., many Vedic mantras. "śabdaḥ khe". I am sound in ether. And "pauruṣaṁ
nṛṣu". I am "pauruṣaṁ". The ability in man, Prabhupada translates. Hmm. So,
here, Krishna is identifying Himself with five objects. Now, what does this
actually mean? There are many different philosophies. One of the philosophies is
called as ma..., pantheism. Pantheis..., pan means total. Everything. So,
pantheism means everything is God. So, is Krishna saying over here that
everything is God? We will see, in a later verse, in 7.12 at the end
of description, section, Krishna will say that I exist beyond this, all this
you see. "ebhiḥ", "t...", you know, "guṇa", we will see that, Krishna says that.

        mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam

That I am beyond these modes. So, He talks about this, you know, 7.12. And 7.13,
both. You know. But here, Krishna is not literally saying that when we talk
about Krishna, you know, being the taste of water. So, that is not that Krishna
in hi..., He is reduced. Only that. Krishna is that. But He is f..., also much
more. So, here, Krishna is talking about how He is the essence of everything.
How, you know, just as a thread is the essence of a necklace. A thread enables
the necklace to exist as a coherent functional whole. Similarly, it is Krishna
who allows everything to exist as a coherent function whole. So, water. Now, the
first example itself is challenging. I am the taste of water. Now, according to
a perspective of modern science, water is considered to be a tasteless liquid.
So, generally, we put some sugar or salt. So, then, we put, say, that it has a
taste. However, that is just one way of looking at water to say that it is
tasteless. But water does have distinctive taste. So, when we see that, you
know, if we go to different places. And sometimes we drink the water. We feel
like the water here taste different. The water here taste different. So, now, we
may say, actually, that difference of taste, is because there are different
things which are added to water. So, that is why the water, you know, the
natural water in India may seem, may taste different from the natural water in
Australia. Or in America. Or Africa. Even the natural water of the different
holy rivers may taste to be different. So, what does it actually mean when
Krishna says I am the taste of water? So, is Krishna the taste of the water in
India? Or Africa? Or Australia? Or what? Actually, the point which Krishna is
making over here is much deeper. Now. Indi, sankhya, when, you know, the
evolution of the various elements is being described, at that time, it is
described that every sense object is associated with a particular, you know,
particular element. So, for example, "śabdaḥ khe". As des..., Krishna tell...,
as Krishna tells in 7.8D, in the verse itself. In the last line, He speaks this.
So, when the creation unfolds. So, from the subtle towards the gross. So, at
that time, one element evolves from the previous element. So, from ether comes
fire. Hmm. Earth. Water. Air. Fire.

        bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ
        khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

So, from ether comes air. From air comes fire. From fire comes f..., water. From
water comes earth. Like that. When it is coming like that, at that time, al...,
along with each particular element, a particular sense object associated with
comes out. So, the ess...., sense object associated with ether is sound. Hmm.
Similarly, the sense object associated with water is taste. The sense object
associated with, hmm, fire is, fire is pursued with the eyes. And its form. The
sense object associated with the earth is taste. Hmm. Sorry. Its fragrance. Not
taste.

        puṇyo gandhaḥ pṛthivyāṁ ca

In the next verse, Krishna will describe that. "puṇyo gandhaḥ". "gandhaḥ" is
fragrance. So, like that, there are, you know, each of the primary sense
objects, they are associated with, you know, a particular element. So, the
ten..., sense object of touch's partial is associated wind. Wind is felt through
touch. So, when we say it is associated, what does it mean? That means, that
particular sense object facilitates us in the experience of, you know, of that,
that particular element facilitates our experience of that particular sense
object. Hmm. So, for example, hmm, it is the presence of ether that enables
sound to be transmitted. And thereby, you know, the elements, hmm, so, thereby,
we can hear sound. You know. So, that is "śabdaḥ khe". So, let us look at this
one by one. We will look at all these three which are mentioned by Krishna here.
Out, among which, He is the essence. So, now, the conc..., there is a concept of
ether. Which is present in modern science. You know. Or it was present in modern
science. It was proposed at one particular time as an element which allows
transmission. But then, subsequently, it has been rejected. It has been
disproved. The idea that such an element exists, you know, hmm, is no longer
considered to be, you know, valid. So, then, if it is, you know, you know, if it
is not considered to be valid, the, so, various experiments, which apparently
have proven that ether does not exist. So, then, what does Kri..., what does
Bhagavad Gita sa..., statement that ether is one of the elements mean? Actually,
the modern science conception of ether and the Vedic conception of ether, there
are, the word may be the same. But the conception is different. And it is,
actually, different way of looking at matter. You know. Even in western
intellectual history, there have been two fundamental ways of looking of matter.
One is called the elemental theory of matter. And the other is the atomic theory
of matter. Actually, you know, this idea is that elemental theory of matter
means matter is made of certain characteristic elements. And each element has
its distinctive characteristics. So, now, even when we use the word element in,
you know, in our Vedic philosophy. In our study of Krishna Conscious text. At
that time, we understand the word element is used in a sense, different from
what it is used in modern science. In modern science, the word element is used
to refer to one particular type of e..., existing object. So, there are
elements. There are compounds. So, when there is bonding between two elements,
we have, what is called as compound. It is basic chemistry. You know. You know.
Now, that is not the kind of element. Hmm. You know. That is referred to when we
talk about earth, water, fire, air, ether. So, earth, water, fire, air, ether,
these are the fundamental blocks, you know, of material existence. Now, of
course, earth, water, fire, air, ether may also have their own components. But
each of them has its defining components. Now, the modern scientific idea is
that there are elements. There are compounds. But although the word element may
be there, you know, today's scientific idea is primarily, you know, called as
the atomic theory of matter. It is not the, so much the elemental theory. So,
even the atomic theory of matter is also there in, you know, am..., among the
six systems of philosophy. One of the phil..., system of philosophies is called
as, you know, "Vaiśeṣika". And "Vaiśeṣika" is actually largely atomic theory of
matter. So, it talks, a, not much, not ma..., molecules.

So, either way, the point here is that these particular elements are, you know,
which are talked about in the Vedic culture. They are considered to have their
own, you know, fundamental characteristics. Unlike that in modern science, we
have the concept that there are elements. But they can be broken down into
fundamental particles. So, earlier, it was atom. Which is considered
indivisible. Now, we have further division of particles. And it is a complex and
as of now, incomprehensible, you know, idea of how from the, hmm, from the, you
know, subatomic world of atom, of, you know, mesons. And protons. And neutrinos.
And all those things. How from there, whi..., which actually, most of them, do
not have any con..., they do not have any sense object associated with them.
They do not have color. You know. It is not that an atom, or an electron, or
molecule has a partiuclar color. Or a particular fragrance. Or particular
taste. So, they do not have it. But how, as they build up, build up, build up,
build up, then from at what particular time, you know, suddenly, a, you know,
you know, the world which we see around us, with all its variety, and its, you
know, individuality. You know. Every element is distinctive. It comes up. Its
distinctiveness and its variety comes up. It is quite incomprehensible. It is
like, you know, the, if the Taj Mahal suddenly comes out of the foam. There is
foam in the, say, Yamuna river. And from the foam, that is there. Now, the foam,
basically, is, is almost like non-material. Of course, it is material. But foam,
you know, just comes for some time and goes. It does not have any
characterisitics, practically speaking. It does not have any specific sha...,
shape. Fragrance. You know. Color. It does not have the artistry and the, you
know, delicacy, that is there in the Taj Mahal. But fo..., so, say that, from
foam, suddenly, Taj Mahal emerges. How it happens? What is the connection
between this and this? So, like that, the world which the elemental theory of,
the atomic theory of matter has gone down to in today's science. And from there,
how the world that we know about through, you know, Vedic philosophy, or, or 
through, through our daily experience. So, the world view of science and the,
our world of daily experience, you know, the connection between the two is, is
not there actually. In terms of even conception. Ok. How, how are the two
connected? How does this world emerge from that? We do not know. So, basically,
our understanding is the atom, the element, it is not that the atomic theory of
matter is necessarily wrong. It is just one way of looking at the world. It is a
map. So, science is basically like a map. There are many eminent scientists who
have talked about this that science is essentially like a map. And a map maps
certain features from the, you know, territory. From the reality. So, there is a
political map of India. You know. In the political map, primarily, the political
divisions will be talked about. So, in the political map, you know, there are
many features, which are relevant for other characterisations, will not be
there. So, similarly, you know, you know, you know, you know, if you want, if
you want a, which, you know, area is that. What level, height, above, above sea
level. What height above sea level. Or which area is a plane. Which area is a
plato. Which area is a slope. Which area is a, hmm, a mountain range.

So, all that features may not be so much in detail in a political map. But these
are also important features. Which do, which are real. But they are not there.
So, a map is no doubt a useful tool for navigating, you know, a territory. But
it is important to recognise that map is not the territory. The map is a guide
to the territory. And the territory is different from the map. Similarly, what
science offers us is one way of looking at the world. And it is, it is like a
map. It is useful. Anyways, it, in many ways, it is remarkably useful. But what
it describes is not the ultimate reality. What it describes is the, is one
representation of reality. One map of reality. You know. And when we are saying
that there is, it is very, there is no connection explainable between the, you
know, the map that science has come up with of all the subatomic particles. And
the world that we experience. We are simply pointing out that this map is
incomplete. This does not mean it is incorrect. That is, so, when something
is incomplete, that does not necessarily have to be incorrect. Unless the
incomplete is thought to be complete. When the incomplete is mistaken to be
complete. Then, the i..., incomplete becomes incorrect. So, you know, hmm, we do
not have to make that mistake. So, we accept science as one map. But the Vedic
scriptures are not bound by that map. They give us other ways of looking at
reality, also. So, one of those ways is this elemental theory of matter. So, the
el..., the elemental theory of matter, the sense objects are the presence of the
sense objects. Where the sense objects come from. And how we see the various
sense objects in the world ack..., of our experience. That is explained much
more satisfactorily. So, it is described. It means associated with each of these
elements. There is a sense object. So, when Krishna sa..., and that element
enables us to access and relish that sense object. And then, that is why it is
said that the sense object, you know, that essence of that sense o..., element
i..., the essence of that element is the sense object, particularly. You know.
And that essence is Krishna. So:

        raso ’ham apsu kaunteya

So, "rasaḥ" is taste. I am the taste of "apsu". "apsu" is water. What does this
mean with all this background? Actually, you know, a t..., you know, you know,
taste becomes accessible to us through water. What does that mean? You know. If
our secretary glance did not, stopped taste, you know, stopped secreting saliva.
Saliva is basically a transformation of water. It is primarily water with some
other digestive and, a, chemicals added into it. You know. If the, if the tongue
stops secreting saliva, which is water, then we will not be able to taste
anything. So, similarly, you know, where, for, an object to be tasty has to have
some level of water presence in it. Other, generally, we may say something is,
if a chapati says, it is a dry and tasteless. You know. A chapati does not have
to be liquid like soup. But still, a chapati has to have some amount of
liquidity. If that, if liquid presence goes out of the chapati, then we say, it
has become dry. It has become tasteless. So, that means, it is the presence of
water that that makes the tastes accessible to us. In that sense, the essence of
water is its taste. So, water is the medium by which we are able to experience
taste. And that taste is Krishna. So, what Krishna is saying over here, I am the
underlying unifying essence of everything. So, this is basically a section which
enables us to understand that Krishna is not just present in, you know, far away
in the spiritual world. But He is all around us. So, you know, Prabhupada quoted
this verse once the devotees were in, I think, Visakhapatnam. This is described
in "līlāmrta". So, when they were in, m..., they were, you know, at one of
Prabhupada's godbrothers's ashram. And nearby, there was the ocean. So, the
devotees decided to go and bathe. And Prabhupada said, you are going. It is
sacred place. I think, some s..., holy place was there. You know. The water was
able, so, some holy place. So, the devotees went to bathe. And their earlier
experience was, swimming was, you know, largely sensual. You know. People go to
swimming pools. And they basically, h..., ph..., perform enjoyment. Of the
devotees were getting the past memories. And they were thinking. You know. Is
this really Krishna Conscious? And then, they asked Prabhupada. And Prabhupada
said, you know, generally, if we go to any sacred river, it was, you know, the
sacred river, then, actually, we sip a little bit of the water. So, Prabhupada
said. Prabhupada quoted this verse. You know. The tasting the water. The water
is Krishna. And then, Prabhupada said, above, over at the sun is there. Krishna
says, I am the, I am the light of the sun. Then, we are chanting the Hare
Krishna maha mantra. That is equivalent to "praṇavaḥ".

        praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu

"aum" and Hare Krishna are the same. And then, "śabdaḥ khe pauruṣaṁ nṛṣu".
"śabdaḥ khe". He said that, actually, the sound, Hare Krishna maha mantra, the
Krishna Katha that you are doing, that is also Krishna. And then, whatever
ability to swim you have, that is also Krishna. So, Kri..., we are surrounded by
Krishna everywhere. How can we forget Krishna? Now, the devotees have been
thinking, how can we remember Krishna? So, in such a situation. But Prabhupada
w..., revealed to them that how when we understand that Krishna is the essence
of everything, then it becomes much easier for us to remember Krishna. Because
we start seeing Krishna everywhere and in everything. So, "śabdaḥ". So, this is
how, you know, this whole section is primarily a means for us to go deeper into
the remembrance of Krishna. Let us understand this point of how Krishna is the
taste of water once more. H..., so, water makes us, you know, makes all other
taste accessible to us. Water makes all other taste accessible to us. And water
gives taste to all the objects that we consider tasty. So, through saliva, it
makes all the taste accessible to us. And it gives taste to all other object,
all the objects that we consider tasty. So, as I explained these two points. So,
now, let us look at other things.

        raso ’ham apsu kaunteya
        prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ

So, now, we understand or we consider the essence of the moon and the sun to be
the light. You know. If there were no light coming, then we would not consider
the sun to be sun. And we would not consider the moon to be moon. So, they are
the essence. And Krishna says, I am that. Now, what does it, Krishna mean when
He says I am the light of the sun and the moon? Essentially, it is, you know,
Krishna's energy which manifests through them. It is by Krishna's arrangement
that the sun gives light. And the moon gives light. You know. Now, science may
give us certain pre..., mechanisms. Or about how the sun and the moon give light.
That is fine. There may be some mechanisms. And, you know, we do not have to
deny those mechanisms. But those mechanisms are not a complete explanation.
Krishna's action as, is manifested through those mechanisms. We have discussed
this earlier, also, in talking about a billiard's ball. The more, you know, a
billiard's board. When a pers..., people are playing. The motion of all the
balls and the billiard board is as per the rules of mechanics. You know. Because
this ball hit this ball with this force. So, this stick hit this ball with this
force at this angle. Therefore, the ball over that ball went and hit all those
other ball. And eventually, that ball went into the hole. That is fine. As far
as it goes. But beyond all this is also the trick that there is an expert player
who hit that ball with that particular force from that particular angle. So,
both explanations are, you know, con..., they are complementary. They are not
contradictory. So, there may be physical mech..., there may be some material
mechanism by which things are happening. But overseeing and en..., overseeing
that mechanism is Krishna. Who is, He has set up the system. And He is
overseeing the system.

        upadraṣṭānumantā ca

As we will discuss in 13.23. Krishna says, I am the overseer and the permitter.
So:

        prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ

You know:

        praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu

The word "praṇavaḥ" refers to sound, "aum". "sarva-vedeṣu". So, among all the
Vedas, I am the "praṇavaḥ". What this means is that the "praṇavaḥ" is the, you
know, actually, it is considered to be one of the most important among all
sounds, "aum". And this sound is actually, this word "aum" is related to many of
the invocations or words connected with God. H..., the, if we look back at word
roots. The study of word roots is called as etymology. So, in the Abrahamic
traditions, Abrahamic religions are as we discussed earlier, Judaism,
Chritianity, Islam. In the Abrahamic traditions, the word "amen" or "ameen" is
used. So, the root of that and "aum" is the same. You know. I..., both come
from the same. Similarly, the words "omni" are used for referring to, you know,
attributes of God. So, God is omnipresent. Omniscient. Omnipotent. That means,
He is present, He is present everywhere. He knows everything. He can do
everything. So, "om...", now, the word "omni" is also coming from the same,
m..., etymological roots as "aum". So, in general, the sound "aum" is considered
to be holy. It is connected with the Absolute Truth. And more, the more, the
important Vedic mantras, all come, all generally begin with "aum". So, "Om Namo
Bhagavate Vasudevaya" is an example of one mantra. Which, you know, is asso...,
which associate with the Krishna Consciusness process as given by our acharyas
to us. We chant this mantra before the Bhagavatam class. So, Krishna is saying
that, actually, now, the Vedas, they contain a lot of instructions. They contain
mostly, you know, instructions, in terms of, you know, karma-kanda. They talk
about how one should engage in sense gratification in a, or, or pursue sense
gratification within the precincts or dharma. So, dharma, artha, kama. But the
Vedas ha..., the transcendental aspect of them is also there in the references
to Vishnu. In the glorification of Vishnu. And in the references to "auma",
"aum". So, in that sense, "praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu" means, Krishna is saying that.
Ok, the Vedas contain many things. But the Vedas also talk ultimately about
transcendence. And that transcendence, I am. So, "praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu". So,
now, after, the sound "aum" is so powerful. Then, can devotees also chant "aum"?
"aum"? "Aum"? M..., m..., you know, can we chant "aum", also? Actually, there is
no ban against chanting "aum". You know. "aum" is a powerful sound. And can
definitely be chanted. In fact, in, when we chant, when we get the gayatri
diksha. The second brahman diksha. At that time, we get the gayatri mantra. And
devotees also chant "aum". So, in general, we prefer the Hare Krishna maha
mantra. Because that is the yuga-dharma for this age. And along with that, the
Hare Krishna maha mantra invokes the Absolute Truth in a personal way. You know.
You know. The omkar is often used by the, while referring to the Absolute Truth
in a non-personal way. So, for example, if there is a, you know, you know, if
there is a, you know, you know, Prime Minister of, say, India. Now, Prime
Minister has a particular name. Now, referring to the Prime Minister by that
name, you know, is personal. Referring to a Prime Minister by the designation is
formal. So, somebody may not use the word Prime Minister. He may use the head of
state. The head of state of India has come. That is a designation. But that is
definitely not as personal as, say, calling the Prime Minister by, you know,
one's direct name. And even more direct would be called, referring to the
personal, see, Prime Minister by a nickname. If the Prime Minister has a
nickname, you know, which is known by family members. That would be even more
intimate. So, like that, the same person can be, you know, addressed with a
different degrees of intimacy.

So, you know, addressing the Supreme Lord as Krishna, as Govinda, as Gopala, as
Yashoda Nandana, as "Śyāmasundara". These are all very intimate forms of
address. And "aum" is a very, you know, formal, non-personal form of address.
That means, what to speak of calling out to Krishna as the child of Yashoda
Mayi. Such a f..., specific address. And intimate address. You know. We are,
when we use the word "aum", we are not even referring to Kri..., you know, m...,
the Absolute Truth as a person. It is just a generic reference. It could be used
by impersonalists. It could be used by personalists. It could be used by
Vaishsisai..., Vaishnavites. Or it can be used by Sh..., Shaivites, also. So, it
is in that sense a nondescript. Nondescript form of address to the Absolute
Truth. Nondescript means that it does not contain any description within itself.
It, it does not make, it is, it does not, not distinctive in any way. And that
is why devotees generally do not use this form of address. But when we are
chanting some mantras, you know, if the word "om" is there. Definitely, we can
chant it. And, you know, if we are doing some yoga asanas for health. At that
time, also, if we f..., if it is said, considered that one should chant "om" at
that time. That also, some, one can chant it. Certainly, there is nothing wrong
in chanting "om". But generally, because it is, there is a, it is a
non-personal, nondescript form of address to the Absolute Truth. That is why
devotees prefer to address the Lord in more distinctive and personal ways. H...,
now, we discussed about "śabdaḥ khe", also. That how the ether is the means by
which sound is propagated. You know. So, therefore, "śabdaḥ khe". And "pauruṣaṁ
nṛṣu". When Krishna says, I am ability in man. What does this refer to?
Actually, it refers to multiple levels. At one level, it refers to the, you
know, distinctive abilities that different human beings have. So, if that person
is an excellent speaker, that ability to speak comes from Krishna. If the person
is an excellent, you know, corporate leader. That ability comes from Krishna.
So, whatever abilities that person has, that come from Krishna. Now, however,
"pauruṣaṁ nṛṣu". "nṛṣu" refers to human being. In general, human beings.
"pauruṣaṁ". "pauruṣaṁ" is the ability. So, actually, it is human beings who have
the ability to do th..., get things done in terms of improving themselves
internally. You know. All living beings have their bodily urges. M..., eating,
sleeping, mating, defending. But it is only human beings who have the capacity
to go beyond these bodily urges. And to raise to something higher. So, that
something higher, the ability to control one's impulses with one's intelligence
is a distinctive ability of human beings. And that is what opens the doorway to
transcendental realisation. And in that sense, "pauruṣaṁ". You know. "pauruṣaṁ
nṛṣu". The distinctive ability of human beings. Which opens th..., which
catapul..., can catapult them on the spiritual path. Which opens the doorway to
spiritual advancement for them. That distinctive ability is Krishna. So, the
ability is Krishna. Now, Prabhupada explains that, you know, you know, you know,
so, now, we will see, something s..., very striking in the purport. We discussed
earlier in the purport of 7.7 when Prabhupada, when:

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat

So, just one purport earlier, Prabhupada said that actually, there is some
con..., common controversy between personalists and impersonalists. And the
Bhagavad Gita, as far the Bhagavad Gita is concerned, it is very clear that the
Absolute Truth is a person. And that is said again and again. And this
particular verse is, Krishna is saying, "mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat". There is
nothing higher than Me. It is not that there is some other impersonal Brahman
that is higher than Me. But, you know, you know, here, Krishna is saying, you
know, sorry, Prabhupada is saying in the purport there is no controversy at all.
So:

"Practically speaking, "

Prabhupada says over here:

"there is no conﬂict between personalism and impersonalism. One who knows God
knows that the impersonal conception and personal conception are simultaneously
present in everything and that there is no contradiction."

And therefore, we have the "acintya bheda-abheda-tattva". So, now, when we say
impersonal conception and personal conception simultaneously present. What does
it mean? Actually, just as a sun, as a specific entity, and the sun is the
all-pervasive s..., light. Both are present. Similarly, Krishna has both these
manifestations. And all these manifestations, both these manifestations exist
eternally. So, the focus is different for, you know, different per..., different
transcendentalists. So, when, the, what is the controversy? The controversy is
not whether the two features exist or not. The controversy comes up which
feature is the highest. So, the impersonalists not only consider that the, you
know, you know, you know, the impersonal..., not only consider that the personal
aspect is the lower one. And the impersonal is the highest. But in, they,
mayavadis go so far as to say that, actually, the personal aspect is just a
convenient fiction. It does not really exist. It is just a convenient fiction.
That we use. Oh, there is a particular form of the Lord. And there is particular
God who is above all the other Gods. And He is, He has this form. He has these
features. He has these pastimes. All this is a convenient fiction that we
ultimately must transcend so that we can attain, you know, the real realisation.
That conception is what creates the controversy. But the Bhagavad Gita
understanding and the Vaishnava understanding in general is very clear that both
the aspects are there. So, when we understand that both exist simultaneously.
Then, there is no need for controversy. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada
concludes in his purport that:

"The jurisdiction of Kṛṣṇa consciousness extends everywhere, "

The jurisdiction of Kṛṣṇa consciousness extends everywhere.

"one who knows Kṛṣṇa consciousness is blessed. Those who do not know Kṛṣṇa are
in illusion, and so knowledge of Kṛṣṇa is liberation, and ignorance of Him is
bondage."

So, the jurisdiction of Krishna Consciousness exists everywhere. You know. This
is significant usage. Jurisdiction. Normally, we use the word jurisdiction, say,
a particular, you know, if there is a crime happens in a particular area. And
then, somebody has been visiting that area. And that person goes back to one's
own place. And they say, oh I was, you know, I was, sort of, robbed over here.
Or I was abused over there. Then, the question comes up. Ok. You belong to this
area. You are abused in that area, robbed in that area. So, under whose
jurisdiction that comes? So, then, they will decide. Ok. Then, actually, you
should register in that police station. And then, they will take a complaint
over there. Their file will be, filed over there. So, like that, the question of
jurisdiction comes up in, practically, so many areas. H..., you know, but
jurisdiction of Krishna Consciousness extends everywhere. This means that, we
can, we can be Krishna Conscious everywhere. You know. It is Krishna's energy
which pervades everything. And if you want, we can remember Krishna anywhere and
everywhere. In that sense, actually, Krishna Consciousness is the ultimate
perfection of life. And in that sense, the jurisdiction of Krishna Consciousness
extends everywhere. Everywhere. Hmm. So, knowledge of Krishna is liberation. The
more we know about Krishna, the more we advance. And we do not know about
Krishna. Then, we stay in bondage. We stay in illusion. So, essentially, the
whole Bhagavad Gita is going to reveal to us how we can see the connection of
everything with Krishna. Inability to see the connection of things with Krishna
is the cause of bondage. And the ability to see our connection, our things with
Krishna will be the cause of liberation. So, let us look at the 7.9 now. 

        puṇyo gandhaḥ pṛthivyāṁ ca
        tejaś cāsmi vibhāvasau
        jīvanaṁ sarva-bhūteṣu
        tapaś cāsmi tapasviṣu

So, "puṇyo gandhaḥ pṛthivyāṁ ca". So, I am the fragrance of the earth. "tejaś
cāsmi vibhāvasau". So, "vibhāvasau" refers to the fire. I am the heat of fire.
"jīvanaṁ sarva-bhūteṣu". I am the life of all that lives. And "tapaś cāsmi
tapasviṣu". I am the austerity of the austere. So, we discussed earlier. "puṇyo
gandhaḥ pṛthivyāṁ ca". M..., m..., what does this refer to? We discussed how the
earth, its defining, you know, you know, its associated sense object is
fragrance in the sankhya system of evolution. So, in that sense, the "puṇyo
gandhaḥ pṛthivyāṁ ca" refers to how the fragrances, the essence of the earth,
and that fragrance is manifested through Krishna. M..., now, we also see that
this fragrance is quite extraordinary in the sense that, we may plant a seed in
the earth. Now, the seed has no fragrance. And then, we nourish the seed with
water. You know. That also does not have any fragrance. But if we are doing
hotty culture. We are doing simple gardening, also. Say, we are planting
flowe..., you know, trees that will give blossoms. Flowers. So, when the flower
comes out, at that time, the flower has a charming fragrance. So, where did this
fragrance come from? The fragrance was not there in the seed. The fragrance was
not there in water. Yet, when we put the seed in the earth and nourish with
water, we have the fragrance over there. So, that has come from the earth.
Especially, in rainy season, when the fresh rainy seasons, fre..., you know,
when just first rains come, at that time, you know, we can also feel the
fragrance of the earth. So, these are just general examples about understanding
from our experience how fragrance is associated with the earth. But the point
is that there is an experiential understanding. And there is a conceptual
understanding of this. So, the conceptual understanding is that, in sankhya,
taste is, fragrance is associated with earth. Then, "tejaś cāsmi vibhāvasau".
So, "vibhāvasau". "vibhāvasau" means fire. So, actually, you know, with sun and
the moon, generally, we talk about in terms of light, first of all. You know.
Sun also gives heat. And the moo..., moonlight is considered to be cooling.
But, you know, generally we talk about sun in terms of light, primarily. And
secondarily, of course, heat is also important. So, here, Krishna is
distinguishing, He says, I am the light of sun. But now, I am saying, He is
saying, I am the heat of fire. Either way, the point is that how there are
things which, you know, you know, there, there are various things in this world.
And all of them have certain essential chater..., characteristics. Which are
important for us. So, when it is cold, at that time, people light a fire. Or if
we may have a, a hea..., heating system. So, even the heating system is
basically giving out, you know, it is involving some fire which gives out heat.
So, I am the heat of fire means, we, we are attracted to fire because it has its
essential element of heating. Krishna says, I am that heat. So, then:

        jīvanaṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

So, how is life present in all living beings? "sarva-bhūteṣu". Actually, life
itself is a great mystery. You know. You know. We felt, perspective of sort...,
modern science. How does life come about? So, many scientists, they reject the
conception of a soul. Because they say, if soul is there, you know, how is the
soul going to ac..., affect matter? Modern, thei..., their idea is the soul is
spiritual. And because the soul is spiritual. So, being spiritual, the soul
cannot understand, m..., or rather, the soul cannot affect matter. Because
matter, their idea is, is affected by material process. So, how does the soul
affect matter? That is a, a, that is a problem that has perplexed western
thought. You know. And because of that, in western intellectual history, the
concept of soul has largely been, was largely neglected. But the Vedic
conception is that, actually, the soul and the matter interact through the
Supersoul. So, the Supersoul is the controller of both spirit and matter. And
the Supersoul can affect matter. And of course, the Supersoul can use material
mechanism, also, to affect matter. So, that mechanism is actually
misidentification. So, but the point is, that what defines all living beings,
you know, is their life. And where do that life come from? Ultimately, it comes
from Krishna. The soul who gives life is K..., a part of Krishna. And the
arrangement by, the, which the soul is able to manifest the life through matter,
that is also coming from Krishna. So:

        jīvanaṁ sarva-bhūteṣu
        tapaś cāsmi tapasviṣu

So, "tapasviṣu" refers to those who are austere. Now, austerit..., the capacity
for austerity is also extraordinary. You know. Some people can, you know, when
we do Nirjala Ekadashi fasting. One day to live without water seems to be so
difficult. And there is some devotees may do a, you know, fasting, on just, you
know, without any wa..., water, or just on water. Every ekadashi. You know. Some
people who can fast full. Not just one day. But three days. Five days. Some
people can fast for ten days. Fifteen days. You know. When, you know, Viswamitra
Muni, you know, who earlier was a king named Kaushika of Kaushal Desh. So, he
went to the ashram of Vashishtha. So, at that time, it is described that there
were many many sages over there. And all of them were practicing austerities.
So, it is said that there, there were different levels of sages. So, the most
austere among those sages were living on air. That is all. You have to breathe
air. And that would survive. And then, there were other sages who would live on
water. And those said that among those, among the many sages, among the austere
sages, the least austere were those who were considered to eat leaves. So,
those who would eat leaves, they were considered to be the least austere. And
today, if somebody was going to live on leaves, only, you have to consider that
person, oh, oh, it is h..., what kind of capacity, austerity, he, that person
had, has. So, the point is, the capacity for austerity is extraordinary. And
that capacity for austerity ultimately comes from Krishna. So, you know,
diff..., Krishna can give different abilities to different people. And He gives
the capacity for austerity to certain people. So, when we see certain people
with certain attributes, we can respect those people for the attributes. But
instead of becoming envious of those people's attributes, we can see that those
attributes are coming from Krishna. And that way, we can, you know, you know,
make, you know, l..., make spiritual advancement by connecting everything with
Krishna. So, then, Prabhupada explains sev..., in many practical ways, also.
Out:

        puṇyo gandhaḥ pṛthi

You know. Each of these, he explains how these are important. So, now, another
point about life is, "jīvanaṁ sarva-bhūteṣu" is that, actually, life and death
are not, actually, in our hands. You know. A doctor's treat. But it is God who
heals. You know. Doctors can offer the medicine. They can do the surgery. They
can, you know, do whatever else is required. But ultimately, you know, they say
that medicine is not an exact science. So, we can have, normally, if you have a
v..., v..., exact science, we will say, ok, you take this much chemical. You mix
this much chemical. You will get this much result. This result. But, in, you
know, in medical science, yes, we can have to some extent. Ok. You take this
medicine. This disease will be cured. But eve..., different people have
different backgrounds. Who knows what the case background is. Who knows what
circumstances they are, you know, what, you know, you know, what, you know, say,
infections they have been exposed to. Or they are being exposed to. And how
certain things may interact with certain other things. To produce certain
results. We cannot say. So, that is why, you know, there are many examples of
people who, you know, get a small disease. Which can be very easily cured. And
that disease becomes so severe despite all the best medicines from the best
doctors. The person just dies because on a trivial disease. So, on the other
hand, some people may have a terrible disease. And the doctor may say, you are
going to die in six months. And then, that person attains the funeral of the
doctor. So, that person outlives the doctor. So, how does this happen? You know.
Life and death are ultimately not in our hands. Oh. Life and death are
ultimately determined by Krishna. So, Krishna is the giver of life. Krishna is
ultimately the taker of life. So, it is not that Krishna has a vengeance against
someone who Krishna has, takes life. But the karmic reactions for every soul are
given in different ways by Krishna. So, when Prabhupada says, Krishna Con...,
again, Prabhupada makes the same point in the, this purport, also, that:

"Kṛṣṇa consciousness is active in every sphere."

So, now, it is interesting, Prabhupada personifies Krishna Consciousness here.
That means, you know, say, i..., Prabhupada does not, instead of saying that, we
can be Krishna Consciousness in every sphere. Instead of, by saying, you know,
if, or we can be actively Krishna Conscious in every sphere. Prabhupada, Krishna
Consciousness is active in every sphere. That means the capacity for Krishna
Consciousness is latent in all spheres. We just have to tap that for capacity.
And then, when we tap that capacity, then we can be Krishna Conscious, also. So,
let us look at the, you know, next verse. So, in this ver..., in this p...,
previous verse, we had, m..., you know, four attributes. Which were talked
about. You know. So, first was, so, fire. And there are four. Now, let us
discuss:

        bījaṁ māṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        viddhi pārtha sanātanam
        buddhir buddhimatām asmi
        tejas tejasvinām aham

So, here, Krishna talks about three more attributes. Making the total of twelve
till now. So, "bījaṁ māṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ". I am the seed of all living beings.
"viddhi pārtha sanātanam". I am the eternal seed. Imperishable seed.
Indestructible seed. What does it mean? This can be connected the earlier, with
our earlier discussion of:

        oṁ pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ
        pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate
        pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya
        pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate

So, when many completes come out of the comp..., or complete, still, the
original remains the compl..., the comple..., complete remains the complete. So,
normally, when a seed gives rise to something, at that time, that thing, it is,
you know, destroyed. So, it is a seed, so, when the seed gives rise to a tree.
And the seed no longer exists. The seed gets transformed into a tree. So,
similarly, you know, when a, when an embryo is formed, what is the result? Egg
and then the embryo is formed, then the embryo gives rise to a child. Then, the
child, the embryo no longer exists. So, Krishna says, normally, the seed does
not exist. And one seed gives only one kind of tree. But Krishna says that, I am
the seed that gives all kinds of, you know, you know, trees. That means all
living beings. Whatever exists, it is, comes from Me. So, I am the seed. When
or nothing, He says, is, I am the seed which never gets exhausted. "sanātanam".
S..., so, all the living beings, all the varieties that exist in the universe,
that has all come from Krishna. But still, Krishna remains the original truth.
Krishna remains "sanātanam". Imperishable truth.

        buddhir buddhimatām asmi

Krishna says that I am the intelligence of the intelligent. Some people may say
that brilliant intelligence. You know. The way they recollect. The way they
express. The way they analyse, c..., stupefy people. So, when we see this, we
understand. That is the defining characteristic of these brilliant people. Their
brilliance. The intellectua..., of the intellectuals. So, where does this come
from? This comes from Krishna. And similarly, "tejas tejasvinām aham". "tejas
tejasvinām aham" means that I am the power of the powerful. Some people are
powerful. You know. They may have tremendous body. And they can just, one punch
can knock out somebody else. Such people, you know, are attracted to with
others. And when they are attracted to others, what we have to recognise is,
yes, they have power. But that power ultimately comes from m..., m..., Krishna.
It is Krishna who is making them powerful. And then, Prabhupada quotes again the
standard "nityo nityānāṁ" verse. And then, let us move forward to the next
verse. "balaṁ balavat...". So, ni..., eleventh verse. Now, up till now, we have
got twelve attributes Krishna has talked about. Krishna will talk about two more
in this verse.

        balaṁ balavatāṁ cāhaṁ
        kāma-rāga-vivarjitam
        dharmāviruddho bhūteṣu
        kāmo ’smi bharatarṣabha

So, "balaṁ balavatāṁ cāhaṁ". Krishna says, I am the strength of the strong. But
what kind of strength? "kāma-rāga-vivarjitam". That which is free from desire
and lust. Desire and attachment. H..., and then, He says, "dharmāviruddho
bhūteṣu". You know. That which is "aviruddhaḥ". Not opposed to dharma. That kind
of "kāma". That kind of desire, I am. That kind of, you know, "kāma". Now, here,
Prabhupada, it is interesting that Krishna uses the word "kāma" twice in this
verse. So, in the first li..., you know, time, He uses it in, it is 7.11B.
"kāma-rāga-vivarjitam". So, Krishna is first telling when He talks about
strength that strength should be free from desire and attachment. That means,
ksatriyas, for example, when they act, you know, they should act out of, you
know, dharma. They should act as duty. As protectors of other.

        kshatat trayate iti kshatriya

Those who protect others, from, you know, you know, hurt. "kshatat" is hurt.
They are called as ksatriyas. Now, "dharmāviruddho", but "bhūteṣu". "kāmo ’smi
bharatarṣabha". So, now, Krishna uses the word "kāmaḥ" once again in the next
line. And what is He saying over there when He is using it? He is saying that,
that "kāmaḥ" which is not contrary to dharma, I am that. So, what does this
mean? Actually, there is a, dharma, artha, kama, and moksha. So, that means,
actually, there are these, you know, different elements which all form a part of
life. So, it is not that, you know, "kāma" has to be entirely given up. So,
when we talk about kama, it can refer to various things. You know. And we have
to look at the context. Here, in the same verse, kama is used twice. And one,
first, Krishna is saying, one should be free from kama. And then, He is saying,
I am "kāmo ’smi". So, what is He referring to over here? You know. So, the words
"kama" do not, ev..., each case have the same, in, in, both cases have the same
meaning. First, kama refers to desire in general. And desire and attachment
which one should give up while em..., employing one's strength. It, desire in
terms of selfish desire. And then, when Krishna is talking about kama. He is
talking about kama as one of the "puruṣārthas". So, "Puruṣārtha". The purpose
of living beings, perver..., especially human beings. "Puruṣā"s. So, you know,
when, you know, in the Mahabharata, the sages meet, you know, they, some,
sometimes, sages visit "Yudhiṣṭhira" Maharaja. For example, Narada Muni
visit..., visits "Yudhiṣṭhira" Maharaja. And inquires from him. So, normally,
you know, the, for grihastas, and for sannyasis, the modes of inquiry are
different. When Dasharatha Maharaja sees Vishvamitra Muni, he honors him. And
respect him. And says that. How are you progressing in your conquest over
rebirth? You know. The purpose of sannyasi is that, a person wants to renounce
the world. And end the cycle of birth and death. And go back to m..., attain, go
back to the spiritual world. So, that whole pur..., idea is conquering over
rebirth. So, the sannyasi has asked the question, how can you conquer, how is
your conquest over rebirth going? But when, you know, the, sa..., you know,
sages, like, say, Narada Muni asked "Yudhiṣṭhira" Maharaja in the Mahabharata.
He is asking, oh m..., m..., oh, king, are you having a balance between, you
know, you know, religion, profit and pleasure? So, what is, the religion is
dharma. Profit is artha. And pleasure is kama. So, he says, you know, the, you
know, the, those who prio..., give up, those who pursue only religion and give
up profit and pleasure. Or those who pursue only profit and give up religion and
pleasure. Or those who pursue only pleasure and give up religion and profit.
They are all living imbalanced lives. And they will not be satisfied. But if
they balance this, then they can be satisfied. So, now, when we talk about, you
know, pleasure. When we talk about artha, it is not just bank balance. Artha is
holistic prosperity in terms of having the necessities of life without having
too much anxieties. And having natural comforts. So, Vrindavan is a place where
there is artha in terms of financial. It is a comfortable place. The, the
vrajavasis work hard. But along with that, they are also comfortable. Dharma.
Artha. Kama. So, kama refers to, not just, you know, you know, you know, sensual
gratification in terms of lust. It refers to the overall satisfaction of one's
family life. So, here, when Krishna is saying:

        dharmāviruddho bhūteṣu
        kāmo ’smi ...

He is saying that. The kama. The sex life. That is not contrary to dharma. That
I am. "bharatarṣabha". I am that. So, what does this refer to? This actually
refers to how Krishna is, Ar..., encouraging Arjuna to, you know, recognise that
in all aspects of life, one can manifest, one can perceive Krishna's presence.
So, even in kama, even in, you know, even in the, you know, hou..., in the, even
in the pleasure of family life. Even Prabhupada, you know, is, this kama to
refer to lust over, sex life over here. So, I am sex life. That is not contrary
to religious principles. So, that means, when there is dharma, that is, when
within the precincts of dharma, kama is pursued, then that kama is not
necessarily, is not m..., m..., mundane. That kama can actually be divine. So,
some people say that, is, you know, is sex taboo in the Vedic culture? Now,
taboo is that which is not to be talked about. That is considered to be very
bad. No. Sex is considered to be a manifestation of the divine. But then, when
it is a manifestation of divine, it has to be, you know, understood and, you
know, understood properly. So, actually, when people g..., glamorise sex, they
trivialise it. How i..., how is it? When people glamorise it in their
imagination more and more, then what is the glamorisation centered on? It is
centered primarily on, you know, looks and, you know, physical contacts. And,
you know, pleasure. So, now, what is the pleasure which, you know, most people,
which most depictions of sex, you know, glamorised depiction of sex ultimately
focus on? You know. That, that pleasure is basically, you know, the secretion.
Ejection. And reception of chemicals. That is all that is. You know. So, now,
the more people glamorise sex in their imagination, the more they trivialise it
in their real, real life. Because that which can be an experience of God, if it
is done propely within the precincts of dharma, that becomes reduced to
something just this physical. You know. Just becomes a tool for some physical
release. That is all. You know. And, so, that is a trivialisation of sex. So, it
is not that sex is considered taboo. Is, are, is the Vedic culture against sex?
No. Sex is a natural part of life. But it has to be, you know, made the p..., it
has to be kept as a proper part of life. Not made the whole purpose entire
purpose of life. Not made the constant object of thought. And not, certainly, you
know, made into a trivial activity that just one does for gaining a little bit
of release. You know. It is a, it is a dharmic activity when it is done within
the precincts of dharma. So, "dh...", so, Krishna is saying:

        dharmāviruddho bhūteṣu
        kāmo ’smi ...

When it is not opposed to dharma, then, you know, that life is, that is
actually, you know, that sex life is a matte..., expression, experience of
Krishna. So, nai..., now, Krishna will give a conclusion to, to this section.
He will describe:

        ye caiva sāttvikā bhāvā
        rājasās tāmasāś ca ye
        matta eveti tān viddhi
        na tv ahaṁ teṣu te mayi

So, He says, saying that, till now, He has given fourteen examples. And after
giving these fourteen examples, He gives a general principle. Actually, all
these are present within the three modes. So, "sama", "sāttvikā bhāvā", "sama",
"rāja", "sa bhava", "sama", "tama", "sa bhava". So, here, "bhāvā" refers to
nature. So, you know, some of them are in goodness, pass..., someone in passion.
Somein ignorance. So, now, whatever, everything that exists that will be within
the three modes. It will exist in the material existence. That has to be in some
way in the three modes in some combination. But all these three, "matta eveti
tān viddhi", they all come from Me. So, Krishna has given fourteen specific
examples of how He is the essence of things. But He is saying, ultimately,
everything that exists, its essence is ultimately Me. You know. It is all
present within the three modes. And, you know, "matta eveti". It all comes from
Me. But "tān viddhi". Oh, Arjuna, know. You know, the "tān", but, oh, "tān
viddhi" is there because Arjuna understand that ultimately everything is coming
from Me. I..., its essence is Me. I, source is Me. But "na tv ahaṁ teṣu te
mayi". But do not think that I am reduced only to this. That means I am just
existing everything as an amorphous essence. No. I have my own distinct concrete
personality. And my own individuality. And am, I am alive. "na tv ahaṁ teṣu te
mayi". It is not that I am within them. Rather, they are within Me. This is one
of My energies. As Krishna has talked about. "aparā". "prakṛtiṁ". And, so, He is
talking here about, the two, you know, saying that, everything exists, it is
within three modes. And all of it comes from Me. All. But I am not reduced to
it. So, Krishna is, you know, never contained within nature. Krishna transcends
nature. So, after giving the example of the essence. So, first, Krishna has
given in 7.7, the example, "sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva". I am the unifying underlying
str..., thread of everything. Now, that would mean that Krishna is, Krishna is
just the thread. Nothing more. But no. Krishna is saying, yes, I am the thread,
I am underlying, unifying everything. But I am much more. "na tv ahaṁ teṣu". A
thread is inside the necklace. And thread is not anywhere else. But here,
Krishna is saying that, yes, the thread is there inside the necklace. But I am
distinctive, also. I have my own separate existent. They are Me. I am not in
them. So, when Krishna has said that, you know, He has said that, I am in them,
earlier.

        raso ’ham apsu kaunteya

He is there. But His existence is also beyond. He is transcendental, also. How
He is transcendental and what the transcendence of Krishna implies, that we will
discuss in our next class.

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
