Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n07XSeid5sQ Audio:
https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=n07XSeid5sQ&event=video_description&redir_token=jlVohha0-4gDZB1ZSuLBEs6r9kh8MTU0ODQ4OTEzN0AxNTQ4NDAyNzM3&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_108_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_10_Text_27_to_37_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3
prapanna parijataya totra vetraika panaye jnana mudraya krishnaya gitamrita duhe
namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now into the "Vibhuti Yoga" Chapter, discussing the various vibhutis of Krishna.
So, in this chapter, verses 12 to, verses, sorry, verses 19 onwards till 42,
Krishna talks about His various Vibhutis. So, let us have a quick overview of
this chapter before we go to the last part. So, the verses 1 to 7 talk about no
one Kri..., knows Krishna as He is the source of all. But then, how can we know
Krishna? We can, Krishna can only be known through bhakti by His grace. That is
the Chatur Shloki Bhagavag Gita. And then, Arjuna accepts Krishna's glories.
That is from 12 to 18. And desires to hear more. Especially about His vibhutis.
Because Krishna has already said that it is very difficult to know Him. Even
devatas cannot know Him. So, then, Arjuna feels concerned how will common people
come to know about Krishna. So, they cannot very easily know about Krishna's
transcendental nature. But at least, they can understand Krishna's glory through
what is manifest in this world. So, how, is, how He pervades this world, you
know, in a glorious way. That is what is the vibhuti concept. So, we discussed,
vibhuti means, you know, vibhuti means one among the many. And "Vibhuti Yoga"
means that the one among the many takes us to the one beyond the many. That is
how, you know, that is the last section how to know Krishna through His
vibhutis. That is 19 to 42. So, we started this section. And we had come till
verse 26. So, let us start with the next verse. So, 27th verse.

        uccaiḥśravasam aśvānāṁ viddhi mām amṛtodbhavam airāvataṁ gajendrāṇāṁ
narāṇāṁ ca narādhipam

So, "uccaiḥśravasam aśvānāṁ". So, "aśvā" is horse. It is like we had
"aśvamedha-yajña" in the past. So, there, that is a hor..., our, horse was
sacrifice. So, "aśvā". "aśvā" is horse. "uccaiḥśravasam aśvānāṁ". So, among the
horses, Krishna says, I am "Uccaiḥśravā". There were many horses. But
"Uccaiḥśravā" was the horse who appeared, you know, during the churning of the
milk ocean. And then, horse was so extraordinary. So captivating. And actually,
it was taken by Indra at that time. You know. So, "viddhi mām amṛtodbhavam".
So, there are many wonderful horses. And, you know, among them, the greatest was
"Uccaiḥśravā". H..., so, "Uccaiḥśravā", And now, Prabhu..., when Prabhupada was
asked, which is the best among all animals. You know. Some devotees naturally
thought it is cow. Prabhupada said yes, cow is best in the sense that it is dear
to Krishna. But the most, you know, attractive, the most, you know, beautiful
among all animals is the horse. The horse can, horse can fight in a war. It can
ride majestically. It can take people around. So, Krishna says that the horse is
also attractive in its own way. But among all the horses, "Uccaiḥśravā" is so
attractive. And "Uccaiḥśravā" is a manifestat..., manifesting My vibhuti.
Similarly, "airāvataṁ gajendrāṇāṁ". So, among "gaja-indrā". Now, the word
"gajendrā", you know, just basically refers to the elephants. The king of the
elephants. Or lordly elephants. So, now, "gajendrā" can be a proper noun. Or it
can be a common noun. We discuss proper noun earlier about Shiva being, you
know, the various names of devatas can be proper nouns or common nouns. So, in
the Eighth Canto of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam", there is a pastime. Where it is, you
know, described about a specific element. Elephant by the name "gajendrā". Who
was caught by a, you know, you know, you know, crocodile. So, that is, you know,
the usage of the word "gajendrā" as a proper noun. It is referring to a specific
elephant. But here, the word "gajendrā" is used as a common noun. Common noun
means, it is used as a generic describer of a certain kind of animals. So,
Prabhupada translates "gajendrā" as lordly elephants. So, there are elephants
which were themselves huge and powerful. And among them, there are gigantic
elephants who are like the kings of elephants. But among these kings of
elephants, also, "Airāvata" is special. "Airāvata" is the carrier of Indra. So,
as, just as Indra is the kin..., you know, king of the Gods. Similarly,
"Airāvata" is the, you know, greatest among the kingly elephants. He is very
powerful. And he strikes terror in the opponents of Indra when Indra is riding
on top of "gajendrā", of "Airāvata". Sorry. So:

        airāvataṁ gajendrāṇāṁ narāṇāṁ ca narādhipam

So, similarly, among human beings, who am I? Krishna says, I am "narādhipam".
"narādhipa" is, "ādhipa" is the ruler or the king. So, He is the king. I am the
king among the human beings. So, what does this represent? You know. That,
actually, the kind has enormous power as compared to other people. Other, you
know, human beings. So, that extraordinary power, it can be used for good. Or
for bad. That is different, you know, point. The point here is that,
extraordinary which the king has, that power attracts everyone to the king. And,
you know, that power is a manifestation of Krishna's power. So, is Krishna, who
is manifesting His glory through that king? And, you know, now, we may say that
not all kings are Godly. That is true. So, in fact, we have the pastime of Vena
in the Fourth Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam. Where Vena actually misused, abused
his power. And said that, told the brahmanas to stop worshipping Vishnu. And
they should worship me alone. Why? Because I am the representative of the
Supreme Lord. And I am worthy of your worship. So, he, that was his argument.
And it was a distorted argument. So, the king is worthy of worship. But he is
worthy of worship because he represents God. It is not that substitutes God. He
represents God. And the representative, he is meant to, you know, guide people
towards God. But if the guid..., you know, the guru, instead of, if the king,
instead of representating... God, repr..., representing God, replaces God. Then,
such a king needs to be defeated. And even destroyed. And that is what the
brahmanas did by cursing. So, again, the point here is that that power which the
king has, that rep..., is a manifestation of the vibhuti of Krishna. Then,
beyond that, you know, after describing all this, actually, the, you know, the
kings, if they are righteous. Then, they can take the, which, you know, citizens
towards God. And that is how they should be. But when they are not, then, you
know, you know, they will take people in the wrong path. That is why these
vibhutis, they can be "daivī". Or they can be "āsurī". See, all the opulences,
whoever has the opulences, those opulences come from Krishna. But not all
opulences take us to Krishna. What does that mean? You know. As I said, you
know, vig..., as I was, I was saying, earl..., talking about the king. A king
may have fierce power. Terr..., you know, he has tremendous power. But the king
may be a tyrant. Ruthlessly killing people. Killing people. You know. You know.
In European history, there are, they say that, two great population shocks which
led to the death of large number of people. You know. So, one was the black
plague. Which killed thousand and thousands of people. And other was the attack
of "Genghis Khan". You know. He was, wherever he went, he just was so brutal. He
left behind a trail of corpses. So, you know, you know, there have been many
brutal kings like that throughout history. So, this kind of abuse of power, that
power is a vibhuti. And ultimately, by the past karma of that person, that
person is given power by God. But that person chose to abuse the power. And
then, that will give, lead to bad karma. And that will lead to harm in this
world. For other people. And harm for ho..., that, that person, also. Either in
this or next life. So, that abuse of power is undesirable. But wherever there is
power, that indicates that there is a vibhuti of God coming. So, we should, you
know, be attracted to those vibhutis which take us towards Krishna. See, vibhuti
will naturally attract us. But we should choose which vibhuti we become
attracted to. You know. There may be a devotee who sings kirtans very nicely.
And there may be a, there may be a mundane musician. Who sings, you know, sexual
songs also very melodiously. Now, the musical talent may be there in both. But,
you know, and that, that mu..., musical talent is a manifestation of Krishna's
vibhuti in both. But not all vibhutis are taking a person towards God. You know.
When a devotee sings kirtan, that reminds us of Krishna. That rou..., arouses
devotional emotions within us. And that helps us to, you know, go closer to
Krishna.

On the other hand, when a materialistic person sings sexually explicit songs,
then that arouses material emotions within us. And the material emotions take us
away from Krishna, take us away from, you know, you know, the spiritual reality
of life. So, then, we choose, which we can, we ca..., we have to become
attracted.  Because that is our very nature. But we can choose which vibhutis to
become attracted to. You know. We may be attracted to, you know, eloquently
delivered speeches. And eloquent speakers. You know. You know. These people will
have influence. So, there may be non-devotees. There may be politicians. There
may be, you know, authors. Who may have the power of speech. That power of
speech is an opulence of Krishna. But Hitler had such eloquence in his speech.
He would spend, sometimes, hours in front of a mirror observing carefully each
expression on his face. Each modulation of his tone. And he would gain national
broadcast.  And he, by his power of speech, perverted the thoughts of an entire
nation, practically speaking. So, he had the power of speech. He was using it.
That power of speech is a vibhuti of Krishna. But whether that takes one towards
Krishna, or takes one away from Krishna, that depends on that individual soul's
free will. And, you know, you know, it is our individual free will which will
decide which vibhuti, vibhutis we become attracted to. So, you know, we be, try
to become attracted, you know, we, you know, to those vibhutis which are
manifest either in devotees. Or which take us towards Krishna. H..., now, when
we do this, we cannot avoid the principle that we have, we have to be attracted.
We are conscious beings. And then, naturally, certain things attract us. But
when we take, you know, when we s..., choose to expose our cer..., certain
vibhutis, gradually, attraction will develop. You know. If we hear a
materialistic person's music repeatedly. Well-sung music in terms of musical
abilities. Then, our attraction will increase to that. But if we hear devotional
music sung by a devotee, that will, our attraction will increase to that, also.
If we like to read good literature, we can read the books by materialistic
people. And if it is well-written, that will impress us. If we read a books by
devotees, even among devotees, there are different kinds of authors. And some
authors, they, they are, they make profound points. And then, their, you know,
their, so, writing is eloquent. Potent. And we read that. That, that is also
vibhuti of Krishna. That will attract us towards Krishna. So, Prabhupada
explains in the purport how the king should use the power to, you know, you
know, do virtue. To do good. And to take people towards the ultimate good of
bhakti.

        āyudhānām ahaṁ vajraṁ dhenūnām asmi kāma-dhuk prajanaś cāsmi kandarpaḥ
sarpāṇām asmi vāsukiḥ

So, "āyudhānām". "āyudhā" is weapons. So, among the weapons, I am "vajraṁ".
"vajraṁ" refers to the thunderbolt. The weapon of Indra. This is, Indra is the
king of the Gods. And his elephant is extremely powerful. Similarly, his weapon
is also extremely powerful. And what struck terror in the heart, heart of Indra,
while fighting with Hiranyakashipu was, you know, you know, that, actually,
Indra's thunderbolt which could reduce by one blow a whole mountain into powder.
That thunderbolt could not even make a scratch on the body of Hiranyakashipu.
Such was, the, you know, you know, power of the blessing that Hiranyakashipu had
got by his austerities to Brahma. And, so, it is a formidable. It, you know, can
just burr..., reduce, you know, mountains to powder. So that, such was, what
kind of weapon is that? You know. We have nuclear weapons today. But how many
nuclear weapons can do something like that? Reduce a whole mountain to just a
rubble. You know. So, "dhenūnām asmi kāma-dhuk". So, "dhenūnām". There are many
cows. But among them, "kāma-dhuk". You know. There are desire-fulfilling cows.
That means they give whatever is desired. You know. They can fo..., give as much
milk as one desires. Now, it is interesting that in Vrindavan, there are
"kalpadruma", also. There are desire-fulfilling trees. And, you know, there,
where, we can, one can ask them for whatever one wants. And get it. But we do
not see the "vrajavāsīs"s utilising those desire-fulfilling trees too much.
Even Radharani, you know, she comes to "Pavana Sarovar". She comes and cooks for
Krishna. You know. She does not say the desire tree, oh, I want to offer
Rasgulla to Krishna. But the, oh, desire tree, just give Rasgulla. She does not
do like that. Why? Because the joy of love is also in service. So, through the
striving to serve Krishna. And cook the best food for her, her beloved,
Radharani relishes the joy of devotional service. So, the cows, when they offer
milk, they are not just offering milk in Vrindavan. They are offering their love
to Krishna. So, in the spiritual world, you know, you know, the essential point
is the reciprocation of love. Here, you know, "dhenūnām asmi kāma-dhuk". Among
the cows, the cows which give extraordinary amount of milk.  You know. Which is
special milk. So, they are considered special over there.  The opulence of
Krishna. Krishna manifests Himself through them. So, Prabhupada would say that,
you know, what kind of, can human beings make a kind of machine where you put
grass from one end and get milk out of the other end? It is, it is miracle. So,
that is the kind of machine that a cow is. And it is not a machine.  It is a
living being. It is sensitive. And caring. And warm. And that is how is the cow.
"dhenūnām asmi kāma-dhuk". And "prajanaś cāsmi kandarpaḥ". "kandarpaḥ" is the
God of love. Now, the God of love attracts people, you know, attracts males to
females. Females to males. And that is why people have these, the "kandarpaḥ" is
said to have flower arrow. Huge flower arrows. And the arrow pierces the heart.
So, why is it called a flower arrow? You know. In, from the front, it looks like
a flower. But when it goes inside, it burns like an arrow.  It cuts. And wounds
like an arrow. So, flower arrow. "prajanaś cā puspa bana" That is in the
"Kāmadeva". So, now, "Kāmadeva", generally, induces lust within us. And we have
to be careful. But Krishna is saying that not all kama is bad.  "prajanaḥ".
"prajanaḥ" means, "janaḥ" is birth. So, "prajanaḥ" means that "Kāmadeva" which
leads to the, you know, you know, begetting of progeny. This is the explanation
of "Chakravarti Pada". "prajanaś cāsmi kandarpaḥ". That when the attraction
leads to the begetting of, you know, new life. That is the kind of lust that I
am, Krishna says. So, when there is proper dharmic marriage. And then, there is
the begetting of children through that. You know. Children are the gift of God.
So, that is an act by which God sends new life into the world.  And that is
special. You know. So, you know, you know, "prajanaś cāsmi kandarpaḥ". Children
have to be seen as gifts of God. You know. Sometimes, when the jnani perspective
is there. And the jnani perspective strives to disect everything in, in terms
of, you know, detachment. So, in terms of detachment, renunciation. In some, in
some cases, it might be helpful. But otherwise, it can lead to a lot of
hard-heartedness in most cases. So, the jnani perspective, if chil..., if the
pare..., if the parents see that. Or people start seeing children as the
products of lust. You know. Man-woman were attracted. And they became lusty. And
then, this child has born. You know. They, how can, if we start seeing children
as products of lust, that can lead to, how can the children be offered love?
And, you know, care that they need? So that they grow up? So, the jnani
perspective, you know, you know, can make us very hard-hearted. And the jnani
perspective is not even complete. Because that is not seeing the hand of
Krishna.

So, when children are born, actually, you know, the "prajanaś", Krishna says, I
am that "prajanaś". So, we have that, you know, pastime of "Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu". When Shivananda Sena came to him. And told "Chaitanya Mahaprabhu".
Sannyasi, "Shivananda Sena" came, came and told him that, you know, my wife is
expecting. "Chaitanya Mahaprabhu" was very happy. And he says, yes. May your son
be a vai..., great vaishnava. And he gave him a name, also, over there. And
blessed him profusely. So, "prajanaś cāsmi kandarpaḥ". Then, "sarpāṇām asmi
vāsukiḥ". So, there are many "sarpā"s. There are many snakes. But among them,
the "Vāsuki" is, you know, "Vāsuki" is a powerful snake. And this "Vāsuki" was
used as the rope. You know. While the milk ocean was, you know, being churned.
So, he had that, you know, f..., power. To act as the rope over there. And
everybody is pulling. An ordinary rope can break. But at that time, he did not
recogn..., in fact, the mode of ignorance acted on him. And he went to peaceful
sleep. While everybody was using his body to pull. So, in this way, you know,
this is, these opulences. Now, Krishna goes on further describes:

        anantaś cāsmi nāgānāṁ varuṇo yādasām aham pitṝṇām aryamā cāsmi yamaḥ
saṁyamatām aham

So, "anantaś cāsmi nāgānāṁ". Now, what is the difference? It was, you know,
"sarpāṇām asmi vāsukiḥ" So, among snakes, I am "Vāsuki". And here, there is
"nāgā"s. "anantaś cāsmi nāgānāṁ". So, what is the difference between "nāgā" and
the "sarpā"? So, the acharyas described that, you know, a sna..., "nāgā" is a
multi-headed serpent. Normal serpents that we see in today's times, they have
one head. But there are ferocious serpents. And they have been observed, also.
You know. On few occasions, even today. Where the serpents have many heads. So,
when they have many heads, like Kaliya had so many heads. Krishna was dancing on
all those heads. So, multi-headed serpents are called as "nāgā"s. And among
them, the most celebrated is "Ananta". "anantaś cāsmi nāgānāṁ". So, that power
of "Ananta" is an opulence of Krishna. By seeing that, we can remember Krishna.
"varuṇo yādasām aham". So, "yādasām". "yādasām" is the aquatics. So, among the
aquatics, I am "varuṇaḥ". "varuṇaḥ" is the God controlling water. Actually, he
controls, you know, water. And that is his abode. His vein reside in the water.
Nanda Maharaja, when he went to bath, described in 28th Chapter of the 10th
Canto. How, when he went to bath, the residents of, the servants of "varuṇaḥ"
took him, you know, co..., arrested him. And took him to the abode of "varuṇaḥ".
Which is deep inside the water. So, he is the, there are many bodies. There are
many aquatics. But he is controlling all of them. That is why he is considered
the most powerful. "varuṇo yādasām aham". His power represents Krishna. You
know. So, then, it is said "pitṝṇām aryamā cāsmi". So, "pitṝṇām". Among the
ancestors, I am the "Aryamā". "Aryamā" is the chief of the ancestors again. So,
"Pitraloka". "pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ". It has been talked about in 9.25
earlier, also. That, you know, those who worship the "pitṝa"s go to the
"pitṝa"s. So, you know, actually, you know, generally speaking, in the Vedic
culture, it is described. Now, we may wonder what is this concept of
"Pitraloka"? Is that all ancestors go to "Pitraloka"? Everybody's ancestors,
whatever be their karma, they go to "Pitraloka". Not like that. Vedic culture,
the idea was, people generally live a life of punya. So, those who live a life,
life of average punya, they go to "Pitraloka". Those who live a life of above
average punya. They will go to Svarga Loka. So, the normal destination for the
ancestors is expected to be "Pitraloka". But if they do a very high punya, they
can go to Svarga Loka. If they do papa, then they can go to Naraka, also. That
will vary. But in general, if, the Vedic had a progressive way of living. The
progression was gradual. But that gradual progression led to some level of
elevation. So, that abode where then ancestors are normally expected to go, if
they do average level of punya, that is called as, you know, "Pitraloka". And,
you know, the predo..., predominating deity of "Pit...", the, in charge of the
"Pitraloka" is "Pitr...", "Aryamā". So, his power represents the power of
Krishna. "yamaḥ saṁyamatām aham". And among the dispenses of law, "saṁyamatām".
Those who bring "saṁyama" on others. Who am I? "yamaḥ". "yamaḥ" is Yamaraja. So,
actually, you know, people, the people con..., want to break free. And defy
rules in this world. And they may do that, for cer..., to some extent. No matter
how much they defy rules, you know, and if they are powerful. They may c...,
brea..., you know, break the rules and get away with it, also. They get, you
know, but ultimately, they are all regulated by Yamaraja. They cannot exc...,
escape the power of Yamaraja. There is the cosmic system of justice. And they
cannot escape that. So, he, those who refuse to be regulated in this world by
rules of God. Or rules of the state. They are ultimately regulated by the rules
of Yamaraja. They have to endure the punishments that will come as a result of
their karmic misdeeds. You know. You know. Then:

        prahlādaś cāsmi daityānāṁ kālaḥ kalayatām aham mṛgāṇāṁ ca mṛgendro ’haṁ
vainateyaś ca pakṣiṇām

So, "prahlādaś cāsmi daityānāṁ". "daityānāṁ". So, you know, the "daityā"s. You
know. "Ādityá"s. And "daityā"s. So, you know, "Kaśyapa", you know, you know,
had, you know, two wives. Among, has, among several wives, he had two major
wives. "Ādity...". "Aditi". And "Diti". The sons of "Diti" are called as
"daityā"s. The sons of Aditi are called as "Ādityá"s. So, the Gods, the son, you
know, so, the "Ādityá"s are some..., sometimes called the Gods. The "daityā"s
are called the demons. So, actually, they are related. They are cousins in a
sense. But they are, they, or rather, not, could, you know, we could say not
exactly cousins. They are, you know, even stepbrothers. But there is a, you
know, their natures are very opposite. And because of that, there is a conflict.
You know. "vishnu bha...":

        viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ

That those who are devoted to Vishnu, they are the bhaktas. And opposite to them
are the asuras. Opposed to them are the asuras. Now, you know, you know,
"prahlādaś cāsmi daityānāṁ". So, normally, the "daityā"s are very inimical to
Vishnu. But among the "daityā"s, you know, very special person is "Prahlāda".
You know. "Prahlāda" may not seem to have much physical power. But he had
enormous spiritual power. Such spiritual power that the person with the greatest
philo..., physical power in the whole universe could do nothing for him. Nothing
against him. That was Hiranyakashipu. Hiranyakashipu ev..., terrorised even the
greatest of the devatas. But "Hiranyakashipu" could not do anything to
"Prahlāda". So, his extraordinary character of then the, daityā dynas..., you
know, dynasty. And that is why his extraordinariness is a manifestation of
Krishna's opulence. "kālaḥ kalayatām aham". So, among subduers, I am time.
"kalaya". Subduers. You know. You know. So, among subduers, I am time. So, what
does it mean actually? "kālaḥ kalayatām aham". So, again, in this world, people
may refuse to be subdued by anyone. But then, time subdues everyone. You know.
Time, you know, you know, time makes, you know, shiny faces shrivelled. You
know. Time makes strong persons weak. Time makes healthy persons sickly. Time
makes active people passive. Time makes the living dead. The time changes
everything in this world. And nobody can resist time. So, "kālaḥ kalayatām
aham". Ultimately, time subdues everyone. There may be the greatest of
conquerors in this world. But time will conquer the, the greatest conqueror,
also, also, in this world. And then, "mṛgāṇāṁ ca mṛgendro ’haṁ". So, "mṛgāṇām".
"ṛgāṇāṁ" means animals. "mṛga-indraḥ" is a lion. So, actually, lion has a
majesty and a ferocity. That is extraordinary. "mṛgāṇāṁ ca mṛgendro ’haṁ". So,
Krishna says, I, among the animals, I am the lion. So, actually, one time,
devotees were gone to a, you know, some of that had gone to a zoo. Prabhupada
had also gone there. So, some people were just poking sticks. And making fun of
a lion that was caged. And Prabhupada said, do not do that. Prabhupada, you
know, you know, reminded devotees of this verse. And he says, actually, that
lion is meant to be the king. And lion deserves respect. Now, it has been put in
an unnatural situation. It is miserable for this lion. So, you know, we should
not, you know, heap, insult to injury over there. So, these are opulences of
Krishna. And a devotee tries to see the opulences everywhere. And then,
"vainateyaś ca pakṣiṇām". So, "pakṣi". "pakṣi" is birds. So, among them, you
know, "vainate". Actually, "Garuḍa" is, "Garuḍa"'s mother, is named as "Vinata",
is known as "Vinata". And therefore, the son of "Vinata" is "vainateyaḥ".
"vainateyaḥ". So, "vainateyaś ca pakṣiṇām". Among birds, I am "Garuḍa". Now,
"Garuḍa" is so powerful. Actually, there is a long story given in the
Mahabharat, how some, the, the mother of the snakes, and the mother of "Garuḍa",
they were friends. They were acquaintances. And somehow, you know, the mother,
the snake has cheated "Garuḍa"'s mother, Vinata. And "Vinata" and her son became
slaves of "Garuḍa". So, at that time, you know, "Garuḍa" asked, you know, how,
why are we, why do we have to serve them? How can we be, he says, that is what
the condition was why lost the battle. Actually, his mother had chea..., you
know, the mother of the snakes had cheated. So that Vinata would be enslved.
Then "Garuḍa" went and asked, what you, what will you take for freeing my, my
mother and me? Yes. He said, we want the nectar from Svarga. So, "Garuḍa" said
ok, I will go. Now, "Garuḍa" had huge power. He had flying straight in the sky.
And he went to the place where the devatas have stored the nectar. Do yoga the
other, devatas came. And their guards over there, their swapped. "Garuḍa" just
blew his wind. And all of them flew away. And then, they went to Indra. And
Indra said, what a huge bird this is. Indra said, stop, otherwise I will kill
you. "Garuḍa" has not paid attention. And Indra used thunderbolt. And "Garuḍa"
said, actually, a thunderbolt cannot do anything to me. But because you are the
king of the Gods, therefore, out of respect for you, I will let that "Gar...",
let the thunderbolt cut one part of one feather of my body. And that, he let the
feather cut. And he was shocked. Indra said, Indra was very po..., diplomatic.
He said, oh, you are so powerful. You know. I am impressed. Let us be friends.
You know. The idea is, if you cannot suppress somebody, become, become a, you
know, cannot defeat somebody, befriend that person. So, then, Indra said, why do
you want this nectar? He said, this is not meant for the demons. He said no. No.
The nagas want this. Indra said that you have been told only to deliver it to
them, isn't it? He said yes. So, then, Indra deliver. So, he says, ok, you just
go and give it to them. And leave at that time. You know. So, he said, ok, so,
he went and left it for the nagas. And as they were taking it, you know, for
"Garuḍa" just blew his wings. And when he blew the wings that such a wind came
that, you know, the nagas became blinded for temporarily. You know. The sna...,
the serpants. The snakes became blinded temporarily. And that time, Indra came
and took the pot of nectar. And went way again. So, that way, you know, you
know, "vainateyaś". What Gaje..., you know, "Garuḍa" did was, he liberated his
mother from slavery. So, he was such a powerful bird that even Indra's
thunderbolt could not cut him. "vainateyaś ca pakṣiṇām". Now, there are many
stories of "Garuḍa", also. How he is competently serving Lord Vishnu in every,
his various pastimes. Then:

        pavanaḥ pavatām asmi rāmaḥ śastra-bhṛtām aham jhaṣāṇāṁ makaraś cāsmi
srotasām asmi jāhnavī       

You know. "pavanaḥ pavatām asmi". "pavanaḥ". "pavanaḥ" means the wind. So, there
are many purifying objects. Among them, wind is also purifier. And that
purifying potency of the wind represents Krishna. "rāmaḥ śastra-bhṛtām aham".
So, among "śastra-bhṛtām", those who carry weapons. There are many, but among
them, the most formidable and fearsome carriers of the weapons were the two
"Rāma". It can refer to Bal..., you know, it can refer "Paraśurāma". It can
refer to Lord "Rāmacandra", also. "rāmaḥ śastra-bhṛtām aham". "jhaṣāṇāṁ makaraś
cāsmi". "jhaṣāṇāṁ". "jhaṣāṇāṁ" is, among the fish, I am the shark. You know.
Shark is so swift and so fearsome. There are movies made about shark only.
Jokes. And things like that. They can swiftly catch. And consume a person. With
that ferocity. That power. That f..., speed. That is representative of Krishna's
opulence. "srotasām asmi jāhnavī". So, among the flowing rivers, I am the Ganga.
Ganga is sacred. Ganga comes from the lotus feet of, you know, Lord Vishnu.
Ganga is held by Lord Shiva on his head and is received by Lord Shiva on his
head. So, in that way, Ganga is so special among all rivers. So, it ca..., it is
considered to be a manifestation of Krishna. So, when we see the Ganga, we can
remember Krishna in various ways.

        caraṇa-sīdhu, dekhiyā gańgā, sukha sā sīmā pāya

Bhaktivinoda Thakur saying in his:

        śuddha-bhakata-caraṇa-reṇu, bhajana-anukūl

He says that, you know, he is singing the song about what all meditations and
attitudes are favorable for, are, are, for, healthy for the, the devotee to
have. And he says the devotee should take the various, you know, you know,
spiritual objects as stimula for comtemplation on Krishna. And therefore He
describes that actually contemplating on the Ganga. When we see the Ganga,
whimsically, we might, this is the "caraṇa-sīdhu". It is like the "caranamrta"
of Lord Vishnu. When Bali Maharaj..., when, when Bali Maharaja gave the three
worlds. But still, that was not enough for the three steps. So, then, Vamanadeva
put his, let his third step expand from the bottom of the universe to the top.
So, at that time, you know, you know, from the universal covering, that broke
the uni..., this upper part of the stoke, broke the universal covering, then
what, what the amount that came as Ganga. So, that is why "caranamrta". So,
devotee can remember it in different ways. The Lord can stea..., use the sight
of Ganga. The thought of Ganga to stimulate our devotional memory in different
ways. Remembering that this is an opulence of Krishna. So, you know, you know,
you know:

        sargāṇām ādir antaś ca madhyaṁ caivāham arjuna adhyātma-vidyā vidyānāṁ
vādaḥ pravadatām aham

"sargāṇām". "sargā" is creation.

        ... ādir antaś ca madhyaṁ caivā ...

So, beginning. Middle. And end. In the crea..., whole creation, I am the
beginning. Middle. And end. So, now, earlier, in the 20th verse, Krishna has
talked about:

        aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca bhūtānām anta eva ca

There, He was talking about, you know, His pervasion in terms of, you know, of
all phases of time for the living beings. "bhūtānām" refers to living beings.
So, beginning. Middle. And end. Here, He is talking about, you know, non-living,
insentient things. "sargāṇām ādir antaś ca". Beginning. Middle. And end. All
this, I am, He says. "adhyātma-vidyā vidyānāṁ". "vidyānāṁ". So, among, there are
various kinds of knowledge. But the most potent among these knowledge is
"adhyātma-vidyā". Material "vidyā" can help us in the material world to some
extent. But it cannot get us out of the material world. "adhyātma-vidyā" can get
us out of the material world. And that is the greatest blessing that we can get
from the material world. You know. And not only can "adhyātma-vidyā" be...,
"vidyā" get us out of the material world. But that spiritual knowledge can grant
us the best possible fulfillment even in the material world. So, "adhyātma-vidyā
vidyānāṁ". And then, "vādaḥ pravadatām aham". So, "pravadatām". "pravadatām"
means when people are having debates. And there are arguments. So, there are
different kinds of arguments. Sometimes, some peo..., arguers, you know, when,
you know, we, we make a logical argument, they will attack "ad hominem". "ad
hominem" means instead of attacking the argument, they attack the person making
that argument. And they try to shift the focus of the debate from the content of
the argument to the character of the arguer. So, that is considered to be
malicious argument normally. Such "ad hominem" attacks. And then, beyond that,
you know, there, there is another kind of argument which Prabhupada makes. It
is, you know, "vā...", "vādaḥ". "vādaḥ" here is "vitanda". "Vitanda" means that
actually, you know, you know, I do not care whether I am right or not. I am
going to, I am going to prove that you are wrong. So, whatever you say, wrong.
Wrong. Wrong. Wrong. Wrong. So, that is called "vitanda". "vitanda". "vitanda"
means just, it is actually not constructive argument. Destructive argument.
Destructive argument means ju..., the focus is just on proving the other person
wrong. Not on, you know, not even on proving oneself nor..., right.  And not
even on trying to understand, or discover, or establish what is right.  So, you
know, wha..., to prove myself right may not actually always be right also in a
debate. It may be the process of discovery where we discover, understand what is
right through mutual discussion. But "vitanda" is a destructive argument where
the only goal is to prove the other person is wrong.  You know. Especially, if
there is animosity between two people. Then the whole, you know, purpose of the
interaction is, often is to put the other person down.  So, then, that time,
"vitanda" can be, "vitanda" is used. So, but, you know, "vādaḥ" is the argument
where it is conclusive. You know. Normally, there is argument. And there is
counterargument. Then, there is counter counterargument.  Then, there is counter
counterargument. And there is counter counter counterargument. And like that,
this counter, you know, can stop counting. But the arguments will not stop. It
will just go on. That is why at, at logical level, there is no end. But in some
cases, in some debates, some people may be so powerful logically. Logic is after
a weapon. You know. Some people may be more skilled at using the weapon. Some
people may be less skilled at using the weapon. See, logic itself does not
reveal the truth always. You know. You know.  Atheist, if atheist is confident
in a debate with a theist. But the atheist is logically were memorse..., you
know, skilled. And the theist is not skilled logically. Then, you know, the
atheist may defeat the theist, also. That can happen. Not because theism is
intellectually weaker. Or atheism is, you know, intellectually superior. But it
is just that the representatives who are combating over there may not be equally
matched. So, therefore, you know, here, we are not talk..., not talking about
the strength of various schools of thought. But here, we are just talking about
the point of arguments. So, there are different kinds of arguments. And
sometimes, the arguer gives an argument for which there is just no comeback.
There is no, you know, comeback. So, when there is no comeback. Then, that is
like a decisive, conclusive, knockout argument. So, that knockout argument is
"vādaḥ". "vādaḥ pravadatām aham". You know. Then:

        akṣarāṇām a-kāro ’smi dvandvaḥ sāmāsikasya ca aham evākṣayaḥ kālo
dhātāhaṁ viśvato-mukhaḥ

So, "akṣarāṇām a-kāro ’smi". So, there are many letters. So, now, this, you
know, He is giving us a vision of the Absolute Truth. That is actually
pervasive. When we look at letters. Normally, we may not think about Krishna.
We may think about language. And in and out itself may seem to be technical. You
know. Jiva Goswami to help us get a devotional vision of language, you know, he
wrote, he rewrote the whole grammar, you know, based on rules using the names
of, you know, Krishna and Vishnu. So, in Hari-namamrta-vyakaranam, you know, so,
that is to help us see the spiritual even within the grammatical. But here, the
Bhagavad Gita is telling the same thing to us in principle. And He is saying
that, actually, even the letters. We look at the letters. And we say that, ok,
these letters, you know, among them, some letters are more commonly used. More
important. So, all the alpha..., the alphabet begins with 'a'. In sanskrit,
also, it is 'a'. So, "akṣarā". So, among the "akṣarā"s, among the various
letter, 'a' is the beginning. And it is said that, actually, in all sounds in
sanskrit, the 'a' sound is present. The "Aitareya Aranyaka" says that, you know,
you know, actually, the 'a' sound is universal in all syllables in sans..., all
sounds in sanskrit. So, that sound which is the beginning. And that sound which
is also, according to some analysis, present in all other sounds. That sound
represents Krishna. That "dvandvaḥ sāmāsikasya ca". So, "sāmāsika". "sāmāsika"
is jou..., compound words. You know. For example, we have devotee children. So,
the children that is devotee. These are compound word. The two parts which are
brought together in it. So, when there are compound words. Or we have a devotee
scientist. That is also compound word. So, now, now, sometimes, in the, you
know, compound words, one word is heavier than the other. You know. It is more
important than the other. So, devotee children. So, if now, it will depend on
the context. What is it we want to emph..., we want to, you know, you know,
emphasise? Is it that children we want to emphasise? Or is it devotee we want to
emphasise? So, in some compound words, the first word is more important. In some
compound words, the second word is more important. But, you know, Krishna is
saying that, you know, the most special compound words are those in which both
are equally, you know, important. Both have equal weight. And in, Prabhupada
gives the example of Rama Krishna. It is a compound word. Rama and Krishna, both
are there. So, such, such compound words, in which both the components of the
compound are equally important, that is called as "dvandv...". That is a, you
know, that is called as "dvandvaḥ". And that is a representation of Krishna. So,
actually, it is said in a language there should not be one, in a, you know, in a
sentence, there should not be one word more than what is necessary. In a
paragraph, there should not be one sentence more than what is necessary. In an
essay, there should not be one paragraph more than what is necessary. That is
eloquent sys..., truth spoken concisely as Krishna Dasa Kaviraja Goswami has
said in "Chaitanya Charitamrita". So, here, you know, the point which is made is
that, when we use words, if we can use words in such a way that every word has
potency. And the compound word, both words have equal potency. Then, that is a,
a sign of the expertise in the use of language. And such is, such a "dvandvaḥ"
is a re..., opulence of Krishna. "aham evākṣayaḥ kālo". So, here, Krishna is
repeating, but here, about the power of time. Earlier, He has talked about
"yamaḥ saṁyamatām aham". Among subduers, I am time. But here, He talk about
"aham evākṣayaḥ". "akṣayaḥ" is imperishable. So, eternal. I am inexhaustible
time. So, actually, in this world, the time has a peculiar characteristics. Time
exchausts everyone, but never gets exhausted. Time exhausts everyone as time
passes. You know. As we said, the young become old. The energetic become
energyless. So, time exhausts everyone. But time never gets exhausted. Time
keeps running. Running. Running. Running. Running. Moving forward. At its own
pace. So, such an extraordinary time. It just keeps moving. Moving. Moving.
Inexorably. You know. That is, you know, a manifestation of Krishna. And
"dhātāhaṁ viśvato-mukhaḥ". So, "viśvato-mukhaḥ" refers to Brahmaji. So, "dhātā".
So, among the various creators, Brahmaji is the mani..., opulen...,
manifestation of Krishna's opulence. You know. Then, sometimes, there may be
some person who may say, I am a construct..., I am a cont..., builder. And I
have built five hundreds buildings. Somebody may say, I have built thousand
buildings. Actually, most people cannot build too many buildings. If a king has
built many temples. Or many palaces. People, that peop..., king's name may go
into history cooks. But who can say that I have built a whole universe? You
know. Only Brahmaji can say that. And how does he get that power? He gets from
Krishna. So, that extraordinary capacity and feat of Brahmaji to build a whole
universe, that is an opulence of Krishna. Then, in this way, Krishna is
describing various opulences. So:

        mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham udbhavaś ca bhaviṣyatām kīrtiḥ śrīr vāk ca
nārīṇāṁ smṛtir medhā dhṛtiḥ kṣamā

So, "mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham". So, "sarva-haraḥ". You know. You know. In this
world, you know, there are thieves which steal away. So, some thieves may steal,
steal their money. Steal some, steal their money. Some other thieves may come.
Ok, not just, you know, money amount, your credit card, also. I will normally
take your money. I will take whatever money is in bank balance, also. So, some
may, some people may come. And not only steal the money. They may steal the
money and steal the clothes, also, that person, also. So, he is left with
literally nothing. But, you know, where is a thief like time? You know. Like
death. You know. Death not only takes away our positions. Death not only takes
away our identification card. Our ID card. It just takes away our identification
itself. You know. You just forget who we are. Everything. I may think I am an
engineer. I am a doctor. I am this. I am that. Everything is taken away. The
only thing that is left is the conceptions that we have, you know, developed in
terms of desires. And karma. That is the only thing that stays with us. You
know. The material identification that we have got, that also goes away.
Everything is taken away. "sarva-haraḥ". "ca". Nothing is left. Pract..., you
know, so that is a thorough. You know. Sometimes, it is said that, you know, I
do a thorough job. So, death does the must, most thorough job. You know. It
takes away. And it takes away, takes away everything. Leaving nothing behind.
So, that, you know, all-devouring sort of capacity, all the, you know, that is a
representation of Krishna's opulence. "udbhavaś ca bhaviṣyatām". But Krishna's
opulence is not one side. He is not just the destroyer. He is also the creator.
I am the generator. The generat..., the princip..., principle underlying the
principle of future manifestation. So, the, actually, as we have discusssed
earlier, the process of, you know, the arrival of new life, not just in human
form. But in various form, it is, it is an extraordinary process. How, you know,
new, the progeny is born in any specy. And it is ultimately God's hand. In the
Bhāgavatam, in Sixth Canto, in Citraketu pastime, it is explained that
sometimes, you know, the husband is potent. And the wife is fertile. And still,
when the two unite that children are not born. Why is that? You know.
Biologically, or some, may doctor say, everything is alright. But still,
children are not born. So, when such a thing happens, you know, you know,
actually, the Bhagavatam uses this "cauitam caut". You know. It gives the
example to make the point that, actually, we are not the ultimte doers. So, life
does not come just by the union of the male and female. Actually, there has to
be the sanction of God, ult..., the, you know, abode, and above that. And beyond
that:

        kīrtiḥ śrīr vāk ca nārīṇāṁ smṛtir medhā dhṛtiḥ kṣamā

So, here, giv..., He is giving a list of qualities. "kīrtiḥ" is, you know, fame.
Then, beauty. "vāk" is fine speech. "nārīṇāṁ". Of the women. "smṛtir medhā
dhṛtiḥ kṣamā". So, memory. Intelligence. Firmness. And patience. The "dhṛtiḥ".
And "kṣamā". So, now, what does, what does it mean actually? See, there are
various, you know, there are various explanations which are given by different,
you know, acharyas. You know. So, these qualities are considered feminine. So,
now, when now, Prabhupada, the way, Prabhupada put it:

"Among women I am fame, fortune, ﬁne speech,"

So, what does it mean? That when women have these qualities, that is a
manifestation of Krishna. That is fine. You know. That is, you know, that is
true at one level. Another explanation, exp..., explanation is that these
themselves are feminine qualities. That means, you know, there are nou...,
certian nouns which are in sanskrit masculine. Certian nouns whih are feminine.
So, you know, "nārīṇāṁ" refers to feminine nouns. And among feminine nouns,
these are special. So, again, the point is, you know, rather, let us not go into
technicalities here. The point is that, we can see whatever is an opulence
wherever. We can see that is opulence of Krishna. And attract ourselves to
Krishna. So, "vāk" also is re..., often referred to, used in sanskrit language.
It is said that the sanskrit language is capable of expressing every thought
that, you know, can, the human, at, the human mind can come up with. Speciality
of that language. And "vāk" is often used to refer to sanskrit.

        bṛhat-sāma tathā sāmnāṁ gāyatrī chandasām aham māsānāṁ mārga-śīrṣo ’ham
ṛtūnāṁ kusumākaraḥ

So, "bṛhat-sāma". So, in the "Sāma Veda", there is a special song called the
"Bṛhat-sāma". Which is very melodious. And which is used to glorify. Which is
used for praising. And eulogisising. And glorifying. And "gāyatrī chandasām
aham". So, the Vedas have various meters. And among them, one of the meters is
"Gāyatrī". And that is a special meter. So, that meter represents Krishna. This,
you know, sometimes, it is said to refer to the, you know, "Gāyatrī" mantra that
we chant, also. That is also one understanding. So, but here, the point is,
among the "chandas", I am "Gāyatrī". So, there are various "chandas". And h...,
"Gāyatrī" is one of the "chandas". There is also mantra by the name "Gāyatrī".
Which the brahman-initiated devotees chant. So, the word can have many meanings.
Then, "māsānāṁ mārga-śīrṣo ’ham". So, actually speaking, you know, I, among the
months, I am "mārga-śīrṣaḥ". Why "mārga-śīrṣaḥ"? Because that is the time when,
you know, you kno, the nature reveals its bounty. You know. There are diff...,
there are car..., there are, there are cariff crops. There are revi crops. Like
that. There are different crops which grow in different seasons. So, now, it is
said that, you know, from one particular point of five, ayurvedic understanding,
you know, that the "mārga-śīrṣaḥ", the month when now, the, its rough ground is
assembled, that is a time when the crops grow bountifully in a proper climate.
And that month where nature gives out her bounty l..., you know, lavishly, that
is considered to be a manifestation of Krishna. So, first, Krishna talks some,
in terms of mo..., seasons. And then, Krishna talks in terms of month. Sorry.
Here, Krishna talks in terms of month. "māsānāṁ mārga-śīrṣo ’ham". And then, He
talks in terms of seasons. "ṛtūnāṁ". "ṛtū" is season. "kusumākaraḥ". "ākaraḥ"
means maker. You know. So, "ṛtūnām". "ākaraḥ". So, pearls are formed in the
ocean. So, "ṛtūn...". Ocean is called as "ṛtūnāṁ". "ākaraḥ". So, like that,
"kusumākaraḥ" refers to that which forms the "kusuma". Flowers. That is
flower-bearing spring. So, when spring comes. You know. The nature becomes so
beautiful with varieties of flowers coming up. And it appears as if, you know,
painter has decorated all of natur..., nature. With a magnificent hand. So, that
luxuriant beauty of nature, you know, which is so manifested in spring is
considered to be an opulence of Krishna. You know.

        dyūtaṁ chalayatām asmi
        tejas tejasvinām aham
        jayo ’smi vyavasāyo ’smi
        sattvaṁ sattvavatām aham

So, "dyūtaṁ chalayatām asmi". So, "chalayatām" is cheats. So, among all forms of
cheating, I am gambling. So, normally, you know, why gambling here? See,
generally speaking, when, you know, we are cheated. Normally, no one wants to be
cheated. And we will try to fight off. We will try to resist if anybody tries to
cheat us. That is how we do it normally. But if somebody, you know, fools a
person so thoroughly that actually that person willingly participates in an
endeavor that ends up cheating him. Then, that is considered to be a, exa..., is
a manifestation of, you know, extraordinary cunningness. By the person is so
deluded that the person voluntarily chooses to become f..., to get fleeced. To
get cheated. So, in gambling, everybody knows that actually, you know, what is,
what is, you know, when one is more likely to lose than to gain. You know. If
the gamblers were meant to gain, then actually the gambling houses would become
gamb..., bankrupt. The gambling houses are run. They have their expenses. And
they have their employees. And they earn profits. How do they do that? Because
the whole gambling industry is running in such a way that actually people
gamble, you know, the people who are gambling are meant to lose more than they
are meant to gain. And that is how it works. So, "dyūtaṁ chalayatām asmi". Yet,
people participate in gambling. So, Krishna says, now, the point is not that
cheating is good. Or gambling is good. Sometimes, people ask, you know,
"Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja", you know, he also gambled. So, why cannot we gamble? So,
actually, the lesson of the Mahabharata is exactly the opposite. The point is,
the lesson of the Mahabharata is that even if a king like "Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja"
was so virtuous. If he gambles, even he gets in trouble. So, we are not at all
virtuous. Like "Yudhiṣṭhira". So, if we gamble, we will get into far greater
trouble. The Mahabharata uses exalted characters to demonstrate extremelessness in
unforgettable ways to us. So, here, the point is not that cheating is, you know,
good. Or cheating is divine. Cheating is just accepted as a fact of nature. And
within the various kinds of cheating, also, there are some cheatings which are
extraordinary. And those cheatings, the opulence, the intelligence that is
manifested over there, that can also be seen as a manifestation of God. "tejas
tejasvinām aham". I am the splendor of the splendid. So, some people have
charisma. Some people have, you know, a courage. A personality. You know. The
splendor of the, hmm, so, that splendor is a represetation of Krishna. Charisma
is often an extraordinary thing. Some people just have charisma. When they
appear, people are attracted to those leaders. You know. What makes people
attracted to them? You know. When sociologists and historians try to deconstruct
charisma. It is very difficult to deconstruct. You know. When spiritual
disciples are attracted to spiritual master, other people may wonder. You know.
What is this? Why are they so madly attracted to that person? Just cannot
understand. Of course, the charisma of an ordinary, of a material leader. And a
spiritual leader. May, are of a different nature. You know. But still, the point
is, you know, that splendor of the splendid, that is a manifestation of Krishna.
"jayo ’smi vyavasāyo ’smi". So, when there is "jayaḥ". When there is victory,
you know, then that victoral of victory, you know, many players play sports.
Because, you know, the thrill of victory that they get, it is so exhilarating
that they want it again. And again. And again. And again. And they live for it.
So, what is that feeling? Now, at the material level, it is that feeling is
fleeting. It comes. And it goes. But when it is there, it is so exhilarating that
people just want it. So, when we see that feeling of exhilaration, when we feel,
experience it. Or we see others experiencing it, a devotee sees that actually,
this is, this is an experience of Krishna. But this is, this c..., this
experience of Krishna does not take the person close to Krishna.

So, a devotee does not try just for material successes and the feelings of
victory over there. A devotee tries to serve Krishna wholeheartedly. And then,
the connect..., Krishna connection is there, those feelings will be constant.
And very, you know, sweet at that time. And "vyavasāyo ’smi". Now, Prabhupada
translates "vyavasāyaḥ" as adven..., enterprise or adventure. Many people
practice, you know, or, you know, play, participate in, you know, in what is
called as, you know, you know, living on the edge sports. This, these, these are
sports in which people, you know, you know, t..., put their life into threats.
Some, somebody may go in an airplane. And just jump down from the airplane. And
then, when they jump down, normally if somebody jump from an airplane, people
have parachute. But actually, they go with the parachute. And they do not open
the parachute, only. And yes, when last moment appears as if just going to die.
At that last moment, suddenly, they, people, you know, you know,  open the
parachute. So, what happens is this, people want to risk and have adventure.
Take risk. And have adventures. And in that, it, wi..., sense of adventure, they
get a kick. And that kick is their sense of joy. And that makes them want to
live. There was, there was a person, there was a person who, you know, who used
to just walk on railway tracks. And when the railway would start coming, he
starts running towards the railway. Straight. Running. Running. Running. And the
thrill that they would get was on seeing the driver's face. The driver thinks, I
will run over this person. Are you, are you joking? Move away. Move away. But he
just runs straight towards the train. And the last moment, when the train
would just crash him, jump off the tracks. And he would, the what, what is the
fun in that risky life? But he would just get some thrill in that. So, one time,
he just t..., came too close to the train. And he knew whether he would be able
to jump off. And last moment. Tuck. He jumped off. And he jumped off. And he
fell. And when he fell, what he fell on was, there was a "Bhagavad-gītā As It
Is" over there. Then, he read "Bhagavad-gītā As It Is". And he became a devotee.
There, sometimes Krishna can make our adventures also spiritually adventurous.
So, actually, if we want adventures in our spiritual life, if we try to share
Krishna Consiousness with others, then there are extraordinary adventures. And
these are not just meaningless adventures. These are supremely meaningful
adventures. Because through these adventures, they are helping others come close
to Krishna. And they are granting them the highest happiness of all of
existence. So, "vyavasāyo ’smi". So, that "vyavasāyaḥ". That excitement. That
enterprise. The, all that. So, people like m..., you know, f..., adventure
novels. And adventure stories. Why? Because, you know, that e..., that exp...,
the experience is so special. And that experience is an experience of Krishna.
That ex..., we can see that experience is a manifestation of Krishna. "sattvaṁ
sattvavatām aham". So, among the strength, I am the strong, He says. Strength is
an, also an opulence. And here, Krishna is saying that that opulence comes from
Me. So, then, after this:

        vṛṣṇīnāṁ vāsudevo ’smi
        pāṇḍavānāṁ dhanañ-jayaḥ
        munīnām apy ahaṁ vyāsaḥ
        kavīnām uśanā kaviḥ

So, "vṛṣṇīnāṁ vāsudevo ’smi". So, the acharyas explained that here, He said,
re..., referring to, you know, you know, Vasudeva does not refer to Himself. It
refers to Balaramji. "vṛṣṇīnāṁ vāsudevo ’smi". Of course, both Krishna and
Balaram are Vasudeva. They are sons of Vasudeva. Through different, you know,
wives. Devaki and Rohini. But here, Krishna is talking about, not about Himself.
About all opulences. And naturally, he defers, and deferentially refers to
his borther over here. He says among the great "vṛṣṇī"s". Among the "vṛṣṇī"s,
the greatest is Balarama. And that Balarama is a manifestation of my opulence.
Now, when here, "pāṇḍavānāṁ dhanañ-jayaḥ". So, at that time, Krishna is
thinking, oh, if, you Pandavas, He will surely refer to, He will ref..., surely
refer to "Yudhiṣṭhira". But He does not. He says, "pāṇḍavānām". "Yudhiṣṭhira".
No. "pāṇḍavānāṁ dhanañ-jayaḥ". Why "dhanam-jayaḥ"? Because "dhanañ-jayaḥ" was a
spe..., prayer, special devotion. "Yudhiṣṭhira" was dharma raja. But Arjuna had
not only extraordinary power of archery. But he had very, very special and
intense devotion for Arjuna. For Krishna. So, you know, you know, you know, He,
"pāṇḍavānāṁ dhanañ-jayaḥ". Now, interestingly, over here, this illustrates. So,
when, now, Krishna, Arjuna does not, done, hearing this, say, oh, Krishna, I did
not know, we two are one. Then, there is no need for you to speak. Both of us
are one. We are one. And we will forget everything. We are, we are just, I am
also God. You are God. No. He did not say that. He understands the principle
over here. The principle is, He is talking about opulences. And then, "munīnām
apy ahaṁ vyāsaḥ". There are many "munī"s. When He says, just Brahma, the "Vyāsa"
is the greatest. He wrote, he compiled to all the Vedic literature. Who can do
that? And "kavīnām uśanā kaviḥ". So, "uśanā" refers to "Śukra". "Śukra" acharya.
And "Śukra" acharya is the priest of the, of the asuras. Of the demons. So, that
might considered to be a less than complimentary position. But actually, you
know, he is a priest. And even the asuras are powerful. And the asuras, they may
not, you know, they may not worship Lord Vishnu. But they also have faith in
the power of Vedic rituals. To some extent, at least. You know. That is why they
want to have priest who do yajnas for them. So, when they do yajnas like that,
they need a priest. And they will not have, take any ordinary priest. They want
a powerful priest. "Śukra" acharya is a powerful priest. And we see "Śukra"
acharya, he also knows about Vishnu. All the, because of his attachments,
sometimes, his position may be covered. His actions may not be devotional. But
at the end of the Bali Maharaja pastime, you know, Lord Vishnu does not
chastise..., you know, Lord Vishnu has come as "Vāmana deva" does not chastise
B..., "Śukra" acharya. He says, actually, "Śukra" acharya, he treats him as a
respectable brahmana. And he asks him, what was that, th..., was wrong? You
know. That was in Bali Maharaja's sacrifice. Because of which, he got cursed.
And, you know, defeated in Brahman. So, actually, what does "Śukra" acharya say?
He reveals s..., tr..., profound spiritual knowledge. But then, He says that:

        mantratas tantrataś chidraṁ

That whatever fault might be there in a sacrifice, but if one chants the holy
names, all the sac..., all the sacrifices can be, all the false can be
countered. So, the point is "Śukra" acharya is also an extraordinary priest. And
that extraordinary power is a representation of Krishna. So, we will continue in
our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
