Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7042WyIL4sw
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_115_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_12_Text_01_to_09_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=C3NssfajJH9NljoLdtCbs-SOOXB8MTU0ODQ4OTM5NkAxNTQ4NDAyOTk2&v=7042WyIL4sw&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. So, welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now,
we are starting with the Twelfth Chapter. Twelfth Chapter, as we know, is called
as bhakti yoga. Or "Devotional Service", Prabhupada translates it. Literally.
And this is the last chapter in the bhakti section. So, all the Eighteen
Chapters in the Bhagavad Gita talk about bhakti. But the first fity..., 6
Chapters have, focus on karma. And how karma leads to bhakti. The last Six
Chapters focus on jnana. And how jnana leads to bhakti. The middle Six Chapters
focus on bhakti itself. So, you know, Arjuna has, in the Tenth Chapter, accepted
Krishna's supremacy. And asked to see the, you know, you know, you know, Virata,
the vibhutis. The manifestations of Krishna's greatness in nature. Then, while
desc..., you know, while Arjuna desc...., Arju..., he is hearing that, Then,
Krishna makes a reference to how he is sustaining the whole world. You know. You
know. With just one fragment of His being. That he mentions in 10.42. In
response to that, Arjuna asks the question to sho..., be shown the "Virata
rupa". And that is shown in the Eleventh Chapter. Now, after seeing this
magnificent and awe-inspiring. And in some ways, scaring form of the Absolute
Truth. Arjuna has another question. What about the impersonal form? What about
the, now, we, now, the word, we could say impersonal form is a paradox. Because
fo..., form cannot be impersonal. Form is normally personal. So, we could say
the impersonal aspect of the Absolute Truth. You know. So, you know, you know,
you know, what about the impersonal aspect? Now, in, if we remember, in 9.15, it
was a, it was a critical verse that underlies th..., much of the flow of the
later chapters. So:

        jñāna-yajñena cāpy anye
        yajanto mām upāsate
        ekatvena pṛthaktvena
        bahudhā viśvato-mukham

So, "ekatvena". In oneness. "pṛthaktvena bahudhā". And, you know, through the
worship of the demigods. And "viśvato-mukham". So, these were three ways in
which people do "jñāna-yajñe". People worship Krishna through the ritual,
through sacrifice of knowledge. So, in that, "pṛthaktvena bahudhā". You know.
Through the worship of the demigods. That has been talked about in the, you
know, Ninth Chapter, itself. From verses 9.20 to 28. Where Krishna says that,
those who worship the demigods, they f..., you know, they have to continue on
cycle of birth and death. "gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante" is in 9.21. And
first, for that, devotees, "ananyāś cintayanto māṁ". He says, "yoga-kṣemaṁ
vahāmy aham". I protect them. So, the point which I am making is, three things
were talked about. And two of them have been dealt with. So, the first that was
talked about was demigod worship. That was dealt about in that chapter itself.
Then, "visva rupa upasana". "viśvato-mukham". That was talked about briefly in
that chapter itself. From verses 16 to 19. And then, it was talked about in the
Eleventh Chapter. Now, what remains is "ekatvena". "ekatvena". Oneness. So,
what does this refer to? What is this whole concept of worshipping of the
Absolute Truth in an impersonal manifestation? Thinking of oneself as one with
the Absolute Truth. That is what Arjuna will question now. So, in that sense,
the 12.1 is not immediately related with the 11.55. There is no linear,
chronological correlation with the, just the previous verse. But it is an
exploration of, you know, discussion that had started earlier. So, what was
mentioned in 4.15, that is now being, you know, you know, explicated by Krishna.
And, you know, Arjuna is being inspired by Krishna from within to ask questions
which will lead to the further se..., you know, further exploration all the
relevant topics. So, the Twelfth Chapter starts with a question by Arjuna. Let
us quickly look at the flow of the Twelfth Chapter. You know. You know. So, you
know, 1 to 7, in this ta..., ta..., seven, twelfth, establish how worship of the
personal form is superior to worship of the impersonal Brahman. Then, 8 to 12
talk about the progressive stages of bhakti. And after that, 13 to 20 talk about
qualities that endear one to Krishna. Qualities that endear one. Because of
which, you know, we feel, you know, because of which, Krish..., you know,
Kri..., these qualities, Krishna likes in His devotees. So, let us look at these
one by one. Let us start with 12.1:

        arjuna uvāca

        evaṁ satata-yuktā ye
        bhaktās tvāṁ paryupāsate
        ye cāpy akṣaram avyaktaṁ
        teṣāṁ ke yoga-vittamāḥ

So, you know, you know, you know, "evaṁ satata-yuktā ye". Those who are
constantly engaged. "bhaktās tvāṁ paryupāsate". With bhakti, "tvāṁ paryupāsate".
They worship You. "ye cāpy akṣaram avyaktaṁ". In contrast, those who "akṣaram".
And "avyaktaṁ". That which is beyond the senses. That which is unmanifested. You
know. "teṣāṁ ke". Among those who are "yoga-vittamāḥ". "vittamāḥ". So, "tamāḥ",
as we know, is superlative. It is the best. So, who are the most perfect in
"yoga"? This is an interesting question. In the sense that both are on the
transcendental path. Now, what is, you know, what are, how are these two
categories that are being referred to? Which Krishna is saying. Ok. Both seem to
be good. But who is better? Or who is the best? "tamāḥ" means best. So, you
know, you know, now, if we look at the words itself. "bhaktās tvāṁ paryupāsate".
So, it is very clearly referring to the devotional path. And the devotional
conception. "bhaktās" itself clearly dev..., devotion. And "tvāṁ", you know, is
also referring to You. Now, "evaṁ satata-yuktā ye". So, now, "satata-yuktā" is
also a very clear reference to something. Not just the meaning of it, you know,
wha..., you know, what it literally means. You know. But what, the way it has
been used earlier, also. Krishna has said in the, you know, Chatur Shloki
Bhagavad Gita.

        teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ
        bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam
        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ
        yena mām upayānti te

So, in 10.10, He has used the same word. "satata-yuktā". As has been used over
here. So, "satata-yuktānāṁ". It was here "satata-yuktā". So, clearly, the first
part is referring to "bhaktās". And then, "ye cāpy akṣaram avyaktaṁ". You know.
You know. So, now, "akṣaram". And "avyaktaṁ". What does it refer to? Now, if we
look at it, the way Krishna has used the word "akṣaram". And "avyaktaṁ". In the
past. You know. The word, it, it basically means unmanifested. That which is not
perceivable. So, now, if that is to be considered to be a comparative object of
worship, then that will refer to the Absolute Truth. In terms of the impersonal
aspect. So, Arjuna is asking basically which form of worship is better.
Personal. Or impersonal. Which aspect of the Absolute Truth is better to
worship? You know. Or more precisely, you know, his question is which
worshippers are better situated? Which worshippers are more intimately united
with You? Those who are worshippers of the impersonal aspect? Or those who are
worshippers of the personal aspect? So, now, moving forward, let us look at
Krishna's reply. So, Krishna's reply focuses on, you know, you know,
establishing the personal aspect very explicitly. So, what Krishna does is He
focuses on using words which remove all ambiguity from the context. You know.
Sometimes, when in, a question is asked. Then, the answer is given. If the
que..., if the answer is not very clearly related with the verse, then the,
there can be multiple interpretations that are possible. But the way Krishna
u..., the way Krishna, you know, uses words over here, He makes things so un...,
unambiguous. That it is very, it becomes very easy to understand what He is
referring to. So, let us look at the next verse. You know. So:

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        mayy āveśya mano ye māṁ
        nitya-yuktā upāsate
        śraddhayā parayopetās
        te me yukta-tamā matāḥ

So, "mayy āveśya mano ye māṁ". "mayy āveśya". "mayy āveśya" means fixing the
mind on Me. "mano ye māṁ". Second time, the word is "māṁ". So, you know,
actually, fixing the mind on Me. And "māṁ nitya-yuktā upāsate". They worship Me
constantly. So, if we look at the previous verse, previous verse,
"satata-yuktā". "upāsate".

        evaṁ satata-yuktā ye
        bhaktās tvāṁ paryupāsate

So, the first two lines, whatever it was being talked about, that is what
Krishna is referring to over here. "yuktā upāsate". Same words are there. And
"nitya" is also there. Then, Arjuna had used the word "tvāṁ". Krishna is using
the word "māṁ". "māṁ" and "mayy". So, it is very clear. And then, you know, you
know, "vittamāḥ". "teṣāṁ ke yoga-vittamāḥ". And Arjuna is also using, Krishna is
alos using word "tamā". "yukta-tamā matāḥ". So, "śraddhayā parayopetās". With
transcendental faith. So, what Krishna is telling is those who fix their mind on
Krishna. You know. And worship Him. You know. Constantly. "mayy āveśya mano".
They fix the mind on Krishna. "māṁ nitya-yuktā upāsate". They worship Him
constantly with faith that is transcendental. They are the most intimately
united with Me. Now, a very significant point of this is that Krishna is using
"śraddhayā parayopetās". That their faith is, you know, transcendental. So, the
impersonal, you know, the mayavadis especially have the idea that we can choose
our "Ishta-Deva". And worship that particular form until we come to the level of
transcendence. When we go beyond to the, the form to the formless. So, that
conception is not supported by the Bhagavad Gita. Because it is "parayopetās".
"parayopetās" means that He is in the transcendental faith. So, with, with
tran..., with transcendental faith, one fixes the mind on Krishna. With
transcendental faith, one worships Krishna. So, it is not that we transcend
Krishna at a particular point. And go to the impersonal light. No. With
transcendental faith, that means even after we come to transcendence, we will
continue fixing the mind on Krishna. So, the, so, what Arjuna's question was,
Krishna has answered fa..., with crystal clear unambiguity. That those who
worship My, Me those who f..., worship, you know, you know, Me. And worship Me
with transcendental faith. They are the most intimately united with Me. So, now,
Prabhupada to make things even more clear, you know, translates, you know, you
know, here as they see:

"fix their minds on My personal form", 

My personal form. Now, we may say there is no reference to the word "rūpam". And
per..., there is no sanskrit equivalent to personal form in the original verse.
But the point is that Krishna has used very specific word like "māṁ". And
"mayy". And obviously, it is not that there is some light, impersonal light that
is speaking over there. It is, it is Krishna in a personal form standing in
front of Arjuna. And speaking. So, when Krishna is saying "māṁ", it means "māṁ".
If Krishna wanted to say, oh, you have to worship some light beyond Me. I am
that, I am just a temporary manifestation of that light. Then, Krishna would
have said like that. So, what is there in the verse, it may not be there in the
literal sanskrit of the verse. But it is implicit in the context of the verse.
Who is speaking this? It is Krishna in a personal form who is speaking it. And
He is referring to Himself. "māṁ". So:

"Those who fix their minds on My personal form and are always engaged in
worshiping Me with great and transcendental faith".

So, now, Krishna answers "yes". The personalists are the most intimately united
with Him. The personalists are most intimately united with Him. So, it is a very
clear answer. Krishna does not leave any scope for ambiguity. Now, even if there
are some ambiguity. If there are two alternatives. You know. Which were raised
in one ver..., in Arjuna's question. And then, naturally, the subsequent verses
will actually lead to, will, you know, analyse those two alternatives. So, the
second verse has analysed the first alternative. A third, fourth, fifth verses
will analyse the second alternative. And the second alternative also uses words
which make it clear what is being referred to. So, let us look at third and
fourth:

        ye tv akṣaram anirdeśyam
        avyaktaṁ paryupāsate
        sarvatra-gam acintyaṁ ca
        kūṭa-stham acalaṁ dhruvam

        sanniyamyendriya-grāmaṁ
        sarvatra sama-buddhayaḥ
        te prāpnuvanti mām eva
        sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ

So, you know, you know, Krishna has used the word, "ard...". Same words.
"akṣaram". And "avyaktaṁ". So, these are the words which were used by Arjuna in
his question.

        evaṁ satata-yuktā ye
        bhaktās tvāṁ paryupāsate
        ye cāpy akṣaram avyaktaṁ

So, whatever Arjuna has used, Krishna has used the same words. And He has given
some further words to describe, also. "akṣaram". "avyaktaṁ". And then, He says
"anirdeśyam". That which cannot be, "nirdeśyam". The description of it cannot
be, cannot pointed out to, to it. And then, how is it? "sarvatra-gam". It is
all-pervading. "acintyaṁ". He is inconceivable. "kūṭa-stham". It is
"kūṭa-stham". Fixed. Unchanging. "acalaṁ". Non-movable. "dhruvam". Just factual.
So, He gives how many attributes of that Absolute Truth? One. Two. Thr...,
"akṣaram anirdeśyam" is two. "avyaktaṁ" is three. Then, you know, two more in
the third, in C part of the verse. "sarvatra-gam acintyaṁ". It is five. And
three in the last part of the verse. You know. In the last line of the third
verse. 3D. "kūṭa-stham acalaṁ dhruvam". So, it is clear that He is referring to
the non-manifested aspect. The impersonal aspect. And then, what happens by this
is, he says, how, how is that to be worshipped? How do we worship the impersonal
manifestation of, of the Absolute Truth? T..., "sanniyamyendriya-grāmaṁ". You
know. "sanniyamyendriya-grāmaṁ". "niyam", "indriya". You know. You know. So, one
has to have, one has to have the "niyam". One has to have st..., strict rules
and regulations. You know. So, sen..., "ni...", "indriya-grāmam". to control all
the senses. And then, "sarvatra sama-buddhayaḥ". One tries to have an equal
vision towards everything. And "te prāpnuvanti mām eva". That "te prāpnuvanti".
They will also obtain Me. And Krishna says "eva". Certainly. You know. When?
"sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ". So, in this verse, Krishna does not ev..., you know,
speak anything negative about these people. It is, they will also obtain Me.
Certainly, they will obtain Me. But the next verse, He will describe that, oh,
it is not so easy. Next verse, He will say "kleśo ’dhika-taras teṣām". We will
look at that verse. But here, basically, what Krishna is telling is, He, as far
as He is concerned, Arjuna's question was, who are most intimately united? Yes.
Those who fix their mind on Me are most intimately united. And, you know, the
others, they will also come to Me. But then, there is a, you know, complex
process that they have to follow. You know. The, the process is basically
centered on equanimity. On, you know, equal vision towards everything. And
towards everyone. So, now, let us look at the next verse. And then, we will
elaborate on this further. You know. You know.

        kleśo ’dhika-taras teṣām
        avyaktāsakta-cetasām
        avyaktā hi gatir duḥkhaṁ
        dehavadbhir avāpyate

So, now, if you see, there are so, you know, there are two words which are very
clear. "kle...", indicating something negative. "kleśaḥ". And "duḥkhaṁ".
"kleśaḥ" is trouble. "duḥkhaṁ" is misery. So, "kleśaḥ". "adhika-taraḥ".
"adh...", "adhika-taraḥ" means very much. So, "adhika-ta...", "adhika-taraḥ"
means largely. Mostly. You know. Viddh..., "teṣām". Those people. Who are these
people? They were referred in the previous verse. They will get "kleśaḥ".
"avyaktāsakta-cetasām". So, their consciousness is attached to the impersonal
manifestation. That means they are attracted to the impersonal aspect of the
Absolute Truth. "avyaktā hi gatir duḥkhaṁ". So, those who, you know, make
"avyaktā" the goal of their life. "gatir duḥkhaṁ". Progress is very di...,
difficult for them. "dehavadbhir avāpyate". "dehavadbhir". Those who are
embodied. "avāpyate". So, progress is very troublesome when the attachment to
the impersonal aspect is there. Especially, for those who are embodied. So, why
is it troublesome? Because it is, you know, difficult for us. To con...,
conceive or concentrate on that which has, you know, no form. Actually, we have
discussed earlier about the negative axis. And the positive axis. You remember.
So, the material form is in the negative axis. The spiritual form is in the
positive axis. And the impersonal Brahman is like the zero point. So, just, you
know, giving, you know, just giving up the material form, the attraction to the
material forms. And trying to concentate the mind on nothing. On the
attributeless, activitiless Brahman. It is very difficult for, you know,
everyone in general. And especially for the embodied soul. You know. We, you
know, generally have to think in terms of forms and things. And the impersonal
is something which is very difficult to think about. So, we are all used to
forms. And if we are just told, do not think about any form. Then, it is very
difficult. What do you think about? It is just as, it is extremely difficult to
create a vacuum. And it is extremely easy to destroy a vacuum. If I take a
glass. And I decide I want to make the glass empty. So, I just put there some
water in it I throw away. I may say it has become empty. But still, it is filled
with air. You know. If I have to remove the air, it is very difficult. It is a
laborious process. And then, even if I succeed in removing all the air. And
creating a perfect vacuum over there. What, the, what is going to happen? The
moment, some, you know, opening comes up. Some no..., hole, air, some hole or
some sort of space is left, you know, open, then tuck. Air will come inside. So,
vacuum is extremely difficult to create. And even more difficult to sustain. So,
like that, basically, the impersonal, meditating on the impersonal aspect is
like creating a vacuum in the consciousness. That mens do not think about
anything. Why do not think about anything? Because all material forms and
material attributes are rejected as negative. As entangling. As a part of
illusion which need to be given up. But then, there is no positive spiritual
conception. In terms of forms. Activities. Attributes. So, then, what is there
to think about? It is very, very difficult. So, now, "dehavadbhir avāpyate". For
those who are embodied. Now, the impersonalists may argue. That, ok, actually,
the impersonal reality is the actual reality. But as long as we are embodied,
just difficult to think about it. Once, we go beyond the embodiment, embodied,
then we will be able to think about it. And then, that is the ultimate reality.
But Krishna is telling, you know, because you are embodied, you cannot think
about it. No. Kri..., actually speaking, that can be, interpretation which one
can make if that is one what, that is what one wants to, you know, do.

But that is not an interpretation that is supported by the Bhagavad Gita. We
will see the next verses, also. Krishna says that I personally lift those who
devote Myself s..., to Me, themselves to Me. You know. "teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā".
But rel..., you know, apart from the nex..., you know, immediate context where,
of the overall tenor is fix the mind on Me. If the, important thing is, Krishna
has not said anywhere that bhakti is only for the less intelligent people. You
know. Krishna has not said anywhere that once we become more intelligent, we
will go beyond the personal form to something higher. So, here, the
"dehavadbhir" point is not, Krishna does not say that, ok, it is "kleśaḥ" as
long as you are "dehavadbhir". But afterwards, when there is no "dehavadbhir",
when you do not have the embody, then it will no longer be "kleśaḥ". Krishna
does not say that. Krishna simply makes the point that because we are embodied.
And we used to, you know, thinking about forms. So, it is difficult for us to
think of anything which is embo..., disassem..., which is formless.
Attributeless. Attributeless. Activitiless. But that does not mean that the
formless. Attributeless. Activitiless thing is the ultimate truth. It is
difficult. And it is also not the ultimate truth. How is, how do we know that is
not the ultimate truth? Because there are so many verses which Krishna has said
that He, He, when He is saying "I". He is referring to Himself "I". "ahaṁ
sarvasya prabhavo". 10.8. "mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat". 7.7. "mayādhyakṣeṇa
prakṛtiḥ". In 9.10. So many places, He has said. And then, "avyaktā".
"avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā". The, here, here, He is contrasting, He is saying those
who think that the impersonal is higher. He is saying, they are "mūḍhā". And
then:

        avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ
        manyante mām abuddhayaḥ

So, 9.11 and 7.24. They are two important verses where Krishna does very clearly
say that the impersonal aspect is not the, you know, is not the highest. And in
fact, those who think that the impersonal is higher than the personal, they are
completely mistaken. They are totally misled. So, you know, the "dehavadbhir" is
simply illustrating the point here, is simply drawing attention to the point
that as it is, we are, you know, accustomed to thinking in a particular way
because of having a body. And as we are accustomed to thinking in a particular
way, so, this is difficult to think about. So, this "dehavadbhir" has got
noth..., does not contain any implication about the nature of ultimate reality.
It does not in any way state that the ultimate reality is perso..., impersonal.
All that it says is in our current situation where we have a body. And we are
habituated to bodily activity, it is very difficult for us to think of that
which is, you know, you know, which is having no qualities. No attr..., no
activities. Nothing practically speaking. So, is it that when one is in the mode
of goodness, one can think of the impersonal aspect better? And when one is
transcen..., transcendental, one can think of the impersonal aspect more?
Actually speaking, you know, our obsession with material forms will become less
and less. You know. When we rise from the lower modes towards the higher modes.
So, when one is in goodness, one is more con..., contemplative. And when one is
more contemplative, surely, one can think more about certain features of the
Absolute Truth. You know. But that does not necessarily mean that, that is the
highest Abso..., aspect of the Absolute Truth. This is, relatively speaking, if
one wants to meditate on something impersonal, it might be easier if one is less
attached to the body. Less attached to the bodily conception. But that is not a
comment, you know, indicating that the Absolute, impersonal aspect is itself the
highest aspect of the Absolute Truth. You know. It is, it is just that that is
the nature of our conditioning. When we are in passion, we have to act at the
bodily level a lot. When we are in goodness, our activity is more at the
intellectual level. We do not need to act so much at the bodily level. You know.
It is said that there are, you know, three kinds of people. Some people make
things happen. Some people watch things happen. And some people wonder what
happened. So, this can, this is a, quote, there is a quote by some materialistic
thinker. But these can, these three can be roughly ir..., correlated with the
three modes. Some people make things happen. And goodness, people then, you
know, themselves are running around. They are thinking. And they make things
le..., as if they are lazy. Prabhupada would say, a brahmana is lazy
intelligent. Make things happen. And some people watch things happen. And in
passion, people want to make things happen. But because they are so passionate,
so, often, things go out of control for them. You know. I wanted to do this. But
this happened. And what should I do? And what should I do? What should I do? So,
people are, they watch things happen. And in, in ignorance, people are so much
caught in their own world. That phew, what happened? So, not understanding
anything on it. Some people wonder what happened. So, you know, you know, in
goodness, because one has a greater control over one's own mind and senses. One
can, if one wants to act in the material world, one can act also better. And if
one wants to, you know, f..., di..., distance oneself from the material world,
one can also do that better. So, in that sense, goodness is more cond...,
conducive for contemplating on higher realities. And that is not just impersonal
reality. That applies even to the personal aspect. A devotee in goodness can
think about Krishna much better than a de..., person in the impersonal
realisation. You know. You know. Sorry, a devotee in goodness can think about
Krishna much better than what a devotee in passion or ignorance can. So, in
general, contemplation on any aspect of the Absolute Truth will become easier as
one moves clo..., moves towards goodness. And higher and higher. But that is not
a comment on which is the highest aspect of the Absolute Truth. For that, we
will have to look at the other aspects in the scriptures. And we will have to
under..., get a broader understanding of the Absolute Truth.

So, you know, you know, now, "Rāmānujācārya" gives another meaningof this whole
section. If we look at what a, Krishna has referred to in 12.3. You know. The
attributes. "akṣaram anirdeśyam". "avyaktaṁ". "sarvatra-gam acintyaṁ".
"kūṭa-stham acalaṁ dhruvam". These, you know, eight attributes. Now, they are
strikingly similar to the attributes of the atma. Which Krishna has referred to
in the Second Chapter. You know. There.

        avyakto ’yam acintyo ’yam
        avikāryo ’yam ucyate

        sarvatra-gam ac...

You know, "ac...":

        nitya ...
        sarvatra-gam

So, there, also "avyaktaḥ" was there. "acintyaḥ" was there. "sarvatra-gam".
"sarvatra-gam". "kūṭa-stham acalaṁ dhruvam". So, "kūṭa-stham" was there. So,
like that, that, you know, there were, the eight, these attributes that
were talked about, especially, even verses 2.24. 25. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 26,
basically. Just four verses. So, many of these attributes have been talked
about. These are the, that means, you know, what "Rāmānujācārya" says is that
he, he explains Arjuna's question in slightly different terms. He says that what
Arjuna is asking is, you know, if one fixes the mind on atma. And slowly tries
to realise that I am. And I am, then I am the atma. Atma. Atma. And on the other
hand, the other person does not try to focus on atma jnana. The other person
focuses simply on fixing the mind on You. Who among the two is better? So, let
us try to understand what the question is. In the spiritual arena, you know,
Gthere are two, you know, fundamental objects. There is the jiva atma. And there
is the Paramatma. There is the, all of us living entities. And there is the
Supreme Lord. So, sim..., so, corr..., correspondingly, we can choose two
objects for meditation. Either, either when I am trying to act in this world. I
can try to think, oh, I am not the body. I am the soul. I am the soul. "atma
jnana". "atma jnana". And by cultivating "atma jnana", you know, we can become
detached from matter. And we can become attached to spirit. That is one ex...,
one way we could do it. And the other aspect is that we could go from, you know,
you know, you know, go and focus the mind on the Absolute Truth in the personal
aspect. So, what Arjuna is asking is that should am..., among those who fix the
mind on You, and those who try to realise that their atma, who are better? So,
who are better situated? Now, if you see, you know, if you remember how we, the
flow of the first few chapters is, in the first Six Chapters, the focus of the
Bhagavad Git was not on Bhagavan. We discussed how the word "māṁ" does not come
very frequently in the first Six Chapters. Certainly, if we compare with the
7 to 12 Chapters. That is very, very less frequent. The word "māṁ" comes only
very infrequently. 2.61. It comes once. 3.38. It comes once. Then, there is one
section from, you know, 4.1 to 4.15 where it comes. But after that, only one
verse. 4.35. And then, Fifth Chapter, there is only once again. 5.29. And Sixth
Chapter, also. It is not very common. It is there in 6.14 and 15. And in
6.30-31. And then, 6.47. It is not very frequent as compared to that. "māṁ" and
"mayy", it comes almost every alternate verse in the, in-between 7 to 12
Chapters. So, in these Six, in 1 to 6 Chapters, the focus has primarily been on,
you know, you know, detaching oneself from the body. You know. And acting in
that mode of detachment. So that one can progress towards the Absolute Truth.
So, it was all based on "atma jnana". Because at that time, when the seeker is
progressing, the seeker may not know that the Absolute Truth is a person. And
that person is the ultimate object of meditation. So, you know, that has been
made clear at the end of the Sixth Chapter. Where the topmost yogi is described
to be the, you know, Kri..., to be Krishna. "yoginām api". Topmost yogi is
described to be one who fixes the mind on Krishna.

        yoginām api sarveṣāṁ
        mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā
        śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ
        sa me yukta-tamo mataḥ

That was 6.47. And then, from 7.1 onwards, it was "mayy". You know. It was "mayy
āsakta-manāḥ". Fix the mind on Me. So, Seventh Chapter onwards, the mood of the
Bhagavad Gita changes completely. Krishna starts focusing on, more and more on
the, you know, on Hi..., the fixing the mind on Him. And practicing the process
of bhakti. So, basically, here, in the Twelfth Chapter, at the end of the bhakti
section, according to "Rāmānujācārya", what is the question? The question is,
Krishna, You have told one mode of worship from twelfth..., one mode of spiritul
advancement and realisation. From Chapters 2 to 6. And You have told another
mode from 7 to 11. So, 1 to, so, 2 to 6 focuses on "atma jnana". And 7 to 12
focuses on Bhagavat Chintan. So, among these two, which is better? So, that is
Arjuna's question. And Krishna has clearly said that those who do, fix their
mind on Me, they are better situated. And as He moves forward, He elaborates on
that. So, now, let us, you know, ev..., if, even if, even if there are some
doubts, for second verse said, yes, these are that those who fix the mind on Me
are most intimately united. Third and Fourth says that, they will also come to
Me. But Fifth says, it is very di..., it is difficult. "kleśaḥ" is there.
"duḥkham" is there. Now, Sixth and Seventh makes it clear again what, we, what
is Arjuna's, what is Krishna's preference in this case. So, let us look at this
verse. The Sixth and Seventh verses here. "ye tu sarvāṇi karmāṇi". "kar...".

        ye tu sarvāṇi karmāṇi
        mayi sannyasya mat-parāḥ
        ananyenaiva yogena
        māṁ dhyāyanta upāsate

        teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā
        mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt
        bhavāmi na cirāt pārtha
        mayy āveśita-cetasām

"ye tu sarvāṇi karmāṇi". "sarvāṇi karmāṇi". All activities. "mayi sannyasya".
You know. "mayi sannyasya". Offering all your activities to Me. "mat-parāḥ".
Making Me the ultimate goal. "ananyenaiva yogena". "ananya". That means,
"ananya" means, as we discussed, pure. The word "ananya" has come earlier in
"ananyāś cintayanto māṁ". In 9.22. So, "ananyenaiva". Without any att..., you
know, ar..., distraction. The mind steadily fixed on Me. "yogena". With the
practice of. "māṁ dhyāyanta upāsate". They meditate on Me. They worship Me. For
such people, what happens? "teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā". For those people, "ahaṁ
samuddhartā". I become their deliverer. "mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt". In this ocean
of material existence, "mṛtyu-saṁsāra". It is an ocean. "bhavāmi". I become. "na
cirāt pārtha". "na cirāt" means not after a long time. Prabhupada translates
swift deliverer. "mayy āveśita-cetasām". Those who fix their mind on Me. So,
again, if we look at the consistently similar words that are, Krishna has used.
So, Se..., 12.2 starts with "mayy āveśya mano ye māṁ". And 12.7 ends with "mayy
āveśita-cetasām". So, "mayy āveśya". It is very clear that these two are
referring to the same aspect. You know. The same person. Same transcendentalist.
That those who fix their mind on Krishna. "ye...", "ye tu sarvāṇi karmāṇi". So,
those who offer all their works to Me. Those who renounce the fruit, the works
for Me. Those who make Me the ultimate goal. Those who meditate on Me. Those who
worship Me. For them, I become the deliverer. I become the deliverer. So, here,
Krishna is telling the difference between meditating on Him. And meditating on,
you know, you know, the impersonal. You know. You know. The impersonal being
impersonal is not reciprocal. What does that mean? The impersonal is impersonal
in the sense that, that, in that aspect of the Absolute Truth, the personality
of the Lord is not manifested. So, it is qualitiless. It is attributeless. It is
in one sense emotionless. So, that is why there cannot be any reciprocation. You
know. You know. It is non-re..., it is not reciprocal. You know. You know. It is
neutral. So, the impersonal cannot extend and help. It is like, you know,
somebody has fallen in a well. And you find, ok, from that part of the well, the
rope is extending down. So, then, I have to catch hold of the rope. And then, I
have to laboriously climb up. Slowly. Slowly. Slowly. But on the other hand, if
there, you know, so, if there is the, some object from which the rope is hanging
down. That object is unconscious. That object is terri..., it is impersonal. And
then, the, the rope is coming down. I catch the rope. And climb, try to climb
myself up. You know, Then, on the other hand, if there is a person over there.
Then, what happens? That person, you know, is being slowly lifted up. That
person is, you know, going to help us climb up. Because that person is, you
know, you know, having emotions. That that person cares. So, if there is a
person. Please help me. Let me assist. I will help you. So, it is not that we
just have to pull ourselves up. We just hold on. And the person pulls us out.
You know. You know. Like that, Krishna is telling "ahaṁ samuddhartā". That I
become the swift deliverer. "ahaṁ samuddhartā". And when He says that, in this
way, I become the swift deliverer. What is the essential point He is making
here? That this process is easier. Because I help become the, I intervene. I
intervene personally in favor of My devotees. Here, the sweetness of Krishna's
love is manifested. And it, how Krishna definitely prefers the devotional path.
He says, I will intervene. I will lift up. Now, how does Krishna intervene? Many
of you, many of us may have seen that picture in "Bhagavad-gītā As It Is". A
person is, you know, you know, to flow, swimming in the ocean. Struggling. And
drowning. And then, the Lord comes down. The Lord co..., comes with the, you
know, Garuda. Flying on the Garuda. And then, Lord extends His hand down. And
the person is raising up. Then, and then, Lord just catches. And Picks him up.
Sit..., sits him on the Garuda, by His side. And takes him back to the spiritual
world. So, like that, Krishna says "teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā". I will become the
personal deliverer.

So, now, Sridhar Swami here gives the explanation, you know, you know, which is
not, I will first explain. Give the explanation. Then, I will elaborate on it.
He says that actually Krishna gives knowledge. What is that knowledge? Krishna
gives the understanding of the impersonal asp..., you know, of spiritual,
sorry, Krishna gives knowledg..., you know, spiritual knowledge. By which the
devotee becomes disentangled. So, his idea is that the devotee needs knowledge
for this entanglement. And Krishna personally gives that knowledge. So, in that,
that is Krishna's mercy. "ahaṁ samuddhartā". So, the Gaudiya Vaishnava acharyas,
like Chakravatipada, they do not, you know, particularly appreciate this
explanation. And they say that it is not that Krishna just gives knowledge.
Krishna personally intervenes, also. As He has made out. And as He has mentioned
in, in "oga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham". "aham", He is saying. He is talking not just
about the intervention in terms of some knowledge giving. He is talking about
intervention in terms of His personal being, also. So, we see that, this is the
nature of the Lord. That "ahaṁ samuddhartā". I become the swift deliverer. So,
Prabhupada writes in the purport, you know:

"It is explicitly stated here that the devotees are very fortunate to be
delivered very soon from material existence by the Lord."

So, Prabhupada says "explicitly stated". How is it "explicitly stated"? "ahaṁ
samuddhartā". You know. You know. And "bhavāmi na cirāt pārtha". Delivered very
soon. You know. You know. You know. And what is the, you know, kind of work that
one is expected to do? Prabhupada writes over here:

""It does not matter in what kind of work one engages, but that work should be
done only for Kṛṣṇa."

So:

        ye tu sarvāṇi karmāṇi
        mayi sannyasya mat-parāḥ

So, Arjuna may have a doubt that how can I fight a war? So, war and war's
killing. War and war's blood shed. God. Ignorance. passion. Will that, you know,
will that really be devotional service? No. Those "sarvāṇi karmāṇi". You know.
According to our prescribed duties, we may have different kinds of works to do.
But whatever be the kind of work that we have to do, that is fine. If we just do
it faithfully, then, you know, and we fix the mind on Krishna. Then, we will
become elevated. This of course is not a license for doing sinful activities.
Here, the whole context is, within varnashram, doing one's prescribed duties.
"sarvāṇi karmāṇi" refers to whichever varna we might be. Which, whatever be the
other duty, that is, that is our "svadharma", we can do it for the Lord's sake.
And then, Prabhupada explains that, you know, you know, "the Lord Himself":

"the Lord Himself takes him. The devotee does not need to wait to become very
experienced in order to transfer himself to the spiritual sky."

What does it mean? That devotee does not need to wait. Because the Lord will
Himself take him. So, there is no need to wait. "a...", "bhavāmi na cirāt
pārtha". And then, Prabhupada quotes this very beautiful verse from, very moving
verse. From "Varāha Purāṇa":

        nayāmi paramaṁ sthānam
        arcir-ādi-gatiṁ vinā
        garuḍa-skandham āropya
        yatheccham anivāritaḥ

So, "nayāmi". "nayāmi" means to ta..., I take. "paramaṁ sthānam". To the supreme
destination. "arcir-ādi-gatiṁ vinā". So, "arcir" refers to the path of, you
know, you know, the Ved..., in the Vedic literature, it is said the soul can go
by, you know, different, you know, paths. There is a "devyan". And there is a
"pitrayan". And when one is following these different paths, then there are
different devatas. Which are, you know, you know, which, you know, guide the
soul in its postmortem journey. Postmortem means after death. So, here, Krishna
is telling that "arcir-ādi-gatiṁ vinā". That actually, they are not required for
a devotee. The Lord will personally take him without the intervention of all
these people. And then, how, you know, "garuḍa-skandham āropya". This is a
beautiful verse. Krishna says "garuḍa-skandham". On the shoulders of Garuda.
āropya". I am situated. And "yatheccham anivāritaḥ". "yatheccham". What is the
Lord des..., the desire of the Lord's heart? The desire of the Lord's heart is
to take the devotee back to the spiritual world. "anivāritaḥ". "anivāritaḥ"
means without any, you know, distraction. Without any obstacle. Without any
slowing down. "nayāmi paramaṁ sthānam". I will take to the supreme destination.
This is the sweetness of the promise of the Lord. He is assuring. And Prabhupada
says, for a devotee, the Lord is, you know, for, the devotee is like a child.
And the Lord's is like the, you know, f..., parent who will take care of the
child. So, then, you know, you know, then, "Nār...", you know, "Nārāyaṇīya" is a
very important section from the Mahabharata. In the Mahabharata, there are many,
there is a, it is, "Nārāyaṇīya" is a compendium of wisdom. You know. And all the
knowledge of dharma is at various levels. Not all of it is transcendental. So,
all of it, you know, contains valuable information. Valueable knowledge.
Valuable insights. But they are at multiple levels of dharma. So, in that, in
the whole vast na..., you know, you know, Mahabharata, the Bhagavad Gita, the
Vishnu Sahasranama. The "Nārāyaṇīya". These are considered to be, you know, you
know, a works that are, you know, all, they are purely devotional. The bhakti
emphasis on them is much, much more than other sections. You know. So, in the
"Nārāyaṇīya", this verse is quoted. You know. Is given which Prabhupada is
quoting here.

        yā vai sādhana-sampattiḥ
        puruṣārtha-catuṣṭaye
        tayā vinā tad āpnoti
        naro nārāyaṇāśrayaḥ

So, here, as well as in the earlier verse, Prabhupada is not giving a literal
translation of the verses. He is giving a, you know, he is giving a, you know,
rough meaning of those verses.

        yā vai sādhana-sampattiḥ
        puruṣārtha-catuṣṭaye

So, "puruṣārtha-catuṣṭaye". The "puruṣārtha"s are dharma, artha, kama, moksha.
"tayā vinā tad āpnoti". So, "tad āpnoti". "tayā vinā". Even if a dev...,
devo..., per..., transcendentalist does not progress, through each of these, you
know, so, you know, "sādhana-sampattiḥ". Normally, by doing specific sadhana,
so, one gets a, when one is enriched by those sadhana, one when gets the
particular destination. One may get dharma. Artha. Kama. Like that. Whatever
s..., but one, the, that "nārā" who is taken "nārāyaṇāśrayaḥ". That "nār...",
that, you know, person, that human being who has taken the shelter of Lord
Narayana. What happens? That person attains the supreme destination. You know.
You know. Just because of having taken shelter of the Supreme Lord. And then,
Prabhupada writes again further.

"a devotee of the Lord can approach the supreme destination easily and happily,"

Very beautiful word. "easily and happily". So, it is "su-labhaḥ". And it is
"su-sukhaṁ". So, "su-labhaḥ" was mentioned in 8.14. And "su-sukhaṁ" in 9.2. So,
"su-labhaḥ". And "su-sukhaṁ". So, "easily and happily". And this has not been
talked about of any other paths. And that is what Prabhupada says. This
destination cannot be attained by other processes. And then, Prabhupada also
quotes again, you know, from the last Cha..., 18.60..., Charam Shloka.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya

So, normally, Prabhupada, in the purports, he is more, you know, you know, you
know, more analytically devotional. Analytically devotional means that
Prabhupada analyses and comes to the conclusion about how, you know, devotional
service is the best way. But in his purports, there are a few occasions where
Prabhupada gives direct instructions. Even in the scriptures, also, we will see
that, there are different verses. And not all verses come..., con..., you know,
contain instructions. So, for example, if we look at the verse.

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat
        kiñcid asti dhanañ-jaya

So, there is no truth higher than Me. All things are, you know, you know, you
know, that I pervade all things just as the, just as a necklace is, you know,
pervaded by the thread. So, now, in this, is there any instruction? No. We can
draw some instruction. That we should be able to see the Lord's presence
everywhere. Even if that presence is not in, not visible. That is fine. But
there is no direct instruction in this verse. This is an information verse. Now,
some other verses, for example:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

Give up all varieties of religion and surrender to Me. So, you know, even in the
scriptures, some verses are informational. And some verses are instructional.
So, those verses that are instructional are far more important than the verses
which are informational. So, here, Prabhupada is, you know, using, Prabhupada
generally uses an analytical, informational tone. But in some places, Prabhupada
becomes devotional. So, instructional. He says, do this. Do this. That is what
Prabhupada does in this section. And the conclusion, he says:

"Let everyone take shelter of the supreme omnipotent Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. That is
the highest perfection of life."

So, "Let everyone take shelter". So, such is the mercy of the Lord that He will
say "ahaṁ samuddhar...", He says, "ahaṁ samuddhartā". "na cirāt". He says, I
will deliver. And not too far away. Not too long time. Soon, I will do it. So,
why should one not take shelter of that Lord? Let us take that shelter of that
Lord, immediately. So, now, let us move to the next section. So, the, let us,
you know, quickly look at the sections. So, 1 to 7 was worship of Him, personal
form. Wor..., you know, personal form is greater than worship of impersonal
brahman. You know. You know. Now, 8 to 12 talk about the various stages of
bhakti. So, let us look at, you know, one verse. And then, we will look back at,
you know, you know, look at the various levels.

        mayy eva mana ādhatsva
        mayi buddhiṁ niveśaya
        nivasiṣyasi mayy eva
        ata ūrdhvaṁ na saṁśayaḥ

"mayy eva". "mayy eva" means, you know, Me alone. "mana ādhatsva". Fix your mind
on Me. "mayi buddhiṁ niveśaya". And let your intelligence be fixed on Me.
"nivasiṣyasi mayy eva". That in this way, you will reside in Me. "nivasiṣyasi".
"nivasa" means to s..., reside. So, "nivasiṣyasi" means you will reside in Me.
"ata ūrdhvaṁ na saṁśayaḥ". Of this, there is no doubt. No doubt. "na saṁśayaḥ".
So, the point here that is being mentioned is that Krishna is giving the highest
level. That if you can fix your mind on Me. If you can, you know, have your
intelligence in Me. Then, you will live in Me itself. Generally, we live where
our subtle body lives. We do not live where our physical body lives. You know.
An addict is living in, maybe living in a comfortable home. Or maybe working in
a reasonably, you know, you know, well-furnished office. But there, addict is
not there. The mind is with the object of addiction. Maybe alcohol. It may be
drugs. Whatever. And because of that, the addict has no peace of mind. The
addict has been dragged. Pulled. Pushed. Pinched. So, essentially, the point
is, we do not live where our gross body is. We live where our subtle body is. We
live where our subtle body is. What is the implication of that that we live
where our subtle body is? The implication is that if our subtle body is with
Krishna, then we will also be with Krishna. If our subtle body is not with
Krishna, then we will not be with Krishna. You know. So, now, how do we our, get
our subtle body with Krishna? That is we offer our mind and intelligence to
Krishna. If you remember, in the introduction of the Bhagavad Gita itself,
Prabhupada has said this is the art of Krishna Consciousness. That to always fix
the mind on Krishna wherever we are situated. You know. Fix the mind and
intelligence on Krishna. That is how we will live in Krishna. This is what
Krishna is telling about in this verse. And that is what Prabhupada told us in
the introduction itself. So, what is happening now? You know. Now, from the
First Chapter to the Sixth Chapter, there is a slow development which
cultima..., culminated in, in the process of bhakti. From the Sixth Chapter to
the Twelfth Chapter, Krishna, Seventh Chapter to Twelfth Chapter, Krishna has
talked about the supremacy of bhakti in terms of it being the highest reality.
And now, after that, Krishna is now offering a descending ladder. Descending
ladder means that Krishna is telling, yes. Now, once it has been concluded that
bhakti is the best way. You know. So, bhakti is better than demigod worship.
Bhakti is better than, you know, ashtanga yoga. Bhakti is better than karma
yoga. Bhakti is better than jnana yoga. Bhakti is better than "viśva-rūpa"
upasana. Bhakti is better brahmo upasana. All. And s..., bhakti is best. That is
made clear. Then, somebody may consider. Ok. Bhakti is good. But am I qualified
to practice bhakti? You know. Bhakti seems to be so exalted. "satata-yuktānāṁ".
Constantly engaged in service. Constantly thinking of Me. I am not on that
level. If I am not on that level, what should I do? No. Krishna says, now, I
will offer you multiple levels of bhakti. You know. It has been described
earlier how slowly one moves from karma yoga through jnana yoga up to bhakti
yoga. One comes to the topmost level. But, you know, if one is not capable of
doing that, in terms of, you know, you know, you know, you know, or rather, if
one thinks that, ok, bhakti is the topmost. Bhakti is the best. But then, if
bhakti is so high up, then I may not be able to practice bhakti. So, what should
I do? You know. Is it that I have to pract..., bhakti is glorious. No doubt.
Bhakti is the best. But maybe it is that, you know, you cannot practice bhakti
directly because bhakti is so glorious. So, maybe, I have to practice some other
paths before. And then, I will come to bhakti. Then, Krishna will tell actually
bhakti can also be practiced at multiple levels. And because bhakti can be, you
know, practiced at multiple levels, so, you know, you know, you know, we can
understand that, we can practice bhakti at whatever level we feel equipped. We
feel comfortable. And from there onwards, we can rise upwards to the highest
level. So, first, there is a gradual uprising. You know. Sometimes, like there
is a road which is slow in climb upwards. Upwards. Upwards. And takes us to a
highway. And then, there can be a ladder which goes all the way from the top to
the bottom. So, you know, Krishna is now going to offer a ladder of devotion. A
ladder of love. So, 8 to 12 talk about these verses. Especially, 12 is very
complicated verse. But let us try first to understand first things. So, let us
look at these three verses. You know. 12.8 to 12. So, this is one of the Gita
daily articles that I have been writing. You know. So, here, you know, you know,
you know, you know, now, Bhagavad Gita 12.8 which will, outlines a ladder of
love which extends down from the highest level. So, what is the highest level?  

Offer the mind and intelligence to Krishna. En..., entirely and thereby live in
Him. That is the first level. Then, practice sadhana-bhakti to fix the mind on
Krishna. And thereby, increase our desire for Him. You know. And then, thir...,
next is work for Krishna. So, what is the diff..., first, let us look at 12.8
and 9. What is the difference between the two? You know. You know. You know. You
know. You know. You know. Here, in 12.8, the mind is directly attached to
Krishna. And that is how one is able to fix the mind on Krishna. You know. In
12.9, one is not able to fi..., you know, one does, the mind does not have that
natural attachment to Krishna. Therefore, one has to, you know, practice fixing
the mind on Krishna. So, the mind will go here. Go there. But one brings it
back. It goes at different places. One brings it back. And then, below that, is
the level of working for Krishna. So, when we will come to that verse, we will
discuss about that. So, the best wor..., level that Krishna recommends is fix
the mind on Me always. And that is the level of pure devotion. You know.
Devot..., Prabhupada was in America. But Prabhupada was not in America. You
know. When, Prabh..., Prabhupada left Vrindavan, he did not leave Vrindavan.
Prabhupada carried Vrindavan with him. You know. You know. We may, you know, you
know, we may take a pure devotee out of the, Vrindavan. But we cannot take
Vrindavan out of a pure devotee. The pure devotee internally lives in Vrindavan.
So, Prabhupada was always at Krishna's lotus feet. Wherever he was. So, that is
the highest level. Below that, one level is, you know, you know, practice
sadhana-bhakti to fix the mind on Krishna. You know. Let us look at this level
quickly. You know. So, here, you know, you know, you know:

        atha cittaṁ samādhātuṁ
        na śaknoṣi mayi sthiram
        abhyāsa-yogena tato
        mām icchāptuṁ dhanañ-jaya

You know. Krishna is telling "atha". If "cittaṁ samādhātuṁ na śaknoṣi". If
however, it is not possible for you to be satisfied in thinking of Krishna. If
it, if it, if you cannot think of Me constantly. "mayi sthiram". "sthiram" means
steadily. Then, "abhyāsa-yogena tato". "abhyāsa-yoga" means practice. Practice
yoga. That means like we do in our man..., you know, med..., mantra meditation.
In our chanting. What do we try to do? You know. You know. You know. We try to,
you know, fix the mind. The mind goes here. The mind goes there. We bring it
back. As we said, the mind may stray away. But let it not stay away. It will
stray away. It will go here. It will go there. It is like children are
restlessly will want to go here. They will want to go there. What does the
mother do? Gently, but firmly, the mind, mother gets them back. Gets the child
back. So, similarly, "abhyāsa-yoga". Now, Krishna has very interesting thing in
this verse. What will "abhyā", by "abhy...", by "abhyāsa-yoga", what will
happen?

        abhyāsa-yogena tato
        mām icchāptuṁ dhanañ-jaya

"mām icchāptuṁ". You know. Obtain the desire to attain Me. You know. You know.
The word "dhanañ-jaya" is used over here. Why? Because Arjuna is known as the
conqueror of wealth. But the supreme wealth is the wealth of attraction to
Krishna. None of the wealth of this world can help us at the time of death. But
the wealth of attraction to Krishna, the wealth of remembrance of Krishna can
take us back to the spiritual world where we will be eternally happy. So,
Arjuna, by being yo..., referred to by the word "dhanañ-jaya" has been told,
oh, you, you are the acquirer of wealth. But now, acquire the supreme wealth.
What is the supreme wealth? "mām icchāptuṁ". The desire to attain Me. See, all
of us, we have many desires. But we do not have the strong desire to attain
Krishna. We may have many other desires. But we do not have the desire to attain
Krishna. Once we get that desire, then it is the supreme perfection of life. So,
right now, if we look, we may say, we, we are practicing devotional service. We
wear the dress of a devotee. We even go through the actions of a devotee. But
how strong is our desire for Krishna? Not very strong. But we, if we keep fixing
the mind on Krishna. Gradually, it is, at conscious level, we start seeing. Yes.
Fixing the mind on Krishna is so joyful. And we, another thing that is so
irritating. You know. It, because so agitating. So entangling. Let me start to
fix the mind on more, Krishna. More and more. So, the more, first, we fix hte
mind on Krishna, as a discipline. And as we fix the mind on Krishna, we start
to see, oh, this gives so much peace. It is not easy. Initially, it is not so
easy to fix the mind on Krishna. But once we fix the mind, then it gives so much
joy. That we start feeling, yes. Let me do this more and more. You know. You
know. So, by the process, sadhana-bhakti, our attraction to Krishna increases.
Our desire to remember Him increases. And then, from this level, we move to the
next level. Where once our desire for Krishna becomes strong. Then, naturally,
we will think of Him constantly. So, in this way, Krishna gives two levels. The
future levels, we will discuss in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
