Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7jvjDZgpsaw
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=7jvjDZgpsaw&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_096_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_08_Text_23_to_28_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=C0AXOGYrfCfQA4YZo4TUqKqY-u98MTU0ODQ4ODY1N0AxNTQ4NDAyMjU3

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now into the Eighth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. The last section. So, let us
have a quick overview of the Eighth Chapter before we move forward. So, we have
discussed till now how in the Eighth Chapter, there are several sections. The
primary focus is on remembrance of Krishna. You know. So, we discussed how,
first, you know, Krishna answers Arjuna's six questions till verse 4. Then, in
the, eigh..., the seventh question is how to remember Krishna at the time of
death is from 5 to 8. Then, remembrance by yoga-mishra bhakti. Then, remembrance
by shuddha-bhakti. Then, the remembrance by comparing natures of material and
spiritual worlds. And then, remembrance by bhakti-yoga is easier than by
ashtanga-yoga. That is the conclusive sec..., concluding section which we will
discuss today. 23 to 28. You know. You know. Now, let us, you know, look at
this. You know. The 23rd verse.

        yatra kāle tv anāvṛttim
        āvṛttiṁ caiva yoginaḥ
        prayātā yānti taṁ kālaṁ
        vakṣyāmi bharatarṣabha

So, "yatra kāle tv anāvṛttim". So, what is the time at which "anāvṛttim"? One
will not come back. "āvṛttiṁ caiva yoginaḥ". And one will come back. "prayātā
yānti taṁ kālaṁ". "vakṣyāmi bharatarṣabha". So, oh, Arjuna, I will explain to
you the time at which of the yogi departs, the yogi will return. And the time at
which of the yogi departs, the yogi will not return. I will explain this to you.
"vakṣyāmi bharatarṣabha". So, now, you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada
explains that:

"If the yogī is perfect he can select the time and situation for leaving this
material world. But if he is not so expert his success depends on his
accidentally passing away at a certain suitable time."

You know. And now, Prabhupada also quotes something interesting over here:

"According to Ācārya Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, the Sanskrit word kāla used herein
refers to the presiding deity of time."

So, here, we are going into foreign territory, you know, in the sense that what
Krishna will be discussing over here ha..., involves a lot of preliminary Vedic
knowledge. You know. Which we are not familiar with in the normal course of our
Krishna Conscious study. So, I will talk about, so, this is basically what
Krishna will talk in the next verses about the two Vedic paths called devyan and
pitrayan. So, I will discuss about those two paths. But before that, I, let us
discuss a little bit more about the path of yoga. H..., now, see, every
particular path, when a person follows, there is a world view associated with
it. So, m..., for, for example, when a person wants to be a materialist. Then,
there is a particular world view associated with materialism. That may be
godless materialism. Or that may be pious materialism. Religious materialism. Or
atheistic materialism. But there is a world view associated with that. You know.
You know. So, yes, if there is a godless materialist. Then, the world view is
that, you know, there is no God. There is no soul. And this life is a
competition. As we, sur..., survival of the fittest. And we have to fight to
enjoy in this world. And, you know, whatever little success we get in this
world, that is the only success and happiness that we will have. And we die,
everything is finished. This is a world view. Like that. Now, in many ways, a
world view is like a map. A map helps us in some ways to navigate territory. But
if the map is wrong, then the, you know, we cannot really navigate the territory
properly. If I am traveling in Mumbai. And if I have got the map of Calcutta.
Then, no matter how much I try to go, follow the map. Hea..., is not making any
headway. You know. So, first of all, I have to have a correct map. But then,
even if a map is correct. The map may not be appropriate for me. What does it
mean? See, you know, there is a difference between correct map and appropriate
map. You know. If I want to, you know, find a, a my way in a city. And for that,
I bought a map. You know. If I am looking at a, you know, if I got a la..., map,
which is primarily talking about geographical, you know, features. You know.
Where there is plato. Where there are planes. Where there are rivers. You know.
Where, what is the kind of soil that is there? Where there are fault lines under
the soil. If that kind of topographical features are the primary co..., focus
of a map. Then, if I am gonna city trying to find the house of a friend. That
will not be helpful for that. You know. That map is not incorrect. That map may
be correct. But it is not appropriate for me. So, you know, you know, you know,
the map which we have should not only be correct. But it should, should also be
appropriate. So, now, in the Vedic culture, there are multiple correct maps that
are given. You know. But not all are appropriate for our, you know, spiritual
advancement in Kali Yuga by the practice of bhakti-yoga, you know, in Krishna
Consciousness. So, the process of yoga has a particular kind of map. What is
that map? That map involves, like we discussed yesterday, the various chakras
are there. And these chakras help, you know, this is one particular way of
looking at the body. So, now, from, if we look at it from scientific
perspective, we may say, oh, actually, if I study the science, you know, the,
it just talks about glance. And it talks about the circulation. And talks about
nose. And blood. And such things like that. There is no cha..., concept of
chakra over there. So, again, it is a different map.

To understand this concept of a map, you know, we have to understand that the
focus, when we look at a particular world view, you know, what we c..., ca...,
can know depends on what we know. What we can know depends on what we know. That
means, you know, if a, you know, car is giving us strange noise while driving.
You know. You know. A, the, or..., ordinary person may think, oh. Now, why is
this car giving this strange noise? It is irritating. But a trained mechanic may
say, oh, there is some problem with its "carburetor". Or maybe, there is some
other technical problem with some other part because of it is, it is giving
problem. So, now, because the mechanic already has certain knowledge. Because of
that, when some further stimulus, some further information comes up, then, you
know, one is able to understand it better. So, what is just an irritating sound
for ordinary driver, is a sound that indicates what is wrong. And what needs to
be corrected for a mechanic. So, what we can know from a particular situation
depends on what we know. So, in the modern, you know, scientific way of looking
at the body, the body is primarily seen as a, you know, as a, physi..., a
biochemical system. It is organism. But it is basically biochemical system. So,
essentially, the whole functionality of the body is considered to be based on
the proper balance. Circulation. And, you know, m..., and integration of its
biochemicals. So, che..., chemi..., chemicals refer to substances that we study
in chemistry. They are natural and conscious substances. And biochemicals refers
to substance that are, that contribute to, that are studied in biology. That
contribute to life. Or living systems to be more precise. So, biochemicals. It
is basically system of biochemicals. And all diseases are seen to be, you know,
caused by, you know, some anatomical or physiological disfunction. So, anatomy
refers to internal structure. And physiologically refers to interior, internal,
you know, you know, functioning. So, when there is a fracture, that is
anatomical problem. That may also lead to, when there is indigestion. Or
something like that. When there is low blood pressure. When there is, you know,
anemia. That is largely physiological. So, either way, the point is, you know,
everything in the body is seen from a biochemical perspective. A structural, the
structure, it may be structural, also, problem. But ultimately, structure is
also cons..., comprised of biochemicals of different kinds. So, this is a
reductionistic view of looking at the world. And at the body. Ay..., ayurveda
has a different way of looking at the body. Ayurveda focuses on seeing the body in
terms of "kapha". "Vata". And "pitta". So, now, you know, kapha can be cons...,
compared roughly with, "kapha" is basically ka..., you know, referring to the
solid content of the body. You know. You know. "Vata" refers to the
air content. And "pitta" refers to the heat content. It is a rough correlation.
And in ayurveda, the idea is that when kapha, vata, pitta are balanced. Then,
the body will function effectively. And when kapha, vata, pitta are in
imbalance, then the body cannot function properly. So, now, it is a, you know,
well-known, au..., you know, experience fact, h..., that people do get cured.
By, you know, practicing ayurveda, also. And people get cured by look, by doing
ayurve..., allopathy, also. Now, of course, you know, some devotees may choose
allopathy. Some devotees may choose ayurveda. Prabhupada choo..., preferred
ayurveda. But it, Prabhupada was not fanatic about. Prabhupada was pragmatic.
You know. Use whatever works.

So, the point is, both are maps. And both maps, you know, look at the body in a
particular way. In a distinctive way. And they try to solve the problems that
are there in the body. So, how, you know, now, how do we reconcile these two
maps? We understand that it is the same body. But depending on the framework
with which one is looking, one will see the body differently. Now, even the, you
know, allopathic person will recognise that there is some heat in the body. Now,
we know that that our body temperature is important. If the temperature goes up,
it indicates that, you know, there is fever. And that indicates something wrong
inside the body. So, the concept of heat in the body, as, as connected with
health is accepted in allopathy, also. But the whole point that, you know,
certain substances which generate heat. And the concept of a "jatharagni" as
bodily f..., digestive fire itself. That may not be so directly understandable
for allopathy. But there can be rough correlation. You know. You know. Whatever,
you know, the organs that are talked about. Whether it is allopathy. Or
ayurveda. You know. There is a kidney. Which does certain function. There is a
liver. Which does certain function. Heart does certain functions. There are
certain, things are similar. But the way of looking at the two is different. So,
both work in their own way. And, you know, both focus on attaining, to take care
of the body. Now, ayurveda, it does not just fo..., it, it certainly talks about
material, physical balance. But it also takes, you know, you know, into
consideration psychological and spiritual aspects. Not all ayurvedic patience,
physicians may necessarily talk about God. And soul. But if you study the, you
know, you know, original ayurvedic scriptures. Ayurvedic books that are there.
They do talk about, you know, the mental and the spiritual aspect, also.
Although, that is not there emphasis. It is a medical book. But that is
mentioned over there. So, just as there is, this Ayurveda offers one way of
looking at the world. Now, because, science is largely reductionistic. So, even
when ayurveda offers medical benefits. And heals. It is considered to be one of
the alternative treatments which is quite successful in many ways. You know. But
such people are suspicious. Because we have been brought up in a particular
world view. So, we may not be able to appreciate Ayurveda easily. But just as
ayurveda works. Although there is a different, you know, way of looking at the
body. Similarly, there is another way of looking at the body. Which is some ways
connected with Ayurveda. Some ways different. That is the yogic way of looking
at the body. It involves seeing the body in terms of its energy centers. So, let
us understand this. We will see, first of all, how even sci..., in science,
there are different ways of looking at the body. In terms of not, you know, in
terms of allopathy. But in broad understanding of the what the body is. Let us
look at it. You know. So, the point, which I was making of, there being a
different maps. You know. Here, we will see the same human body. But depending
on what is the focus, we will see that the body will be seen differently. You
know. If I want to focus on nervous system, this is what I will focus on in the
body. You know. If I want to focus on the cardiovascular aspects, the
respiration and other things like that. Then, this is what I will focus on. If I
want to look at what are the internal organs, this is the viscera, this is what
I will focus on. If I want to look at the lymphs, then this is what I will focus
on. So, what does this is it, now, if we look at it, you know, if we may do,
just look at each of these, separately, we would think that these are quite
different.

So, they are different, and yet they are connected, also. How they are
connected? Because, you know, they are all talking about the same body,
ultimately. But there is, when there is a different focus, at that time, you
know, we will s..., look at the body in diff..., you know, in different ways
depending on the specific focus. So, the, what we want to do in a particular
territory will determine what kind of map will be most appropriate for us. So,
now, you know, just as, there are, there is one way of looking at the body in
terms of, you know, the physical functions. Similarly, there is another way of
looking at the body in terms of energy fields. So, you know, this might seem a
bit, you know, ea..., eerie. Or scary. You know. But there is nothing, you
know, apprehensive about it. Actually, this is talking about the energy fields.
Now, what are these ene..., what do we mean by these energy fields? Actually,
you know, we will see over here. First, there is a shape around this person. And
then, further, r..., rays are going out. This is like an aura of the person. And
here, we will see, basically, energy fields that are around the person. So,
this energy radiating outwards. This sort of, the aura of the, sha..., shadow of
that person. And this is the, you know, these are the overall field that are
around the person. Energy fields. Let us understand this a little bit more now.
See, even according to modern science, the whole universe is filled with, you
know, vibrations. And everything that we do, it is sets of vibrations. Right
now, I am speaking. So, this is sound vibrations. But even without speaking, if
I move my hand, my hand, the movement of my hand, it creates, it sends of
ripples in the air around me. That also creates vibrations. Just the movement of
any object, they also sets of vibrations. And anyway, there are vibrations which
are constantly there. You know. The whole system of, you know, say,
telecommunication, is based on like ternary vibrations over. We call people by
cellphone. And such similar things happens because there are vibrations. Which
travel around. So, just as a person needs to understand, you know, needs to have
some understanding of physics to know electromagnetic vibration, can, can,
vibrations. Electromagnetic waves. And, you know, to tap into them. To utilise
them. Similarly, we need o..., other aspects, also. What do we mean by other
aspects? You know. Wha..., by other aspects, what we mean is that, you know,
there are other ways of looking at the world. At the body, also. So, h..., h...,
w..., we ha..., we, when we talk about Vedic culture, we broadly talk about the
three modes of material nature. So, that is also one way of analysing,
especially the, you know, psychological characteristics of things. That, you
know, more is, do not get, determine psychological characteristics. You know.
They have "adirindi" effect on everything. You know. And we will discuss about
the mode later when we come to the Fourteen Chapter. But here, we all know about
the modes. And broadly, we know, ok, this behavior is in goodness. This
behavior, passion. This in ignorance. Whichever way it might be. You know. But
the important point in all cases is that, we work primarily on the h...,
foc..., on the map that we are using. You know. Depending on how I look at the
world. Accordingly, I function. So, in the process of yoga, the purpose is that,
one has to, you know, you know, channelise one's energies.

And what are these energies? These are psychic energies. They are subtler
energies. Not physical energies. So, you know, there is some nescient research
that is happening. You know. In mapping or us of people. Many times, we see in,
you know, say, "Amar Chitra Katha". O..., or in some movies. If we see some
saintly people, we will see some l..., light around them. It is called the
"halo". So, you know, it is said that they, they are, give out an effulgence. It
may be, also be called as an aura. So, now, you know, if we have the appropriate
technology, we will find that every person has an aura. Every person has some
kind of vision around that person. What is this aura exactly? That aura refers
to the kind of effect the person has. Around, you know, due to, around, the, in
the environment that one is around. Sometimes, we will find that if we go in the
presence of pre-advanced devotees. Then, just by being in their presence, we
feel calm. We feel, you know, you know, we feel spiritual by that. Now, so,
sometimes, it may happen even when we go to a temple. You know. We are just
going in the temple, outside, it may be just, Radheshyam, that is honking,
And there are crowds. And there is pushing. And there is so much, just enter the
temple atmosphere. And suddenly, we feel something different. Oh. Here, so
peaceful. What is making me peaceful like this? You know. So, what, what is it
that makes us peaceful like that? Actually, it is, you know, something which is
very distinctive. Wha..., now, even materialistic people, when they go to a
temple, they, they feel this. That these vibrations here are different. Is it?
More, what is it that makes them peaceful like that? Actually, it is the
presence of spiritual vibrations. It is a presence, ultimately, of Krishna. Now,
materialistic people may, even they do not have proper understanding of deity
worship. They feel that, ok, this place is spiritual. They think, they do not
think necessarily that deity is spiritual. That the deity's presence is there.
Actually, the chanting of Hare Krishna. The glorification of Krishna. The
prayers and the meditations that the devotees have done over there. All those
create vib..., vibrations which, which help in, you know, you know, which help
in creating a spiritual setting. So, the important point is to, to recognise
that wherever we are. We, you know, there are vibrations around that. So, this
vibration need not be just physical vibrations. You know. Or the kind of
vibrations that are studied in physics. There can be subtler vibrations, also.
So, the energy fields refer to this kind of vibrations that we set of in the
subtler level. Science in and of itself does not study everything that we know
about. You know. There is much that is beyond the scope of science as it is
studied today. You know. Even emotions are difficult for science to comprehend.
What to speak of things beyond that? So, this is another way of looking at the
world. And in the path of yoga, you know, it is understood that these energy
fields that we have, these energy fields can be maximised or minimised. For our
benefit. And for others' benefit. So, you know, when we say that the, certain
yogis, when they advance in, say, of yoga, they can get "siddhis". So, what is a
"siddhi", actually? When the yoga, yogis get some siddhi, what exactly happens?
We see that, when we can get access to subtler or higher dimensions, then we can
do things which are not, which are not so easily possible in other dimensions.

For example, if I am in this room. Now, if, say, this is, this is the, assume,
this is a small room. And if I want to go from the right top corner of the wall
to, right top corner of the room to the left bottom corner of the room. You
know. So, from one end to another end. Now, actually, if I have to, if I ha...,
can travel diagonally. Tuck. I can go like this. If I do not travel diagonally.
If I have to go just like this. Then, first, I will have to come down. Then, you
know, and will have to climb down like this in the vertical dimension. And then,
move horizontally. And come here. But if there is a mosquito that is flying.
Mosquito is just, fly from here to here. So, it has access to, you know, because
it has fly..., it has capacity to fly. It does not have to stick to the ground.
This is so, basically, the point is, the diagonal decreases the distance. And
enables one to go faster. So, similarly, h..., when there is the access to
higher dimensions. Then, that which is, you know, you know, you know, not
normally easily accessible becomes easily accessible. So, you know, even in
science, there is a concept called as wormhole. What is this wormhole? You know.
In most science fiction, you know, science fiction movies. Or science fiction
novels. There is the fan, there is the hope of space travel. And travel to
distant planets. Where there are other kinds of life forms. And going there. And
staying there. That kind of things fascinate people. So, when they are talking
about such things, so, at that time, how are these things done? What is the
practical way in which these things are done? They are done by the practice
o..., of, you know, certain things. Certain concepts. Where they call as
wormholes. So, the idea is that, you know, you know, Einstein has proposed that
space-time is like a circle. So, now, currently, space travel is limited by the,
you know, by the upper limit of the speed of light. So, if one cannot, you know,
you know, now, by, if we just go by the speed of light, we can, what happens?
Then, you know, some stars are said to be thousands of light years away. So,
what does it actually mean? It means that when we see a star in the sky. If it
is, you know, thousand light years away. That means we are not seeing the star
as it is. The light from the star, it took thousand years to come here. That
means, we are s..., not, when we look at the sky, we are not looking at the
present. We are looking at the past. We are seeing the star as it was thousand
years ago. And even if we go at the speed of light, we will go there after
thousand years. And who knows? That star may explode it and will not be there
only. So, actually, a space travel in science and science fiction, it is limited
by this upper limit of the speed of light. So, therefore, the scientists have
thought of a concept called the wormhole. That means a wor..., see, if
space-time is a cir..., is, is like a sphere. Then, normally, one has to go like
this. From the top of this sphere. When one wants to go from one end to the
other end. But if a worm has to go, a worm can worry, a, make a whole. And then,
just go into the hole. Hole. Hole. Or, and just, it does not have to go around
this sph..., or on the circumference of this sphere. And just go right through
the, you know, you know, in a diagonal line. You know. And just, in a radial way
from one end to the center. And then, through the center to the other end. That
will be much shorter. So, that is called as wormhole.

So, now, of course, you know, wormhole right now is entirely a concept. And
whether wormholes exist. And whether space-time is actually spherical. And
whether one can find the areas where wormholes are possible. And whether one can
travel to a wormhole. All these are, you know, speculations right now. We do not
know what it is. But the point which I am making through all these examples is
that by access to some, you know, some different kind of reality, our normal way
of functioning can be changed. It can be, things can be expedited. So, for
example, when there is, you know, "prāpti-siddhi". "prāpti-siddhi" means what
happens? See, somebody might, you know, Prabhupada said, Prabhupada would also
s..., s..., say that. You know. He might, yogis. If somebody wants a date from
Kabul. That yogi will be sitting in the room. And suddenly, the yogi will
stretch his hand. And right now, the dates will appear. And he will eat the
dates. So, now, in many cases, people who claim to be such, just doing magic.
Thy have dates hidden somewhere. And just flow, they just connected. And they
mislead the people. And they show the dates. So, yes. There are people who are
magicians. Who do these things. But alon..., along with magicians, there are
also other people who do it genuinely. They are capable of doing it. So, how do
they do that? Actually, when the yogis, by the development of their process of,
you know, by their, you know, a, spiritual, by their, you know, development in
terms of subtle energies. They can access subtler dimensions. When they can
access subtler dimensions. They can then travel faster. Not just faster, but
they can, you know, they can, you know, take shortcuts that are not accessible
to those who exist in lower dimensions. So, Sadaputa Prabhu was one of Srila
Prabhupada's scientist disciples. And he has talked about this in several of his
books. And there are wikipedia articles, also, which talk about this. The
diagram article, he also explains these things. We are not going to, going to
technicalities here. H..., because our focus is not Vedic science. Our focus is
Bhagavad Gita here. It is certainly not yoga science. But the important point
is, when we have access to subtler dimensions. The things which are not possible
with normal means, are possible in those ti..., in tho..., to, by access to those
dimensions. You know. Just like, you know, you know, if one is studying a, if
one is, h..., working on a computer. In a computer, there can be multiple levels
of users. So, some users, they just have access to, you know, the basics. You
know. Just data entering. Or other, you know, somebody, somebody, the more
advanced user, that person may be given access to, not just data entering. But
you can look at the code, also. That you can change the code if it is required.
And some user may be like a m..., m..., meta user. The biggest user. That person
has access to everything. So, even a simple machine, we can have, computer, we
can arrange system in such a way that, you know, depending on one's ad..., one's
level of authority. One's level of responsibility. In sanskrit, this level of
responsibility, autho..., authority is called as adhikar. So, depending on
one's adhikar, you know, you know, one will be able to things, do things
differently. So, therefore, you know, one will be able to see, get access to
more things. And will be able to do thi..., more things that way. So, yogis are
those who tap their subtle powers by, you know, by a certain process. And when
they do that, then they are able to, you know, have some siddhis, also.

Now, if we look at the yoga sutras carefully. You know. Even in the yoga, yogic
path, there is, the siddhis are considered to be distractions. They are not the
ultimate goal. Because ultimately, siddhi is, many people think siddhis are
spiritual. But this is, these are not spiritual. They are material. Why? Because
the siddhis are focusing on material things. So, it is the ability to manipulate
matter. You know. So, and the ability to manipulate matter is ultimately
material. But in the chakra system, so, there are subtler energies. So, first
point I made is that the chakra systems are different way of looking at the
body. It is a different map. And in this map, there are subtler energies.  When
we tap those subtler energies, then we can do things which are normally not
possible. Because we get access to l..., a higher dimensions. The word dimension
we use here is not exactly in terms of, exactly identical to the way in which we
use it in science. But even in, you know, science, when we talk about string
theory, especially. It talks about s..., eleven dimensions. Seventeen dimensions.
And seventy is themselves, talk about, you know, m..., higher dimensions. But
how those dimensions can be conceived is something which, you know, even the
scientists cannot ex..., you know, understand or explain properly. But there is
a concept of higher dimensions. So, the Vedic understanding of higher dimension
is not exactly similar. But it is something, you know, you know, which is in
that direction. So, the basic point is, when one's subtler energies are
activated, then one has access to higher dimensions. And one can do certain
things at that time. Let us look, come back to this now. You know. This concept
of energy fields. So, you know, once one understands the concept of energy
fields, so, we discussed this chart yesterday. Now, you know, let us look at
the, the, I mentioned about chakra. Seven chakras. The human chakra system. So,
here, this is described in the Vedic text. Now, there are, now, we talked about
chakras. And in the, h..., you know, in the scientific understanding, there is 
the various glance that are there. So, let us look at the correlation between
the two. You know. Rough correlation. It does not have to be, you know, so, now,
in the Muldhara Chakra. That can be roughly correlated Adr..., Adrenal Glands.
The Swadishthana chakra is with, correlated with Gonads. The Manipura correlated
with GIES and Pancreas. The Anahata with Thymus. The Vishuddha with Tyroid or
Parathyroid. The Ajna with Pituitary. And the Sahasra with Hypothalamus and
Pituitary. So, you know, now, now, each of these chakras have certain hormones
associated with them. Now, the chakras. The glands have the hormones associated
with them. So, basically, what we are trying to do over here is, what this chart
explains is, that these two systems, it is not that one is scientific. And other
non-scientific. You know. They can be correlated. But because the world views
underlying them are different. So, there are, you know, there can be some
differences, also. But both within their world views, they stand intellectual
scrutiny. And there is possibility to access power. So, just as when we study
science. So, the doctors who have studied the physical body extensively, they
have power. You know. The ordinary person does not know what to do. Why there is
pain in my stomach. And the doctor knows. And the doctor may give some
injection. Or does some surgery. And the pain goes away.

So, just as this knowledge gives us an understanding of the body, which gives
some power. Similarly, the understanding of the chakras also gives a kind of
knowledge. Which gives power. So, this is, this corr..., correlation is
metabolism. Now, after understanding this, you know, the six of the yogic
system, they are, purp..., purpose of understanding of these yogic systems is,
the whole principle in yoga is, you know, that, it is focusing a lot on
material. It is not foc..., although it, the ultimate aim is spiritual. The
focus is, you know, you know, quite a bit on material. You know. Regulating the
breath. Sitting in a particular asana. And then, trying to activate the chakras.
And then, to get the "prāṇa" to rise to the highest chakra. Now, in all this,
the focus on remembrance of Krishna becomes substantially lower. And that is
unfortunate. So, if somebody can focus on remembering Krishna. And by
remembering Krishna, one returns back to Krishna. That is the best. But if one
does not focus on Krishna, then that can lead to problems. Because one realise
too much on one's endeavors. And if one's own endeavors do not work out
properly, then one will not be successful. So, now, with this understanding, you
know, the of, th..., of material factors. So, the material factors are quite
important in the path of yoga. Because the path of yoga does not rely primarily
on the grace of the Lord. And it does not seek shelter of transcendental bhakti.
It focuses on material readjustment. Redirection of the bodily energies. So,
therefore, you know, at a material level, adjusting things at the time of death
becomes important. Krishna has said earlier that one who remembers Me will come
back to Me. But for those who do not focus on that devotional injunction. Just
remember Me. For them, they have to do other things. What are those other
things? That will be discussed in the next verse. Let us look at this verse now.
You know.

        agnir jyotir ahaḥ śuklaḥ
        ṣaṇ-māsā uttarāyaṇam
        tatra prayātā gacchanti
        brahma brahma-vido janāḥ

So, "agnir jyotir ahaḥ śuklaḥ". "agnir" is fire. "jyotir" is light. "ahaḥ" is
day. "śuklaḥ" is the white fortnight. You know. You know. "śuklaḥ". And
"paksha". And, so, this is refer..., fortnight refers to the, you know, the
phases of the moon. So, "śuklaḥ, "paksha". And "kṛṣṇaḥ", "paksha". "ṣaṇ-māsā
uttarāyaṇam". So, we know that, you know, you know, from the point of the view
of the earth, you know, the sun depending on the way the, the earth's angular
tilt is, twenty-three and a half degrees. The relative position of the moon. The
relative position of the sun. So, there is "uttarāyaṇam". And "dakṣiṇāyanam".
Sun appears to be moving, you know, you know, you know, the whole celestial
arrangement seem to be moving towards the "uttarā". Or the "dakṣiṇā". Depending
on. So, "tatra prayātā gacchanti". If one goes away doing that "prayātā".
"brahma brahma-vido janāḥ". Then, such a person is "brahma-vido". And such a
person attains the "brahma". So, then, Krishna says that, you know, they attain,
Prabhupada translate that they attain the supreme. What happens? They:

"attain that Supreme"

So, Prabhupada also makes the point over here.

"When ﬁre, light, day and the fortnight of the moon are mentioned, it is to be
understood that over all of them there are various presiding deities who make
arrangements for the passage of the soul."

So, you know, K..., now, for, now, this is, Krishna is not talking about
devotees over here. Krishna is talking a..., primarily about yogis. See, what is
going on in this chapter is a comparison of the path of yoga. And the comparison
of path of bhakti. Yoga refers to ashtanga-yoga. So, Krishna recommends this
easiest as the fixing of the mind on Him. But He also analyses the path of yoga.
And His goal is to compare and establish how bhakti-yoga is easier. So, here,
when He is talking about the process yoga, He describes and how the yogis
depart. So, wh..., when the soul departs within the path of yoga, it described
in the Vedas, you know, that, in the Shrutis primarily, that, you know, you
know, there are various devatas who supervise the, you know, pathways that are
used by the departing soul. Hmm. Just like, you know, i..., if a person is going
in a train. Then, there are different railway stations along the way. And there
are station masters of each railway station. And they, overall, look after the,
you know, you know, the rails over there. And the passengers, the trains over
there. So, similarly, when we go acc..., after death. After death when the soul
departs, then how the soul goes. You know. Which pathway does the soul takes,
that, you know, is determined by certain, you know, that pathway is overseen,
different parts of the pathway are overseen by the presiding deities. So, here,
Krishna, when He is referring to, you know, you know, you know, a day. And
night. And "uttarāyaṇam". And ligh..., you know, such, th..., light and such
things. This is referring to not just this particular, you know, phenomena,
cos..., you know, cosmic phenomena. But is also referring to the deities in
charge of those phenomena. That means, when a person is "brahma-vido". When the
person knows the Absolute Truth. And then, one has one's consciousness such
that, one prop..., has propitiated these particular deities. Then, those
particular deities guide the person along. Along the path ultimately to Brahman.
So, the focus is taking the soul ultimately to Brahman. That is the focus. And
how does that f..., how is that focus fulfilled? That is by purification. So,
yoga also involves some level of purification. And then, you know, yogic
austerity brings about purifications requisite qualification. And then, the yogi
goes along in that way. So, now, if the yogi is not so advanced. Then, the yogi
does not, then, these particular presiding deities do not guide that person.
What happens? Then, another set of deities guide that person. That, who are
those deities? That is described in the next verse.

        dhūmo rātris tathā kṛṣṇaḥ
        ṣaṇ-māsā dakṣiṇāyanam
        tatra cāndramasaṁ jyotir
        yogī prāpya nivartate

So, there is a different path. When one takes the "devyan". So, previous verse
talked about the "devyan" path. The jnana means path. You know. You know. We
have, you know, nowadays, there are missions. Which are made. Chandrayaan. Or
Mangalyaan. Is, you know, the, is ISRO setting up missions like that. So, say,
we want to go to the moon. We want to go to the Mars. So, the idea is, you
know, that, you know, devyan is a particular path. Which ultimately leads to
liberation. Pitriyana is another path. Which leads to ano..., which leads to
hell-y, heavenly planets. But it does not lead to liberation. So, here, it is
discussed. "dhūmo rātris". "dhūmo rātris tathā". So, here, what happened? "dhūmo
rātris tathā kṛṣṇaḥ". So, "dhūmo" is the smoke.

        dhūmenāvriyate vahnir

We have discussed this earlier in 3.48, you know, you know, 3.38. How, you know,
one of the ways the soul is covered by dust is mentioned. It is said thus smoke
is, covers by fire. Like that. "rātris tathā kṛṣṇaḥ". So, here, Krishna does not
refer to Krishna. It refers to the dark fortnight. You know. You know. So,
"śuklaḥ". And "kṛṣṇaḥ", "paksha". "śuklaḥ". The fortnight of the "rātris". You
know. "ṣaṇ-māsā dakṣiṇāyanam". So, as comparis..., you know, is contrasted.
The "uttarā". And there is "dakṣiṇā" in there. "tatra". What happens to such
people?  "cāndramasaṁ jyotir" "cāndramasaṁ" is the moon planet. And "yogī prāpya
nivartate". So, what happens to the yogi is, the person who goes there, that
person has, Prabhupada mentions, you know, goes to the moon planet. And then,
lives for ten thousand years according to demigod calculations. And then,
returns back. "yogī prāpya nivartate". This is another path. That means the
yogi, who has done austerities, and who has, you know, you know, you know, you
know, timed the death at a par..., at the right time. But not exactly at the
right time. So, that one can attain liberation. So, in that sense, it is the
wrong time. But still, it is the time by which the yogi gets fruits. It is not
that there is zero results. Yogi also gets results. But what is the result? The
yogi gets elevated to Chandraloka. That means the yogi goes to heavens. But
after staying in heavens, the heavens are not eternal. Remember. They are
long-lasting. But they are not eternal. And from there, the yogi omes back to
the earth. And in that way, "yogī prāpya nivartate". You know. Then, Krishna
will discuss in the next verse. He contrasts the two paths in one verse.

        śukla-kṛṣṇe gatī hy ete
        jagataḥ śāśvate mate
        ekayā yāty anāvṛttim
        anyayāvartate punaḥ

So, "śukla-kṛṣṇe gatī hy ete". So, you know, you know, there are two ways of
passing from this world, embodiment. "ekayā yāty anāvṛttim". By one, 
"anāvṛttim". One will not come back. "anyayāvartate punaḥ". By another, one will
come back. "śukla-kṛṣṇe gatī hy ete". So, "śukla" refers to "śukla", "paksha".
"kṛṣṇe" refers to "kṛṣṇe", "paksha". So, "gatī" is the ways of passing. "jagataḥ
śāśvate mate". These are the, you know, the vedas. Which are "śāśvate". They
give us opinion. You know. "śā...", "mate" is opinion. "śāśvate mate". The two
ways of departing. But, you know, Pra..., you know, Prabhupada quotes this from
the "Baladeva Vidyābhūṣa...". "Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa". Who is quoting it in his
Vedanta sutra commentary. That is "Chāndogya Upaniṣad". Now, this whole thing,
what is talked about, "Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa" talks about it i..., you know,
about it in his "Govinda Bhashya" commentary, also. Quite extensively analyses
this. And there, he explains this, you know, as Prabhupada also quotes it.
Non-literally. You know. Not just these particular times. You know. Because if
they were just specific times. Then, there is often an overlapping. Or a
contradiction. You know, because it may say "uttarāyaṇam". That is six months.
But within that, we have to have day. And we have to have night. So, in
"uttarāyaṇam". And in daytime. But what about if there is night in
"uttarāyaṇam"? Or day in "dakṣiṇāyanam". So, what will happen? That are a lot of
complications over here. So, they truly understanding does not literally, does
not really, you know, stand the scrutiny if we go in very seriously into it. So,
he gives an explanation that these referring to deities. And it referring to,
"kāle" does not necessarily refer to time only. "kāle" can refer to time. But
also refers to path. And there are two paths of leaving the world. And that is
the way it is talked about here in this chapter. "ekayā yāty anāvṛttim". By one,
one will not come back. The other one will come back. So, the whole point of
this discussion is that, actually, there are a lot of precise factors that have
to be taken care of. So that one will attain success in one's spiritual journey.
And if one does not take care of those things, one will not attain success. So,
one, Krishna will, may one, how will I take care of these things. So, Krishna
tells Arjuna, do not bother about this so much.

        naite sṛtī pārtha jānan
        yogī muhyati kaścana
        tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu
        yoga-yukto bhavārjuna

So, "sṛtī" is different path. "naite". These two supreme different paths. Pa...,
even if one knows, "yogī muhyati kaścana". You know. The yogi is not
"muhyati". Yogi is not bewildered. Therefore, what should you do? "tasmāt
sarveṣu kāleṣu". "yoga-yukto bhavārjuna". Oh, Arjuna, practice the path of yoga.
Now, what is the practice of yoga? We will see that, in Sixth Chapter,
Krishna has emphasised that ultimately, the best yoga is the yoga of bhakti. So,
when one practices bhakti-yoga, one will make the most tangible advancement. One
will go rapidly back to Krishna.

        yoginām api sarveṣāṁ
        mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā
        śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ
        sa me yukta-tamo mataḥ

Krishna has told in 6.47. You know. The climax of the Sixth Chapter. That the
best yogi is one who remembers Krishna. And returns back to Krishna. Therefore,
what one should focus on is the remembrance of Krishna. And "yoga-yukto
bhavārjuna" means, Krishna is telling Arjuna, be connected with yoga. Do not
bother about all this. You know. The, what, what will, the, happen. What will
happen. What will happen. Just do what you can. And what, what you can do. And
that is s..., stayed connected in yoga. And the yoga that Krishna will recommend
ultimately, we will see this, Krishna may not refer directly, explicitly to
Himself over here. But, you know, you know, He is, general instruction is,
actually, as contrasted with devyana and pitrayana. And the whole processes, by
which, one has to time one's departure and go back. You know. The, the, it will
be fa..., it is far easier if one stays in the path of yoga. And ultima..., and
the best way of staying in the path of yoga is by cro..., connecting, you know,
oneself with the Absolute Truth in devotion. The Personal Absolute Truth. That
is, that means by practicing devotional service. By remembering Krishna. So,
Prabhupada, you know, writes in the purport. And Prabhupada has told elsewhere,
also. That a devotee does not have to worry too much. Sometimes, we are, fear
that, you know, I am trying to practice Krishna Consciousness. And trying to
remember Krishna. But what if I die suddenly in an accident? Or die suddenly
when I get a heart attack. And there is no one around me. You know. What if I do
not remember Krishna at that time? What will happen then? So, devotees should
not be afraid of these things. Why? Because Krishna is there. And Krishna will
take care of the devotee. In the, Bala..., Baladeva Vidyabhushana quotes in his
Govinda Bhashya that, actually, he quotes in, you know, I think, from the Brahma
Purana. And he says, you know, Krishna loves His devotees so much that Krishna
gives His remembrance to His devotees. And no matter what the material
circumstances be for a devotee, Krishna helps the devotee to remember Him. So,
we may not be able to remember Krishna. But Kishna will remember us. Krishna,
all, will remember the bhakti that we have performed. And based on that bhakti,
He will give the result. So, devotee, you know, in, you know, in, even in the
traditional Vedic culture, there is the concept of a, you know, good death. And
a bad death. So, you know, there are various concept like that. You know. If
somebody dies suddenly, somebody dies and at that time, you know, you know, at
certain time, it is considered ho..., unholy. So, in many traditional societies,
you know, you know, in, in traditional Vedic societies. You know. People, when
they have to die, they will leave the world. They will, how will they leave the
world means? They will leave the cities wherever they are staying. And they will
go to Kashi. Or they will go to Vrindavan. And they will say, when they are
going only. You know. Their relatives and friends were, come to meet. They, when
they know that this person is now departing. You know. He is not going to come
back. This person going to die. And the relatives will come. And they will offer
obeisances. I am not talking about devotee families only. This is actually, you
know, it has been observed in the traditional Vedic families, also. That you
know, you know, the, it is, so, it is not that the person is going to commit
suicide after going to that place. But the person decide, now, my life is
coming to an end. Going to die.

So, then, you know, there are centers like that, where people can go and stay.
And focus exclusively on cultivating remembrance of Krishna. And doing
devotional service. So, when they go. And other people come and beg forgiveness.
If I have offended you in any way, please forgive me. And then, there is a, you
know, you know, you know, tearful last meeting. And then, person leaves. So, the
idea is, in the Vedic culture, it is recognised that one, one should prepare
oneself to remember Krishna. And the holy places offer one the best possible,
you know, one of the best possible settings for remembering Krishna. So, you
know, we should not negl..., when Krishna says here, "yogī", "naite sṛtī". "yogī
muhyati". That the "yogī" is not bewildered. That does not mean that we should
just rely only on Krishna's guarantee. You know. Oh, Krishna will take care of
me. I do not have to do anything. No. We have to do something. What is that we
have to do? We also have to, Kri..., as Krishna says in this verse, "yoga-yukto
bhavārjuna". We have to stay connected with Krishna. You know. If we are
diligently doing our devotional service, then we do not have to bother. You
know. What is the exact m..., how this exact moment of death will come.
What will happen to me when I die? No. I do not have to bother about that. But
what I have to do, what, do, I do have to bother about is how am I doing what I
can do. See, when, you know, when we do what we can do, Krishna will do what we
cannot do us. But, you know, when we worry about what we cannot do, we cannot
time our death. You know. You know. We cannot, we do not have control over
death. You know. But when do what we can do, Krishna will do what we cannot do.
And in that way, there will be human-divine cooperation. So, "yogī", do not be
"muhyati", Krishna says that, just focus on, you know, Prabhupada explains,
just, you know, devotee chant Hare Krishna. And stay fixed in the process of
Krishna Consciousness. And without bothering too much about death, devotee
should keep practicing. We see the example of Srila Prabhupada. That Prabhupada
was, actually, you know, elderly. You know. He was 69 when he retired from his
household life. And, when, sorry, when he, when he decided to embark or to go
journey to America. So, when he decided like that, at that time, what happened?
Actually, when he decided like that, it was not, you know, i..., in, he was in
Vrindavan. And he could have stayed on in Vrindavan. You know. And just chant
Hare Krishna. And, you know, departed ideally. But he wanted to do more than
that. So, he did not want just himself to depart ideally. He wanted to bless
everyone with Vrindavan's blessings. And that is why he went all over the world.
And he preached. So, you know, he brought the knowledge of Vrindavan, the glory
of Vrindavan, the love of Vrindavan to people all over the world. And then, he
helped them to ha..., come back to ku..., you know, to, you know, to Vrindavan.
Or to the Vrindavan consciousness. Through cultivation of Krishna Consciousness.
And then, at the end of his life, he returned back. Now, Srila Prabhupada. He
wanted to instruct his disciples of how they should live, they pass, pass
life's final exam. And that is why he, you know, came by their side. And he had
them by his side. And he stayed in Vrindavan. But Prabhupada often said also,
that, you know, I will be happy if I can die like Arjuna. You know. Fighting. I
can. Of course, Arjuna did not die. But Arjuna kept fighting. Also, I want to
fu..., Kri..., fighting for Krishna. And if fighting for Krishna is a privilege.
And if I die while fighting for Krishna, that is also auspicious. So, Prabhupada
had that spirit. So, as devotees, you know, we orient our life in such a way
that as we grow older and older, then we can intensify our devotional service
more and more. But overall, the focus in our practice is not just the, you know,
not only just preparation of death. Our focus is more of development of love.
And when we develop love for Krishna, other things are automatically taken care
of. We will be able to remember Krishna regularly. And that Krishna will assure
in the next verse.

        vedeṣu yajñeṣu tapaḥsu caiva
        dāneṣu yat puṇya-phalaṁ pradiṣṭam
        atyeti tat sarvam idaṁ viditvā
        yogī paraṁ sthānam upaiti cādyam

So, Krishna is telling over here that whatever results one may get by other
paths. "vedeṣu". By the study of the Vedas. "yajñeṣu". That one does various
yajnas. "tapaḥsu". You know. You know. You know. One does austerities. And then,
"dāneṣu". One gives charity. So, generally, in the Vedic culture, "yajña",
"dāna", and "tapaḥ". These three are considered to be, you know, primarily
religious activities. And of course, study of Vedas are important. So, Krishna,
we will see in the 18th Chapter, also. Krishna will talk about: 

        yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma
        ...
        pāvanāni manīṣiṇām

That "yajña" and "karma" is such that, it can purify even the, you know, people
who are "manīṣiṇām". Who had, you know, qui..., who are quite advanced. Who are
pure. Who have controlled the mind. "manīṣiṇām". "mana". "īṣā". So,
"yajña-dāna-tapaḥ" are considered important. But Krishna is saying that, you
know, these are dharmic activities. They are not necessarily transcendental.
Even on the path of transcendence, also, we may do some "yajña". We may do
some "tapaḥ". We may do, give some "dāna". But in the path of transcendence, our
focus is different. Our focus is on Krishna. Our focus is not just on doing our
dharmic activities for the sake of gaining punya. So, but Krishna is telling
that whatever activities you may do, Krishna, and now, Kri..., you know, the
previous verse, Krishna says, just be "yoga-yukto". Just be "yoga-yukto". So,
one may wonder if I am just "yoga-yukto", then what about
"yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma"? Krishna is telling that no. Whatever results you will
get by that, "yat puṇya-phalaṁ pradiṣṭam". All these will give you
"puṇya-phalaṁ". But Krishna says, "atyeti tat sarvam". "atyeti tat sar...".
"atyeti" means, "atyeti" means more than that. Beyond that. Superseding or
surpassing that. "atyeti tat sarvam". So, whatever results one gets by all the
other pa..., all, all these things. Veda. "vedeṣu". "yajñeṣu". "tapaḥsu".
"dāneṣu". You know. One will get, one will supersede that. Surpass that.
And "idaṁ viditvā". If one ha..., Arjuna, you understand this. And you practice
the "yogī". In addition, what will happen? "paraṁ sthānam upaiti cādyam". "yogī"
will attain the "paraṁ sthānam". So, here, Krishna is telling that the focus on
transcendence will give us a far greater result than what can, you know, be for
God by doing activities for material punya. So, in this way, the, in this chapter,
Krishna shifts Arjuna's focus. Co..., decisively, from acting in the world to
acting for the goal beyond the world. And, you know, now, what kind of yoga that
is to be practiced? Krishna has mentioned the word "su-labhaḥ" in 8.14.
"su-labhaḥ", a, to, a, remembrance of Him. But in the Ninth Chapter, Krishna
will describe this further. What is the means by which one can get this result?
"paraṁ sthānam". And Ninth Chapter is "rāja-vidyā rāja-gu...". It is called "The
Kind of Knowledge. Confi..., "The Most Conﬁdential Knowledge". Prabhupada
translates it. So, there, it is the, it is clearly talking about bhakti-yoga.
So, this cha..., Eighth Chapter concludes with a call to st..., you know, to
practice yoga. Now, here, yoga does not necessarily always have to mean
ashtanga-yoga. What it basically means, focus on the transcendental goal. And
stay connected to the transcendental goal. So, Prabhupada's purport is beautiful
over here. It is progressive purport. So, Prabhupada summarises the Vedic
process over here. He says that how a brahmacari practices brahmacarya ashram.
Lives. And then a person gradually moves forward. And then, Prabhupada writes:

"Study of the Vedas is not meant for the recreation of armchair speculators, but
for the formation of character."

You know. So, when one studies the Vedas under the master for a period of, from
five to twenty yea..., years. So, that means, that means brahmacari life. That
person becomes a, a man of good character. And then, one comes into grihasta
ashram. And then, one retires from grihasta ashram. And then, one moves forward
to sannyasa. That, by then, Prabhupada says:

"The beauty of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, however, is that by one stroke, by engaging
in devotional service, one can surpass all the rituals of the different orders
of life."

You know. That means, essentially, what Prabhupada says is that, these pro...,
these progressive "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma" which is done, you know, in the
Vedic, you know, you know, you know, pious life for doing punnya. The ashram,
brahmacari, grihasta, vanaprastha, sannyasa. Which are, you know, embraced. You
know. All these are good. But they are progressive. You know. However, if one
gets, you know, bhakti, then it is one step up. One then quickly move forward.
And in, in one stroke get the, you know, result of devotional service. By
engaging devo..., that is the supreme result of life. One will get love of
Krishna. One get "paraṁ sthānam". So, just like when a person gets million,
a million dollars. Then, five dollars, ten dollars, hundred dollars,
five-thousand dollars, all of them are included within that. So, like that, one,
when gets, you know, this, you know, you know, "paraṁ sthānam". The love of
Krishna. Then, everything else that is there, it is automatically included in
that. And then, Prabhupada says that, one should begin by go..., studying the
Bhagavad Gita from a devotee. So:

"One should therefore learn Bhagavad-gītā from a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, not from
mental speculators. This is a sign of faith."

And growly, Prabhupada describe, how we study the Bhagavad Gita. And then, you
know, the doubts disappear. And love for Krishna eventually emerges. You know.
And then, "paraṁ sthānam upaiti cādyam". Prabhupada describes. 

"This highest perfectional stage of life"

What is that? Completely in love with Krishna. What is mentioned in the previous
verse. "This highest perfectional stage of life". And when we are:

"completely in love with Kṛṣṇa."

"enables the devotee to be transferred to Kṛṣṇa’s abode in the spiritual sky,
Goloka Vṛndāvana, where the devotee becomes eternally happy."

That is the ultimate goal. So, you know, in the Eighth Chapter, Krishna tells
Arjuna, that yes, there can be material, material adjustments. And by ma...,
different ma..., by diff..., by different kinds of material adjustments, one can
get different material results. You know. And by this, onerously, one given
gradually, even, attain Brahman. But the, just by staying fixed steadily in
yoga, one can get the result of the other, you know, paths of
"yajña-dāna-tap...". Other activities, "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ". And beyond that, one
can get the transcendental result, also. Therefore, stay fixed in yoga. And how?
The best yoga is bhakti-yoga. That was mentioned in Sixth Chapter. And that will
be reiterated in the Seven..., in the Ninth Chapter. Which we will discuss in
our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
