Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6smqKwWenm8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=6smqKwWenm8&event=video_description&redir_token=ksbV2Ywd5XyeLPQJwRmD8seTe6N8MTU0ODQ4OTI0MkAxNTQ4NDAyODQy&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_110_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_11_Text_05_to_17_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the Eleventh Chapter. Just about to start off in rev..., viewing through the
Gita's description what is one of the most extraordinary mystical, religious
visions in all of religious histories. You know. In different religious
traditions, there are saints. And seers. Who get visions. So, Mu..., Muhammad is
supposed to have got a vision which took him to, in which he saw, met all the
previous prophets. Jesus. And Abraham. Moses. And Abraham. And he is supposed to
have seen the face of Allah, also. And then, but what actually he saw, when he
saw God is not described in the Quran. Jesus is said to have been the son of
God. And he has been in touch with God. But what he inv..., what were the nature
of those interactions, that is not spoken about much. So, the, you know,
manifestation of God, that is described in this chapter in the Bhagavad Gita has
few parallels. Few, if any parallels in the religious literature of the world.
So, there have been many great saints throughout history who have had
experiences of God. No doubt. But here, the experience is not just an inner
experience. It is an outer vision. And that vision is not just some imagination.
It is a revelation. So, Arjuna is seeing not because of some imagination from
his mind. But it is a revelation that is given by God Himself. So, God is
revealing how He is the universal form. You know. So, what exactly does the
universal form mean? And, you know, how does it, you know, relate with our
normal understanding of various things? We will see this in due course. Let us
look at Arjuna's verses. You know. Let, let us look at the Gita's verses how
they describe this mysterious phenomena. You know. You know. You know. You know.
So, let us look at it from the Bhagavad Gita. Verses 5 onwards. So, here, we
discussed what is happening in this chapter. Let us have a quick overview of
the chapter once again. You know. Verses 1 to 4 was Arjuna's request. Verses 5
to 8 was Krishna's descrip..., is Krishna's description of the universal form.
Then, 9 to 14 is "Sañjaya"'s description of the universal form. Then, after
that, 15 to 31 is Arjuna's description. And then, it moves forward. So, let us
look, start, let us start by looking at Krishna's description of the universal
form. So, we will look at the description. And as we move forward, we will try
to understand the concepts. That are implied by that description.

        sri-bhagavan uvaca

        pasya me partha rupani
        sataso ’tha sahasrasah
        nana-vidhani divyani
        nana-varnakrtini ca

So, "pasya me". You know. See my "rupani". Now, you know, you know, Arjuna had
asked to see the "rūpam aiśvaraṁ". The mysterious form. "rūpam aiśvaraṁ". The
opulence of the form. So, "pārtha rūpāṇi". So, "rūpāṇi" means, here, Arjuna is
being told that there is not just one form. There are many forms in it. You
know. So, actually, is one majestic form, which, which in cohesion. Or in, you
know, you know, synthesis can be called as the universal form. But within that
universal form, there are many, many forms. So, "pasya". So, actually, you know,
this word "pasya" will come several times in this chapter. And, you know,
especially in Krishna's description over here in the next four verses. And the
point is that, Arjuna had desired to see. And Krishna is, see now. Krishna is
saying see. See. So, this is a, as I said, not just an, you know, experience or
a, you know, inner realisation. It is a vi..., visible vision for Arjuna.
"sataso ’tha sahasrasah". "sataso". So, now, actually, how many forms are there?
"sata" is hundreds. "sahasrasah" is thousands. So, in, in that one form, there
are hundreds and thousands of forms. "nana-vidhani divyani". "nana-vidhani".
That there are many different kinds of forms, also. Variegated. And they are
all divine. They are all tri..., they are all extraordinary. They are connected
with God. And "nana-varnakrtini ca". So, "varna" is color. "akrtini" is shape.
So, they are, that means, there is one universal form. But within that, there is
tremendous variety. First of all, there are many forms. Now, all of them, forms
are "div...", "divyā". But then, they are of different colors. They are all
different, you know, shapes. And they are all variegated. So, you know, this is
the mysterious vision that Krishna is revealing to Arjuna. So, normally, when we
see, you know, we do not just see with the eyes. We see with our intelligence.
This is not just a philosophical point. It is also a practical reality. You
know. When we see, we cannot make sense of things unless our intelligence has
some f..., past framework. By which we can make sense of things. You know. There
are two, there are two kinds of blindness. There is congenital blindness. And
there is adventitious blindness. So, congenital is when a person is blind right
from the, you know, birth itself. Adventitious is when that person becomes blind
over a period of time after having had vision for some time. Now, in some cases,
if the cause of the blindness is correctable, then the person who is blind may
be able to get back eyes through surgery. And through other medical treatment.
Now, if the, if the person had been congentally..., congenitally blind. And got
back eyes. Say, the person has been blind for 15 years. 20 years. And then, for
the first time, the surgery is done. And the person gets back eyes. You know.
After that person gets back eyes, there have been, you know, jour..., medical
journal articles. And even books written about this. That these people who are
blind and they got back the eyes back. You know. You know. All that they, when
they opened their eyes, all that they could see, sense was just a confused haze
of light and colors which was also incoherent for them. So, one of those
persons, he describes, when he asks, you know, I just opened my eyes. And I
could just see a bewildering maze of colors. And suddenly, I heard a voice. And
then, I looked in that diretion. And then, I saw a pattern of dark and faint
colors. And, you know, because I knew that voices came from faces. So, I
realised that whatever I was seeing was a face. But I just could not make sense
of it.

So, whether there was a, there was a carpenter, you know, who had used tools.
And all of, and for many, many years, this carpenter had been using tools to cut
wood. Although, he was blind. You know. So, when the first time, he saw a, you
know, you know, saw. You know. A machine for cut..., a, a tool for cutting. You
know. He looked at it. And he looked at it as if he had never seen it, only.
He just could not make sense of it. Although, he had been using it, so, a, for
a, throughout his life for earning a lifehood. But still, it was completely
unfamiliar. And then, as he was looking at it without being able to make any
sense. Then, as soon as movements were unsure. And, and, you know, un...,
unsteady. But then, as soon as he touched, then, immediately, oh, this is the
part. This is the blade part. This is the handle part. He started picking up.
And using it. So, he was able to use it far better with the sense of touch than
with the sense of sight. Why is that? Because, you know, our knowledge proceeds
from the familiar to the unfamiliar. We have something familiar that we know.
And then, something more which connects with the familiar. And that is how our
knowledge proceeds further. But when, you know, there is no framework for our
knowledge. When there is no, you know, you know, nothing familiar whi...,
through which the unfamiliar can launch on, then there is no, you know,
intelligibility in the perception. So, people who are, you know, you know,
congenitally blind. If somehow, they get eyes, they need, you know, a long
period of inculturation. You know. For them to get accustomed. And habituated to
having eyes. And to function with the eyes. It is not easy for them. Why?
Because they just have no prior frame of reference with which to view the world.
So, actually, people see not just with their eyes. They see with their
intelligence. So, the color patterns and the shapes, and everything that we see
with our eyes, if we did not have a prior bank of experience with which through
to connect with view, we would not be able to understand it. So, similarly here,
you know, Arjuna is going to get a vision for which he has no prior connection
to make. Nobody has seen anything like this. And Krishna will also tell, you
know, you know, several times in this chapter, "adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi". This has never
been seen before. "adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi". So, "dṛṣṭa" is to see. "adṛṣṭa" is not to
see. Not seen. "pūrvāṇi" is in the past. This has never been seen before. So,
therefore, Krishna by these introductory verses is giving Arjuna some basic
framework by which he can, he will be able to, by which Arjuna will be able to
make some sense of what he is going to see now. So, therefore, Krishna is
telling Arjuna. He is orienting Himself. Like when a person gets into a company,
there is an orientation course. So, that person knows what is that. This is the,
this department of the company. This is the, you know, these are the, these are
in charge. This is here. This is here. So, now, Arjuna needs an orientation
course before he can have a perception session. If, with the universal form. So
that orientation course is these four verses. Where Krishna is giving Arjuna a
pre..., a predescription of the view that is going to follow. And then, when he
describes this, he says, now, Prabhupada explains in the purport that actually,
Krishna is not interested, Arjuna is not interested in seeing the form for
himself. Then, what is the reason that Arjuna wants to, he asked Arjuna, Krishna
to show the form? He is saying, just like the previous chapter, when Arjuna
asked the question. So, in 10.16 to 10.19..., you know, 18. The reason for
asking the question was, you know, for "loka-saṅgraham". You know. People cannot
see the spiritual reality. S..., they can see ma..., matter. So, from matter,
how to guide them to spirit. That was the purpose.

Similarly, here, in this chapter, also, you know, how will people know that
someone is God? So, one aspect is to recognise that, you know, that person has
extraordinary power, has the capacity to do extraordinary things. And one of the
things that that person is capable of doing is displaying the uni..., universal
form. So, here, Arjuna is, you know, requesting Krishna that You please display
the universal form. So that, you know, what, so that people who are naysayers.
People who are doubters. You know. Who, you know, so there can be two categories
of people. People who are very gullible. And who believe, you know, believe
anyone and everyone who claims to be God. And there are naysayers, or who even
do not believe that the real God is God. So, actually, there are two kinds of
illusions. So, to think of God to be ordinary person. And to think of an
ordinary person to be God. So, this is, the 19th Chap..., in the 18th Chapter,
we will see, now, characteristic of knowledge and ignorance is:

        sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca

That "sarvārthān". What is the reality? Exactly opposite one pursues of that.
You know. You know. You know. So, that sort of, you know, misfortune of, you
know, perceiving the opposite of the reality, that is, you know, to be avoided.
And Krishna wants to protect, Arjuna wants to protect people from that. So,
Krishna has told so much about His opulences. And some naysayers may think this
is just Krishna bragging about Himself. But no. Krishna, Arjuna wants Krishna
to demonstrate. You know. So that, you know, people will know that f..., Krishna
is not just speaking words. Krishna has the, you know, or the words that
spea..., Kri..., peo..., Krishna is speaking are real. And Krishna can
demonstrate them. And even set the precedent that if anybody wants to claim to
be God, that person has to be able to show the universal form. So, Kri..., you
know, Kri..., Arju..., Arjuna, Arjuna's request is primarily for the sake of
people in general. So that the people in general, you know, will have a standard
by which to know who is really God. Who is not God. So, let us see now what
happens. You know. So, as the verse moves forward. You know. So:

        paśyādityān vasūn rudrān
        aśvinau marutas tathā
        bahūny adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi
        paśyāścaryāṇi bhārata

So, "paśya". You know. So, now, a whole who is who in universal, in Vedic
cosmology is being revealed in this universal form. "paśyādityān vasūn rudrān".
You know. So, many of these people if you see, they were mentioned in the, you
know, Vibhutis. So, these are already powerful personalities. So, "ādityā".
"ana mahanam". Vishnu. Sankarah. "ru...". "rudrās cāsmi". "rudrā". "Sankanam...".
"rudrā". "sankaram...". "rudrā". "rudrāṇāṁ". "cāsmi". It is like that. You know.
"vasūnāṁ". "cāsmi". "vasūnāṁ". So, like that. You know. You know. You know. So,
like that, basically, what was described was, these are all illustrious persons.
And among them, the person who is most illustrious, that is Krishna. That person
is manifesting Krishna's glories. So, "paśyādityān vasūn rudrān". So, see the
"ādityā"s. See the "vasū", see the "rudrā"s. And "aśvinau marutas tathā". So,
see the "aśvinau". "aśvinau". See the "marutas". So:

        marīcir marutām asmi

was also described in the previous chapter. "bahūny adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi". "bahūny".
Like that. All the ama..., all the powerful personalities in the university are
there. "adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi". You know. What no one else has seen until now.
"paśyāścaryāṇi bhārata". "paśya". "āścaryāṇi". It is actually amazing what is
being seen. "bhārata". "bhārata". So, what is being seen is amazing.
"paśyāścaryāṇi". You know. So, actually, for the more, the, this is the
"āścaryā". It was the second time, the word "paśya" has come. And along with
that, the "āścaryā" is described. So, now, it may seem that Krishna, is Krishna
sort of praising Himself here? He says, what I am going to show you is amazing.
No. It is not Krishna praising Himself. Krishna is just stating objective
reality. You know. All these celestial personalities are not very easy to
behold. You know. Even alone, they are not really, very easily visible to a
human beings. Then, what to speak of all of them together in one form? That is
a revelation by the Absolute Truth. That is even more extraordinary. So,
"paśya". "āścaryāṇi". Second time, the word "paśya" has come. Now, again, third
time, the word "paśya" will come.

        ihaika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ
        paśyādya sa-carācaram
        mama dehe guḍākeśa
        yac cānyad draṣṭum icchasi

So, "ihaika-sthaṁ". "iha". "eka-stham". Here, at one place. "jagat kṛtsnaṁ". The
whole universe is. See.

        ihaika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ
        paśyādya sa-carācaram

"paśyādya sa-carācaram". Now, "carā". So, "carā" and "acaram". So, the moving and
the non-moving. At one place everything in the universe can be seen. "kṛtsnaṁ".
"kṛtsnaṁ" is everything as we discussed earlier. "mama dehe guḍākeśa". So,
"guḍākeśa". Oh, Arjuna, see all this in "mama dehe". In My body. You know. So,
Krishna is te..., clearly telling what is this vision that you are seeing? It is
My body. So, until now, the specific word, Vishvarupa has not come. That will
come later on when Arjuna speaks his description and glorification of the vision
that he is having. But this is also one of the close references. Where the Lord
is us, telling us is "mama dehe". This is My form. Which kind of form? Now, when
Krishna is saying, this is My form, what does it mean? It is actually referring
to the form of the Supreme Lord. You know. Which is manifested as the "Virata
rupa". "yac cānyad draṣṭum icchasi". "yac cānyad". And beyond this, whatever
else, you may want to see, that also, you can see over here. So, what does it
mean whatever else you may want to see? "yac cānyad". Actually, it refers to,
you know, the future outcome of the battle. You know. Arjuna is, you know, about
to reach a fierce war. And because he is going to reach a war, he will naturally
be eager to know what is going to be the faith? Who is going to win? Who is
going to lose? So, although, that is not specifically what Arjuna has asked. But
Krishna says, I will show you that, also. In this way, you know, Krishna is
giving Arjuna a, a temporary provisional glimpse of omniscience. How, now,
omniscience means to know everything. So, glimpse of omniscience means that He
is saying, at one place, you will be able to see everything. See, normally, when
we are at one place, we can see only what is visible in that place. Like if I am
in a particular room, I can see what is in that room. Now, you know, through
some, you know, you know, high-tech gadgets, through internet, we can be in one
place. And we can know a lot about various places. Ok. This is happening there.
That is happening there. That is happening there. But it is all secondary. It
is, you know, so, it is all dependent on intermediate sources which we may be
people who are reporting. Or which may be cameras which are showing. Whichever
way it is, we need intermediaries, you know, to be able to perceive. But God
does not. Because God is Himself all-pervading. And in, He has vision and
knowledge of everything. So, here, Krishna where, in the revelation of the
"Virata rupa" is giving a provisional kind of omniscience. You know. So, in the
"Virata rupa", not exactly all the nitty-gritty details of the universe. But the
who is who of the universe, all the prominent people of the universe. And
actually, Krishna says that, in this "Virata rupa", what will you see?
"sa-carācaram". Even all living beings are present. So, "ihaika-sthaṁ jagat
kṛtsnaṁ". So, although, you are in one place, you can see "kṛtsnaṁ". Whole
universe. And, you know, what you are seeing is My form. This is the
extraordinary, you know, me..., mercy that the Lord is giving to him. Now, here,
it is described next verse. Krishna tells Arjuna. Now, Arjuna is waiting.
Krishna is describing to Arjuna that see this form. But Arjuna is not able to
see anything. Then, Krishna says, actually, you cannot see now. With this. So,
what you will, you will need, you will need special eyes for this. So, then,
here, Krishna here will say, I will give those eyes.

        na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum
        anenaiva sva-cakṣuṣā
        divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ
        paśya me yogam aiśvaram

So, "na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum". It is not possible for you to see, oh, Arjuna.
You know. You know. It is not possible. So, you know, actually, 11.4 was
"manyase yadi tac chakyaṁ". If it is possible for me to see. "manyase yadi tac
chakyaṁ". And He says, actually, "na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum". So, "mayā draṣṭum
iti prabho". Same word. "mayā draṣṭum". Will it be possible for me to see me?
Then, reveal it to me. So, Krishna tells, no, it is not possible for you to see
you, for you to see Me. But still, I will give you the pow..., p..., power.

        na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum
        anenaiva sva-cakṣuṣā

With you, with "anena". With those, such an eyes that you have, you cannot see.
Therefore, what I will give you. "divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ". That I will give you
divine eyes. "divyaṁ dadāmi". I will give you divine eyes. And what will, what
is this? You know. When He gives the eyes, He is telling now. "paśya me yogam
aiśvaram". Just see my mystic opulence. Now, this is 11.8 where Krishna is using
"paśya me yogam aiśvaram". Where has He used it earlier? 9..., 9.5:

        na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni
        paśya me yogam aiśvaram
        bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho
        mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ

So, in 9.5B, He has used the word "paśya me yogam aiśvaram". Behold my mystical
opulence. So, we have said that over there. "paśya me". See my mystical
opulence. So, what is actually happening? There, it was more of, their "paśya"
was not so much in literal seeing. "paśya" was in terms of understanding. You
now. Sometimes, when somebody makes a point, then, we say, "I see". Now, when I
say, "I see". What actually I mean is I understand. So, or sometimes, people
say, do you see what I am saying? You know. That means, not literaly see. That
is in terms of understanding. So, do you understand what I am saying? So, the
word "see" is also sometimes used for understanding. So, there, in 9.5B, "paśya
me yogam aiśvaram". Just see my mystical opulence. So, there, Krishna has not
given any vision to Arjuna. Krishna has given a description of how I sustain all
living beings. And still, I do not sustain all living beings. I am different
from them. That is mystical opulence. So, it was in terms of, you know, you
know, you know, a rhetorical expla..., expression to, you know, to underscore,
you know, you know, a mysterious descr..., to highlight a mysterious
description. So, a mysterious description was, ok, this was, you know, this was,
I sustain all. But I do not sustain all. How is this possible? This is my
inconceivable potency. This is my mystical potency. But here, "paśya me yogam
ai...", "aiśvaram" is not a, a rhetorical description. It is a b..., you know,
you know, you know, literal instruction. Just see now. It is a, so, now, in this
verse, "divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ". So, Krish..., Arjuna is being given eyes by
Krishna. You know. When we say "given eyes", you know, it is not like an organ
donation that is done today. It is not as a person has to go into
unconsciousness. And you have to take out the eyes. And then, somebody else has
to be donor for the eyes. And that person gives the eyes. This, so, that, we
can, so, people say, give eyes like that. That is not the kind of eyes that
Arjun..., Krishna is giving. Actually, Krishna gives the power to see. Power to
see. So, you know, Krishna is the Supreme Lord. And we have discussed this
earlier, also, that, you know, how the universe is like a computer. You know. It
is like a, if you have a mainframe computer with huge amount of information.
Information in it. And then, within that, actually, there are different users
who have different levels of access. So, some users have access only to
preliminary ta..., profiles. Some users have access to even the code files. And
some users have f..., access to everything. So, like that, there are different
levels of access. So, like that, within the universe, also, the universe is like
a, built with multiple levels of access. And we, human beings, have a particular
level of access within it. That devatas have higher level of access. And Krishna
has complete access. So, now, sometimes, when a computer, when a person is
working on a computer. You know. There may be a user who is like a child.
Another user is like a parent. The parent says, now, I will give you access. And
then, suddenly, all the files that were blocked, they were not able to see on
the computer. Now, suddenly, they can see, oh, all these files are already
there. So, like that, "paśya me yogam aiśvaram". So, what is Krishna giving?
When Krishna is giving eyes, that means, it is not that some eyes are being sent
through the fingers of Krishna. And they are planting themselves on the eye,
over about, over the eyes of Kri..., Arjuna. No. Krishna is giving access.
Krishna is giving access to the higher realities that are there. And He is
giving, not just the access, the ability to access, also. So:

        divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ

I am giving you divine vision by which you can see. You know. When He describes
this, at this point, what happens? You know. When He says this, so, Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura describes something interesting over here. He says that, the
"Virata rupa" is itself not spiritual. It is also material. Because it is about
the universe. Now, where the universe itself is material. And so, therefore,
even the "Virata rupa" is material. It is not a, it is not a spiritual form.
Now, by one definition, we could say that, anything connected with, you know,
Krishna, with the supreme spiritual reality is spiritual. That is fine. You
know. You know. That is from an applicational perspective. But from a
compositional or constitutional perspective, you know, there are certain things
which are made of, you know, earth, water, fire, ether. And certain things which
are made up of, you know, sat-cit-ananda. So, the, you know, you know, you know,
that difference of matter and spirit always remains true. Because it remain
true. So, it has to be understood, you know, you know, things have to be
understood from that perspective. So, Arjuna and the people over around him,
they are in human bodies. And they have the normal vision. Then, there is the
pure devotional vision. Wherein one sees Krishna. And one understands that
Krishna is God. Who has concealed His divinity out of love. He has concealed His
supreme power. And supreme nature. He has become a charioteer for His devotee.
Because He wants to rel..., so, reciprocate and relish love. So, that is the
divine intimate vision that Arjuna has. The other people over there,
"nara-dārakeṇa". "eva". So, "māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa". So, actually, those
who are in maya, they think that He is just like another ordinary human being.
So, that is normal human vision that people may have. So, Arjuna does not have
the normal human vision. He has a, you know, pure devotional vision. So, now,
for Arjuna, when there is, Krishna is saying "divyaṁ dadāmi". Actually, that is
not, that is a downgading of vision. Now upgrading of vision. Why? Because He is
at a spiritual level. Where he is seeing the Shyamasundara form. The partha
sarathi form of Krishna. Very intimate form. And he is reciprocating with that
form. You know. So, for him to see the "Virata rupa" is not actually an
upgradatio..., it is not upgrading. It is downgrading. And Prabhupada points to
this point in a, you know, in a very extraordinary section in the "Bhā...".
"Bhāgavatam". He says, you know, you know, so, here, such a bold statement
Prabhupada makes.

"Devotees who are correctly situated in a transcendental relationship with Kṛṣṇa
are attracted by loving features, not by a godless display of opulences."

Now, just think about this, you know, you know, God is displaying His opulences.
And Prabhupada is calling it as a godless display of opulences. Now, how can
God's display of opulences be called as a godless display of opulence? So,
actually, this is the vision of a, you know, this is the vision of a devotee. A
devotee is not just d..., inter..., is not interested in just a brute display of
power. I am so great. And actually, even God is not interested in that. You
know. Krishna that in the spiritual world is not interested in everybody
knowing, oh, I am God. Now, all of you, bow down to Me. And the eternal ritual
that you are doing in the spiritual is, everybody keep coming in a sequence.
And keep bowing down to Me. Keep bowing down to Me. And that is what you, all of
you will have to do for an eternity. Krishna is not, not a God like that.
Kri..., That is not what Krishna is interested in. Krishna is interested in
reciprocating love with His devotees. And for the sake of reciprocating love, He
is actually, you know, con..., He conceals His divinity. But in some cases, for
people to know the truth. By which, they can, you know, can come out of
illusion. And come to reality. They can give up, you know, rebellion against
Him. They can give up forgetfulness of Him. And return back to connection with
Him. Reunion with Him. So, for that sake, Krishna sometimes asserts and displays
His divinity. So, a devotee who already accepts Krishna supremacy, especially
the "Virata rupa", you know, it is very difficult to love the "Virata rupa". We
will see that Arjuna's responses vary. First, he is amazed. Then, he is
awestruck. Then, he is fearful. And then, he is overwhelmed with fear. And then,
he just begs, who are You?

        ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo

Who are You? Please help me. Please tell me who You are. So, Arjuna goes throuh
a whole gamut of emotions over there. In his response to the darshan of the
"Virata rupa". But, you know, the point is that, the "Virata rupa" is not very
easy to love. You know. You cannot have, the "Virata rupa", you cannot do rasa
dance with "Virata rupa". No. It is everywhere. How will you dance? Or, you
know, mother Yashoda cannot feed, feed any food to, mother, to the "Virata
rupa". So, the "Virata rupa" displays the, displays the opulences of God in
terms of power and pervasion. Pervasion means that He pervades everything,
exists everywhere. But actually, it is not very conducive for intimate devotion.
And now, that is what the devotee hungers for. The devotee wants loving
reciprocation. Intimate devotion for the Lord. And this form is not very anikula
for that. You know. That is why Prabhupada is calling it as a godless display of
opulence. A devotee is not very much interested in that. Now, you know, a
Krishna is being requested by Arjuna, because Arjuna wants to, you know, you
know, set a standard for others. And, you know, Arj..., Krishna will oblige with
this res..., request. You know, But, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
know, Prabhupada quotes this well-known verse from the "Bhāgavatam", 10.12.11
about how different people perceive, you know, God differently:

        itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā
        dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena
        māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa
        sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ

"caru". So, "itthaṁ satāṁ". Here i..., here is "satāṁ". "satāṁ" is the truth.
"brahma-sukhānubhūtyā". Here is the, you know, here is that same, you know,
being. Who is considered as the "brahma-sukhā". Because, Brahma, He is
considered as the impersonal Brahman. You know. Who is, experiences
"brahma-sukhā". By the "satāṁ". By the sages. "dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ". So, for those
who are, you know, in the personal understanding. And want to serve Him. Those
who are His servant. "dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ". "para-daivatena". He is the
transcendental, you know, you know, God. "para-daivatena". "māyāśritānāṁ
nara-dārakeṇa". So, "māyāśritānāṁ". Those who have taken shelter of, those who
are under the shelter of "māyā", for them, "nara-dārakeṇa", they think that He
is just like an ordinary human being. And "sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ".
"sākaṁ vijahruḥ". You know. You know. That same Absolute Truth is playing with
these gopas. And the gopas, "kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ". They must have acquired a,
"puñjāḥ". Treasury of "puṇya". You know. They have, they have actually
extraordinary credits. These are not t..., ordinary "puṇya". This is bhakti or
mukta "puṇya". They must have extraordinary d..., pious devotional credits
by which they are able to play with Krishna like this. So, the point here, of
this, Prabhupada quoting this verse is that the Lord is persued differently by
differently. But, you know, the certain perceptions are, you know, favorable for
devotion. So, the "Virata rupa" perception is not very favorable for intimate
reciprocation. You know. You know. You know. So, those who want intimate
reciprocation with the Lord, the, for example, the gopas, they are given, they,
they, the Lord places them in an arena where he manifests an intimate form. And
He reciprocates love with them. So, Prabhupada goes on to say again that,
that devotee is not very interested in seeing the "Virata rupa". But for the
sake of others, he is asking. So, now, here, in four verses, Krishna has
described, here, what Arjuna is going to see. So, you know, you know, first, He
says, you will see thousands of forms. Hundreds and thousands forms. All
variegated. And then, second, He says that, oh, you will see the various
devatas. And practically the whole universes who is who in it. And then, He
says, you will get omniscient. He says, you know, you, at one place, you will
see everything in the universe. And you will see what you have not even asked
for. Some of the things which are not even asked to see. That is. You will see
in the future, also. And after describing that, then He says, ok, I will give
you the eyes to see. So, now, when, as these eyes to see is being given, along
with that, there is a transformation that is happening in the setting of the
battle..., war field, also. And, you know, that is reported by "Sañjaya". So,
just, so, sometimes, when a movie is going on. For the action to be properly
conveyed, the camera sometimes zooms closer. And sometimes zooms further. So,
when two people are fighting in hand to hand, at that time, to show the action,
the camera may focus on those two people. But if a war is going on and then
the overall, you know, direction of the war is to be told, then the camera may
zoom backwards. And say, ok, this part, the soldiers are moving forward. This
part, the soldiers are moving backwards. So, the camera zoom comes close and
comes go..., behind. Goes back. So, as to give a complete perception of what is
happening. So, so, what is happening now is, the camera zoom goes backwards. So,
here, Krishna has described. And before Arjuna's description of what, what
Arjuna is going to tell, the camera zoom backward. And then, "Sañjaya", what he
is seeing. He describes. So, "Sañjaya" describes not only, so, by this method,
what is achieved is that, you know, Arjuna's, Arjuna's bodily reactions are also
conveyed. So, you know, Arjuna is going to describe his thoughts and his
emotions. But his bodily reactions, they are conveyed by "Sañjaya". Along with,
of course, what is the vision that Krishna is revealing. So, now, the camera
goes backwards. Until now, the camera focus was on "Sañjaya" and, was on Krishna
and Arjuna. But now, the camera goes backwards to "Sañjaya" and "Dhṛtarāṣṭra".
And "Sañjaya" starts speaking to "Dhṛtarāṣṭra".

        sañjaya uvāca

        evam uktvā tato rājan
        mahā-yogeśvaro hariḥ
        darśayām āsa pārthāya
        paramaṁ rūpam aiśvaram

So, "evam uktvā". Having spoken thus. "tato rājan". So, hav..., so, "rā...",
here, "rājan" refers to "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". "Sañjaya" is speaking, after Krishna
spoke thus, you know, m..., you know, then, to describe what Krishna is going to
do is not ordinary. So, you know, Arjuna has used the word "yogam aiśvaram".
"ro...", you know, you know, you know, "yogeśvara tato me tvaṁ". You know. So,
he has said, oh, "yogeśvara". In 11.4, he said that you can show me of the form.
Because You are "yogeśvara". So, here, K..., "Sañjaya" highlights that point by
using a further describer is "mahā-yogeśvaro hariḥ". That Lord, "hariḥ". Who is
He? "mahā-yoga-īśvaraḥ". Normally, yogis are able to do some things which
ordinary people are not able to do. You know. You know. Yogis may well to be
able to, sometimes, you know, produce sparks from their body. They move their
hands. And some ashes may come out. You know. They may be able to do all sorts
of mysterious things. Now, many of the p..., yogis who claim to do these things
today, they are just, you know, doing slay of fan. They are using just, some,
you know, misdirection of the attention of the audience. So that, by ordinary
means only, they are producing the ashes. But some yogis can actually do such
things. Even if they, even if, whichever way it is. Whether they do it, you
know, by ordinary means or through mystic powers. The point is they are yogis.
Whereas Krishna is, you know, "yogeśvara". And He has all mystic powers. So,
"mahā-yogeśvaro hariḥ". So, He is quite capable of doing this mysterious thing
of revealing the "Virata rupa". "darśayām āsa pārthāya". "darśayām". So, He
reveals. What? "pārthāya". Unto "pārthā", what does He reveal? "paramaṁ rūpam
aiśvaram". So, the same word "rūpam aiśvaram". That was in the request of
Arjuna. He says, I want to see Your opulent form. So, "darśayām". What oh?
"paramaṁ rūpam aiśvaram". The "rūpam aiśvaram". The of, the m..., opulent form.
"paramaṁ". There is a supreme. Divine. That is shown. So, now, when Krishna,
Arjuna, speaks this. You know. Sorry, "Sañjaya" speaks this. In the next verse,
"Sañjaya" goes on to describe. So, here, "Sañ...", the camera is on "Sañjaya"
and "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". And "Sañjaya" is telling, now, He reveals the form. You know.
Ar..., you saw, Krishna has revealed the form. Now, what has He revealed?
"Sañjaya" will tell what he is seeing.

        aneka-vaktra-nayanam
        anekādbhuta-darśanam
        aneka-divyābharaṇaṁ
        divyānekodyatāyudham

        divya-mālyāmbara-dharaṁ
        divya-gandhānulepanam
        sarvāścarya-mayaṁ devam
        anantaṁ viśvato-mukham

So, "aneka-vaktra-nayanam". "aneka-vaktra-nayanam". That there are, "vaktra" is
face. Eye. "nayanam". "aneka-vaktra-nayanam". There are many faces. Many eyes.
"anekādbhuta-darśanam". There are many extraordinary visions.
"aneka-divyābharaṇaṁ". So, "ābh...", there are many divine. There are, actually,
"ābharaṇaṁ" is ornaments. And garments. So, "divyānekodyatāyudham". "āyudham" is
weapons. So, "āyudhānām ahaṁ vajraṁ" had come in the, the Tenth Chapter that
among weapons, I am the, Indra's thunderbolts. See, he is describing that, not
just to, one or two weapons like that. There are many weapons. "aneka". That the
word "aneka" normally means many. The acharyas described that actually here, it
refers to many. Many. So many that the, that there are, there are, you know,
almost like innumerable. They are many. Because Krishna has already said that
"śataśo ’tha sahasraśaḥ". Hundreds and thousands you will be able to see.
"divyānekodyatāyudham". And then, "divya-mālyāmbara-dharaṁ". So, "ābharaṇam" was
ornaments. "āmbara-dharaṁ" here is now, it is dress. So, there is garlands. And
dresses. "divya-gandhānulepanam". So, in Vedic culture, when a person is to be,
when a person is to, honored. And adorned. At that time, you know, "gandhā".
"Sandalwood paste". And other sort of, other such things are applied. So,
"divya-gandhānulepanam". And then, again the same word, "sarvāścarya-mayaṁ
devam". So, "paśyāścaryāṇi bhārata". So, when Krishna had completed His
description in 11.8, He says, "āścaryāṇi". It is of amazing. So, the same word
is used over here. So, "sarvāścarya-mayaṁ". Actually, it is filled with all,
"mayaṁ" is filled with. "sarvā" is all. It is filled with all amazing
scene..., thin..., things. "devam". This form of the Lord. "anantaṁ
viśvato-mukham". "anantaṁ". You know. It is unlimited. Unlimit...,
"viśvato-mukham". "viśvato-mukham" means, actually, it is all-pervading. So, so,
he is describing that, you know, this extraordinary form we are just seeing,
what Krishna has said in the first verse. You know. You know. "paśyādya
sa-carācaram". So, so, "śa...", "śataśo ’tha sahasraśaḥ". That is the first
thing. You know. When we see a person who, we just look around. And see the
overall contour. Isn't it? You know. Is that person tall? Or short? Fat? Or
thin? That the first impression of that person is the contour. So, when you see
the contour. Oh, phew. There are so many hands. So many faces. So many legs. And
it is so, oh, so many garments. So many ornaments. So many decorations. So many
weapons. He just sees the contours. And he says, it is amazing. I have not seen
anything like this before. And then, after that, he describes. Then, when he sees
the contour. Then, next, he realises, oh, there is such an effulgence. It is
very difficult to see this form, only. So, then, he describes the effulgence
over there.

        divi sūrya-sahasrasya
        bhaved yugapad utthitā
        yadi bhāḥ sadṛśī sā syād
        bhāsas tasya mahātmanaḥ

"divi sūrya-sahasrasya". So, "divi sūrya". "divi sūrya" is that there are, you
know, if there were "sahasrasya". So, "sahasra", "sata" we have. "sata" is
hundreds. "sahasra" is thousands. So, if there were, thousand suns could rise at
one time. "bhaved yugapad utthitā". So, actually, "yugapad". At the t...,
conjuction of yugas. When one yuga and another yuga begins. So, at that time,
the, it is said according to the, you know, "Bhāgavatam". In the Vedic
scriptures. That the sun's effulgence becomes far greater. That is. Universe
is going to be destroyed. And corre..., and one of the cau..., you know, cau...,
one of the factors that, you know, triggers or accelerates the destruction of
the universe is, in its due..., due course of time, is increased the temperature
of the sun. So, "bhaved yugapad utthitā". So, at the time of the "yugapad". At
timem, turn of the yuga. When the universe is about to be destroyed, sun's
effulgence increases. So, like that, if that super effulgence sun was there, it
itself would be blinding and burning. But if there were "divi sūrya-sahasrasya".
If there are thousands of suns like this. Like that. Then, it would, that
effulgence "yadi bhāḥ sadṛśī sā syād". If such a thing were possible, then that
would give some indication. "bhāsas tasya mahātmanaḥ". So, he is using the word
"mahātma". Now, until now, the word "mahātma" has been used in "Bhagavad-gītā"
to describe the advanced transcendentalist. Here, Krishna, here, the word
"mahātma" is used to re..., to refer to the Supreme Lord. To the "Virata rupa"
over here. "Sañjaya" is using this. So, such is the extraordinary effulgence of
the Supreme Being. "bhāsas tasya mahātmanaḥ". "yadi bhāḥ sadṛśī sā syād". So,
that is the extraordinary effulgence. Then, what happens after that? "divi
sūrya-sahasrasya". You know. So, actually, Prabhupada also explained in the
purport that this is indescribable. You know. What he is seeing. Actually, he,
you know, when there are spiritual visions, often words are inadequate to
describe them. That does not mean that words are useless. But words are, the
reach of words is not as much as is the reach of the Kri..., as the scope of the
experience. The vision and the experience are so extraordinary that words cannot
reach them. So, in such situations, when the words are used, they act as
pointers. They are not, you know, they are not describers. They are indicators.
"Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura" talks about this elaborately in the, in his
Tenth Canto commentary. It is "sarartha-darshini". Especially the 87th Chapter,
the prayers of the personified yoga in the Tenth Canto. He describes that,
actually, when we say that Krishna is like a blueish black, you know,
complexioned youth. Or Krishna is a youth who has a complexion like a
blueish-black raincloud. So, normally, we may think about a youth. We may think
a blueish-black complexio..., blueish-black cloud. And we combine the two. And
think oh, this must be about, this is what Krishna looks like. So, the
concatenation, the combination of two mental images cannot, you know, you know,
invoke the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So, therefore, that is not the
exactly the Supreme Lord. That is a pointer towards the Supreme Lord. And the
Supreme Lord is perceived, that is, when He reveals Himself.

        svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

When He reveals Himself. Then, He is perceived. Until then, He is not perceived.
So, you know, you know, when we try to meditate on the scriptural descriptions
of how the Supreme Lord is, it is not that, you know, you know, that, you know,
itself invokes the Supreme Lord. You know. The, by that, we do seva. By that, we
serve the Supreme Lord. By following the instructions given in the scriptures by
Him and His devotees. This is how we should meditate on the Supreme Lord. You
know. Eventually, when we will see the Supreme Lord, you know, that vision will
be far deeper. F..., deeper. Far richer than what we could have ever described.
That is why many Vaishnava acharyas have described how, actually, what we see
is, you know, very small, you know, it is not what we, described through words
is not enough. And there are Vaishnava acharayas who have sung that, you know,
I have, I wrote choice poetry glorifying You. And I have thought that I have
gloried You very beautifully. But now that I have seen you my dear Lord, I have
understood that all my glorification is like an insult. Because if we say that,
if we glorify somebody as the, oh, you are the landlord of the whole village.
And if that person is actually the emperor of the whole country. Now, from the
perspective of an ordinary citizen, you know, you are a landlord of the whole
village. That is impressive thing. But from the perspective of the reality of
the position of the person being the emperor of the whole country, then that is
insignicant. So, that is how the glorification is actually a minimisation. So,
similarly, the words that we used to glorify the Lord. They are not, they, they
are often inadequate to describe the glories of the Lord. So, they are not
glorification. They are, can, they can, name, well be minimisation. But still,
that does not mean that we should not glorify. You know. A great, you know,
saint, "Tukaram Maharaj", he says that, you know, the swan can walk very
eloquently..., el..., elegantly. The swan may walk very elegantly. But, and
other birds cannot walk that elegantly. But that does not mean the other birds
do not have a right to walk. No. They can all walk. So, like that, in, we can
all glorify the Supreme Lord. You know. Although, we may not be able to glorify
in a very elegant or eloquent way. And our glorification may not be, you know,
adequate. It can never be adequate to describe the Supreme Lord's glories. But
still, for, for His pleasure. For our purification. And for communicating
something to the world about the gories of the Lord, we try to speak His
glories. So, similarly, Prabhupada is saying that what is actually, even:

        divi sūrya-sahasrasya
        bhaved yugapad utthitā

That even this description that the super effulgent sun in thousands, you know,
that would describe the "bhāsas tasya mahātmanaḥ". The effulgence, that is also
an indication. That is not a description. Then, what happens after this?

        tatraika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ
        pravibhaktam anekadhā
        apaśyad deva-devasya
        śarīre pāṇḍavas tadā

"tatraika-sthaṁ". So, again. "ihai...", the "ihaika-sthaṁ", it was earlier. When
Krishna was telling Arjuna in 11.7, "ihaika-sthaṁ". So, Krishna and Arjuna on
the battlefield. That first, He, adhere, at this one place, you can see
everything. Now, when "Sañjaya" and "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" are describing, they are
discussing. From "Sañjaya"'s perspective. "Sañjaya" is at the palace with
"Dhṛtarāṣṭra". You know. In, you know, Hastinapur. And the battle is going on at
"Kurukṣetra". So, therefore, he is saying, "tatra". "tatraika-sthaṁ jagat
kṛtsnaṁ". So, from that one place, the whole universe was seen. "pravibhaktam
anekadhā". So, "pravibhaktam" means divided into many details. "vibhaktam" is
separated. You know. Divided. "apaśyad deva-devasya". So, in that, "ap...",
"apaśyat", Arjuna saw "deva-devasya śarīre". In that Lord, who is the God of the
Gods. He is the Supreme God. "deva". In His body. So, now, the body word does
not necessarily have to be in material body. It can be a transcendental body,
also. So, but in the form of the Lord. "pāṇḍavas tadā". So, at that time, the
"pāṇḍavaḥ". The Arjuna, Arjuna saw that. So, you know, from the point of view of
"Dhṛtarāṣṭra". You know. All the, all of them are the sons of Pandu. They are
not his sons. So, that particular sentime..., sen..., sentiment is there. And,
you know, you know, that is underscored by, you know, the word "tat...",
"pāṇḍavaḥ".

        tataḥ sa vismayāviṣṭo
        hṛṣṭa-romā dhanañ-jayaḥ
        praṇamya śirasā devaṁ
        kṛtāñjalir abhāṣata

"tataḥ sa vismayāviṣṭo". So, "vismaya". "vismaya" means amazement. You know.
Astonishment. So, "tataḥ sa", you know, "vismayāviṣṭo". He was not just amazed.
But he was overwhelmed by amazement. And "hṛṣṭa-romā dhanañ-jayaḥ". So,
"hṛṣṭa-romā". "hṛṣṭa" means to rise. "romā" is the hair. So, the hair on his
body stood up. "dhanañ-jayaḥ"'s. "praṇamya śirasā devaṁ". Then, he bowed down.
He bowed his head down. And then, "kṛtāñjalir". "kṛta-añjaliḥ". "añjaliḥ" is
hands. "kṛta" is, he says, folded his hands forward. And "kṛtāñjalir abhāṣata".
So, Arjuna starts speaking over here. So, Arjuna has become reverential. Krishna
was asked by Arjuna, please show me this form. And he starts seeing the form.
You know. So, now, as the form moves, as this revelation goes on, what will
happen is that, Arjuna is able to see, you know, this form. And then, he is not
able to see Krishna at all. You know. Later on, we will see that, he just sees
this universal form. And he gets overwhelmed by seeing this universal form. But
when he is seeing this universal form, he starts offering, he starts, first
offers, he bows his heads down. First, bows his head down. Folds his hand. And
then, he starts speaking now. So, what has happened? Arjuna is overwhelmed. You
know. "hṛṣ...", what is, His body, there is an em..., emotional reaction. And
there is a physical reaction. So, the physical reaction, that is described is
"hṛṣṭa-romā". "hṛṣṭa-romā" is that his hair has stood up. And the emotional
reaction is that, "vismayāviṣṭo". He is overwhelmed by astonishment. And then,
he starts speaking. You know. You know. So, now, Prabhupada explains, this is
not because of, this is not because of fear. It is because of wonder. Now, let
us see what Arjuna starts speaking. Now, from here, onwards, if we go back to
the overview. 15 to 31 is Arjuna's description of the universal form. So, 9 to
14 was "Sañjaya" describing. You know. You know. So, let us see what Arjuna
describes now. Now, what, going back, what has "Sañjaya" described until now?
He, "Sañjaya", you know, if we look at this description. You know. Krishna's
description is the briefest. It is actually only three verses. And fourth verse
is saying that, ok, you know, I will give the eyes by which you can see. Then,
"Sañjaya"'s description is slightly longer. It is, you know, totally 5 verses.
Out of which, the fifth verse is describing Arjuna's reaction. So, in Krishna's
description, the point was, ok, you will see many forms. And then, you will see
all the devatas. And then, you will see everything at one place. And now, you
know, Krishna is going to reveal. So, He also says, you are also going to see
some things which, which are not even asked to see. Then, "Sañjaya" is
describing. "Sañjaya" does not know, know that, that Krishna is going to see
something, Krishna is going to reveal something which he does not know. So, what
does "Sañ...", "Sañjaya"'s description contain? First, he says that actually, it
is "mahā-yogeśvaro hariḥ". And He revealed the form. And then, he says, he
underscores the point that "aneka". You know. There are so many faces. So many
hands. So many ornaments. So many weapons. So, what Krishna has said in 5, you
know, you know, "Sañ...", "Arj...", he has, "Sañjaya" has elaborated it in two
verses. You know. In 10 and 11. And then, 12. 13. 14. How is it going? 14 is the
description of the reaction of Arjuna. What happened to Arjuna when he saw that
form. And before that, 12 was the, you know, so when this whole thing was
displayed, "Sañjaya" added one more metaphor. That is "divi sūrya-sahasrasya".
Had actually, the, if thousands of, you know, suns were there. That, that was
not there in His, Krishna's description. So, Arjuna, you know, Krish...,
"Sañjaya" is giving that to give an indication of what it was like. And then,
after that, in the next verse, also, he says, again, he makes the second point.
"tatraika-sthaṁ". There is one place. And one place, everything is seen. You
know. So, in "Sañjaya"'s description, there is no mention of the, you know,
point of Asvina. Rudra. And all that. That is, you know, g..., you know,
"Sañjaya" is just giving a quick overview. He is not going into details. And
the details will be described by Arjuna. When he is describing the universal
form. And actually, when Arjuna is describing, the description will suddenly
change into, you know, glorification. And that glorification will change in...,
into, you know, offering of obeisances. You know. And offering of obeisances
will change into prayers. So, this is how the description will evolve. But let
us start with the description now. So, when he describes here:

        arjuna uvāca

        paśyāmi devāṁs tava deva dehe
        sarvāṁs tathā bhūta-viśeṣa-saṅghān
        brahmāṇam īśaṁ kamalāsana-stham
        ṛṣīṁś ca sarvān uragāṁś ca divyān

So, "paśyāmi". So, several times, Krishna has told Arjuna "paśyā". "paśyā". See.
See. So, now, here, Arjuna is saying, yes, I do see. "paśyāmi devāṁs". So, you
know, that "devāṁs" is a plural word. You know. So, here, is, "devāṁs" refers to
the devatas. So, actually, the same word is being used to re..., in one sense
to refer to the Supreme, also. "tava deva dehe". So, that "deva" refers to the
Supreme Lord. And "dehe" is the form. So, in Your form, what am I seeing?
"paśyāmi devāṁs tava deva dehe". In Your form, I am seeing, many, many forms.
"sarvāṁs tathā bhūta-viśeṣa-saṅghān". "sarvāṁs tathā bhūta-viśeṣa-saṅghān". So,
I am seeing many, many forms over here. And as I see all these various forms.
You know. You know. All different kinds of living beings. And he is describing
right from the top of the universe to the bottom of the universe. "brahmāṇam
īśaṁ kamalāsana-stham". So, as we know, Brhamaji is situated on a lotus flower.
So, "kamalāsana". Is, as an "āsana" of "kamala". And who is situated, he is
"brahmāṇam īśaṁ". He is also one of the controllers of the universe. "ṛṣīṁś ca
sarvān". And as he is moving forward f..., downwards from the description of the
universal cosmology. Ok. Brhamaji is at the top. And then, after that, he is
describing, you know, "ṛṣīṁś ca sarvān". So, from the top of the universe, where
Brahma is there. From there, "ṛṣī"s are there below. And then, "uragāṁś ca
divyān". So, "uragāṁś ca divyān". "uragāṁś" ref..., refer to serpents. And
divine serpent. It is, actually refers to the whole universe vision, is having,
in one vision. At the bottom of the universe, there are the celestial serpents.
There is Seshnag. And there are the various kinds of other serpents of Vasuki
and all that. But Seshnag is at the bottom. So, right form the top to the
bottom. Everything, he is seeing. And he is, "paśyāmi devāṁs". I am seeing all
this, oh, Krishna. So, the first, you know, thing that Kri..., Arjuna describes
is the sheer scope right from the top of the universe to the bottom of the
universe he sees. And then, you know, so, Arjuna is confirming here what Krishna
had said. "ihaika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ". From one place, you will see the whole
universe. So, indeed, Arjuna is confirming. Yes, I am going to see. And then, he
goes on. And describes again. What is he seeing? "aneka". Many, many things.

        aneka-bāhūdara-vaktra-netraṁ
        paśyāmi tvāṁ sarvato ’nanta-rūpam
        nāntaṁ na madhyaṁ na punas tavādiṁ
        paśyāmi viśveśvara viśva-rūpa

So, "aneka-bāhūdara-vaktra-netraṁ". "aneka", as we discussed earlier, it is not
just many. It is so many that we cannot number it. "bāhū". "bāhū" is arms.
"udara". "udara" is the bellies. "vaktra". Face. "a-netraṁ" is eyes.
"aneka-bāhūdara-vaktra-netraṁ". "paśyāmi". So, the word "paśyāmi" comes twice in
this verse. Second line. And the fourth line. "paśyāmi tvāṁ sarvato
’nanta-rūpam". "sarvato", everywhere I am seeing. "’nanta-rūpam". Your form is
unlimited, dear Lord, when I am seeing it. And to emphasise the unlimited, what
does he say? "nāntaṁ na madhyaṁ na punas tavādiṁ". That actually, when I start
looking. You know. Just look. Look. Look. From this end to that end. There
is no end, only. There is no end. There is no beginning. Sometimes, if
somebody is trapped in an ocean. We look in all directions wherever we see, just
see water, only. Water. Water. Water. Everywhere. We just do not know what to
do. Where, where does the water begin? Where is the, where does it end? Where is
the middle? You know. If we know, ok, this much is a la..., this is a lake.
Then, we can understand. This is a lake's one side. This lake another side.
This is center. But it is so big that we, we just do not have any reference
point left, only. He says, "nāntaṁ na madhyaṁ na punas tavādiṁ". I cannot see
anything related to that. And then, now, I understand, what am I seeing?
"paśyāmi viśveśvara viśva-rūpa". So, this is the first and the only reference
specifically by the word "viśva-rūpa" to what, to the vision that Arjuna is
having. The Chapter is called as "Virat...", you know, "viśva-rūpa" darshan.
Generally, that is the word that is used. We will discuss in our next class
about what is the, what are the various kinds of "viśva-rūpa"s. And what it
ref..., what is referred to over there. But here, the important point is that,
you know, he uses this word. He just two words over here. "viśveśvara". And
"viśva-rūpa". So, "viśveśvara" refers to the Lord of the "viśva". And then, You
have a form. So, my dear Lord, You who are the controller of the universe. You
have a form which pervades the whole universe. And that is the form that You are
revealing to me. So, "viśveśvara viśva-rūpa". So, "Kuntī" Maharani, also, in one
of her prayers to Lord Krishna, she says:

        atha viśveśa viśvātman
        viśva-mūrte svakeṣu me

So, she says, she is, she use, describes as, the Lord in three ways. You are
over the, You are above the universe as its controller. The "viśveśa". But You
are inside of the universe, also, as a "viśvātman". You are transcendental as
the "īśvara". You are immanent as the in-body, as the in-dwelling Supreme Being.
And then, You are the "viśv...". "viśva-mūrte". You are Yourself the
"viśva-rūpa", also, So, actually, in that sense, Krishna is, you know, inside
the universe. Krishna is the universe. And Krishna is outside the universe,
also. So, here, he is talk..., you know, Arjuna is talking of two aspects of it.
He is saying that You are, you know, a, the Lord of the universe. And You are
also manifesting the universal form. I am seeing this, oh, Lord. And so, now,
you know, what happens as Arjuna further describes in this vision. And then, how
Arjuna's vision and emotion change as he sees more and more things. That we will
discuss in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
