Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8sWNKLetwh8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=8sWNKLetwh8&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_091_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_07_Text_19_to_24_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=vsq5YqpzZCsWSy_wW1pi4HFR34l8MTU0ODQ4ODUxNEAxNTQ4NDAyMTE0

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the Seventh Chapter discussing the second section of people who surrender to
Krishna. Those who do not surrender to Krishna. And those who surrender to
something other than Krishna. So, you know, you know, 7.14 talks about how we
should surrender to Krishna. And then, we will go beyond maya. 7.15 talks about
the four categories of people who do not surrender to Krishna. And then, 7.16 to
19 talks about the four categories of people who start worshipping Krishna. And
eventually, they surrender to Krishna. So, from seven point four..., oh, sixteen
talks about "bhajante". And from "bhajante", the progression moves onwards. And
then, it comes in 7.19 to, you know, you know, "prapadyate", to surrender. So,
they become, you know, they become one-pointed in that devotional service to the
Supreme Lord. So, let us discuss that now. You know. So, 7.19 is:

        bahūnāṁ janmanām ante
        jñānavān māṁ prapadyate
        vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti
        sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ

So, "bahūnāṁ janmanām ante". After many lifetimes. "jñānavān". When the person
becomes "jñānavān". You know. "māṁ prapadyate". They surrender to Me. What is
their understanding of the surrender to Me? "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti". They
understand that Lord Vasudeva is everything. There is no reality higher than
Lord Vasudeva. "sa mahātmā". Those such great souls. "su-durlabhaḥ". They are
extremely rare. So, here, Krishna is talking about a progression from one level
of reality to higher levels of reality. So, "bahūnāṁ janmanām ante". After many
many lifetimes. So, what is He referring to? He is referring to the four
categories of people who came to Him in 7.16. So, āsu..., those are people who
start doing "bhajante". You know. "bhajante" to "prapadyate". It is a
progression. Which can take, you know, several lifetimes depending on the
intensity of the practice. There are many people who can, who may do bhakti as a
casual activity within the journey of their lives. But beyond that, there is
bhakti c..., which can be performed in a much more serious, much more, you know,
you know, intense and single-pointed level. So, that is the kind of bhakti,
which Krishna is talking about over here. When He talks about "prapadyate". So,
"bahūnāṁ janmanām ante". That after many lifetimes, one moves from the
"bhajante" to "prapadyate". "jñānavān māṁ prapadyate". So, now, Krishna has
talked about four categories of people. "ārto", "jijñāsur", "arthārthī", and
"jñānī". All four people are "su-kṛtinaḥ". All four people are, you know, you
know, having pious credits. What is this pious credits referring to? This
actually refers to spiritual pious credits. In the sense that, they have done
some kind of, you know, you know, bhakti in some way. Not directly bhakti by
in, in knowing that it is bhakti. But some "janāḥ su-kṛtino" they have done
which is conducive to bhakti. That means they have, you know, the, while doing
gardening, water tulsi. Or while doing some service, you know, you know, given
some prasad to people. Or rendered some seva to vaishnava. While, you know,
giving charity in general, they gave some charity to, for Krishna's cause, also.
So, they are not doing consciously, thinking that this is devotional service.
They do it without that conscious understanding. But they somehow engage,
connect with Krishna. So, that sort of "su-kṛti" helps them. And with that
"su-kṛti" brings them to Krishna. And they start serving Krishna. They have in
"bhajante". But after many lifetimes, then they understand something. Because of
which, "bhajante", they do not ju..., they do not just remember. I mean, like
ser..., ser..., connecting with Krishna. And serving Krishna occasionally. When
they understand this, then they start Krishna, serving Krishna constantly. So,
"jñ...", "jñānavān māṁ prapadyate". Now, what is the conception that enables us
to make them "prapadyate". "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti". That Vasudeva is everything.
You know. "sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ". Such great souls are extremely rare. you
know. "durlabhaḥ". He says. "sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ". "durlabhaḥ" is very
difficult. "su...", very rare. And "su-durlabhaḥ" is, you know, extremely rare.
Now, it is interesting, Krishna says they understand Vasudeva is everything.
That means that they understand that there is no reality beyond Vasudeva. Lord
Krishna has Himself told in 7.7, in the same chapter:

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat
        kiñcid asti dhanañ-jaya

They understand this that there is no reality higher than Krishna. And because
of it, you know, they surrender to Krishna. When they surrender to Krishna,
thus what happens? "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti". So, when they surrender like this to
Krishna, they become purified. They become elevated. And gradually, they become,
you know, you know, completely fixed in their worship of Krishna. That is
"sarvam". "prapadyate". It is interesting that, you know, although they
understand Vasudeva to be sarvam, you know, this is not pantheistic.
Pantheistic, as you remember, we discussed anyways, everything is God. So,
th..., although they understand Vasudeva is everything. That does not mean that
they surrender to everything. They surrender to Vasudeva. So, "vāsudevaḥ sarvam
iti" means, you know, God is a, Vasudeva is everything. But everything is not
Vasudeva. But Vasudeva is everything means, yes, Vasudeva is manifest
everywhere. Vasudeva is accessible everywhere. But it is not that everything is,
everything and everywhere is, everything is just Vasudeva. Vasudeva has his own
self-existence and self-glory in the spiritual world. Where He is manifest in
his transcendental turn..., personality. You know. So, they do not surrender to
everything. But they surrender to Vasudeva. You know. When Hiranyakashipu asks
Prahlada, where is your Vishnu? So, he says, "Khadga pray", with my "khadga", I
am going to kill you. Let us see if your Vishnu comes and protects you. Is he
ever...? Where is he? Is he everywhere? Is he in this pillar? So, he says, yes.
Vishnu is everywhere. He is in this pillar, also. And then, Hiranyakashipu
assaults that pillar. And then, he, what happens is, Nrsimhadeva emerges from
there. Now, when Nrsimhadeva emerges from the pillar, Prahlada Maharaja does not
offer obeisances to the pillar. He offers obeisances. He offers prayers. He
offers garland to Nrsimhadeva. So, yes, the pillar can also be respected because
it is the place from which Lord Nrsimhadeva manifested. But the pillar itself is
not the ultimate object of worship. Because it is connected with Krishna, so it
also becomes sacred. But it is not in and of itself the ultimate object of
worship. Everything connected with Krishna, you know, especially if Krishna
has performed some pastimes in connection with that, that is sacred. And that is
worshipable. Although, it is, whatever is worshipable, does not mean that that
is the ultimate object of worship. See, worshipable can also mean that because
of its connection with the Absolute Truth, it also becomes sacred. So,
"vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti", the person understands. You know. The "jñānavān"
understands that Vasudeva is everything. But still, the "jñānavān" does not
surrender everything. "jñānavān" surrenders to, you know, you know, the,
Vasudeva. "māṁ prapadyate". "māṁ prapadyate". Surrenders to Me. So, Krishna is
telling over here this very significant truth that from the point of approaching
Him to surrender Him, it may take many lifetimes. Of course, if one practices
bhakti seriously, then:

        teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā
        mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt
        bhavāmi na cirāt pārtha
        mayy āveśita-cetasām

So, in 12.7, in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna will tell that "ahaṁ samuddhartā". I
will lift such people out of material existence. Who are these people? These are
people who are the spiritualists. Those who are not just ordinary spiritualists.
But those who fix their mind on Him. And "na cirāt". Not after a long time. So,
bhakti is like an elevator. It can take us rapidly up. You know. Now, here, we
will discuss that these people, they are not directly practicing bhakti. They
are definitely approaching Krishna. And we can say that is bhakti. But that is
not suddha-bhakti. So, here, when Krishna says "bahūnāṁ janmanām ante", He is
referring to people who start approaching Him. And from the point of view, 
starting to approach Him, to the point of view of, completely set to the poin...,
level of completely seven notation. That may take time. That may take
progression. And that progression is what is talked about here in this verse.
So, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport here. Hmm.

        bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

You know. You know. So, Prabhupada quotes the "purusutta" section from the
Bhagava..., you know, from the "Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad". That chapter, m...,
three, verses 14 and 15. And what does he say over here?

        sahasra-śīrṣā puruṣaḥ
        sahasrākṣaḥ sahasra-pāt
        sa bhūmiṁ viśvato vṛtvā- 
        tyātiṣṭhad daśāṅgulam

        puruṣa evedaṁ sarvaṁ
        yad bhūtaṁ yac ca bhavyam
        utāmṛtatvasyeśāno
        yad annenātirohati

So, here, he is talking about how one understands that everything is Vasudeva.
So, "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti". Prabhupada says, such a, previously, he has
explained:

"Such a universal vision of Vāsudeva precipitates one’s full surrender to the
Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the highest goal."

So, what is that universal vision? One understands that the Supreme Lord is:

        sahasra-śīrṣā puruṣaḥ

        sahasrāk...

        sahasrākṣaḥ sahasra-pāt

So, He has thousands of hair. Thousands of eyes. Thousands of legs. Like that.
"daśāṅgulam". So, like that, that, basically, the point is, this universal form
is all-pervading. This univer..., for..., form is, you know, so great. So
glorious. That the glory pervades everywhere and in everything. And, you know,
then further, how is that to everything? So, that is further described over
here, in next verse of "Chāndogya Upaniṣad", Prabhupada quotes.

"na vai vāco na cakṣūṁṣi na śrotrāṇi na manāṁsīty ācakṣate prāṇa iti evācakṣate
prāṇo hy evaitāni sarvāṇi bhavanti"

So, in the living entity, you know, in the living, in the body of living, the
power to speak, to power to slee..., the power to hear, the power to think,
these are not central. It is "prāṇa" that is central. And "prāṇa" ultimately
comes from Krishna. So, here, this verse is explaining "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti".
Now, after explaining how one progessively comes from you know, you know, the
worship of Krishna for some material motive to the worship of Krishna with a
pure motive. That is how one progresses. So, from there, now, one starts
thinking about, you know, Krishna starts analysing are how those who do not
reject Him, but do not surrender to Him? Who surrender to someone, someone else?
That He will describe in the section through, 7.20 to 23.

        kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ
        prapadyante ’nya-devatāḥ
        taṁ taṁ niyamam āsthāya
        prakṛtyā niyatāḥ svayā

So, "kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ". "kāmais". Because of material desires,
"hṛta-jñānāḥ". The intelligence. The knowledge has been destroyed. "hṛta".
Abducted. Removed. And "prapadyante". So, they are surrendering. But what is the
surrender to? "prapadyante ’nya-devatāḥ". They are surrendering to somebody
else. To some other devatas. "t...", "taṁ taṁ niyamam āsthāya". So, one follows
the rules accordingly. Of the, for worship of "taṁ taṁ niyamam āsthāya". What
are the "niyamam"s? What are the rules that one follows? "prakṛtyā niyatāḥ
svayā". The rules that are according to one's own "prakṛtyā". So, here, Krishna
is explaining why do some people surrender not to Him, but to other devatas? So,
Prabhupada explains in this section in his commentary that, actually, you know,
some people say all Gods are one. But Krishna is here clearly differentiating.
"māṁ prapadyate". And He says, "’nya-devatāḥ". Those who surrender to other
Gods. So, there is a categorical difference between the two which Krishna is
mentioning over here. And that indicates that there are different Gods. And they
are, not all of them are one. They are all different. So, you know, when one
understands this, then, m..., you know, one understands very clearly that it is
all, all paths are not one. All Gods are not one. That there is, there is the
Supreme Lord. And there is the other devatas.

        kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ prapadyante ’nya-devatāḥ

It is a very clear word. "’nya-devatāḥ". Other Gods. "taṁ taṁ niyamam āsthāya".
Now, one follows rules according to, you know, one's own nature. "prakṛtyā
niyatāḥ svayā". So, here, Krishna is referring to how there are Puranas within
the three modes. You know. And that, these Puranas, you know, they direct people
to worship according to the propensities of the people. According to the level
of consciousness of the people. So, tamasic Puranas guide people to worship
Shiva. The rajasic Puranas guide people to worship Brahma. And the sattvic
Puranas guide people to worship Vishnu. So, "prakṛtyā niyatāḥ svayā". So, the
Vedic system is created in such a way that according to the level of people,
people can worship. And then, they can become elevated. So, this is the, you
know, you know, broad encomp..., you know, we could say encompassing nature of
the Vedic system. Encomp..., it encompasses people from the lowest mode to the
highest mode. And provides them custom-made methods for elevation. "prakṛtyā
niyatāḥ svayā". So, ok, somebody is, you know, you know, addicted to eating
meat and drinking. You know. Then, can such a person become religious? Or now,
c..., we could say, at the highest level of religion, such a person cannot
become religious. But that does not mean that the person cannot at all become
religious. Yes. You know. You know. The, for, for the practice of serious
spiritual life, for the sake of attaining liberation, is not easily possible for
such a person to do that. Unless the person is ready to give it up. But if the
person is not ready to give it up, that does not mean that the person has to
suffer. You know. And, you know, suffer, you know, exile from the, you know,
house of religion. You know. That person can still be accommodated with the
house of religion. How is that? Then, there are custom-made, you know, you know,
a, forms of religion. Rules of religion. Practices of religion. Which that
person can accept. So, there is tama, so, the, such people can offer mamsa to
Kali. And then, they can take mamsa. Such people can offer, you know, they may
offer, m..., bhang. M..., they may take wine. Just, Lord Shiva drinks that. We
also drink it. Like that. So, now, this is allowed. We have discussed earlier
the difference between the concession and a, a recommendation. Or an
instruction. Recommendation or instruction means, I want you do it. This is
good. It shou..., you should do it. Or it, it is good if you do it. Instruction
means you should do it. Recommendation means it is good if you do it. Concession
means that you want to do it? I will allow you to do it. You know. You know. So,
the concessions are given in this case. Of, for some people, who are in those
natu..., a, who are at that level of consciousness. "prakṛtyā niyatāḥ svayā".
Now, we may say that, actually, in Kali Yuga, also, people are in lower modes.
Then, should people practice this tamasic modes of worship? Because most people
are in Raja Guna, Tama Guna. How can they practice devotional service? Which is
actually meant for Lord Vishnu. Which is meant for those who are in the
goodness. So, actually, here Krishna is talking about a normal system. If a pure
devotee intervenes in the life of a person, i..., if the devotional force come,
energy come in the life of a person, then this normal system can be, you know,
transcended, also. Not transcendental as being rejected. But one can take the,
instead of taking the gradual, you know, you know, staircase. One can just take
the swift elevator. And move forward.

So, the difference between the two will depend on one, whether one gets access
to the mercy of a d..., you know, Kri..., of, Krishna coming through a pure
devotee. And whether one accepts that mercy. You know. So, you know, when one
gets, is fortunate enough to get that mercy and to accept that mercy, then one
can also move fast. So, Prabhupada, you know, was so compassionate that he was
able to acc..., he was able to elevate even the people who were in Tama Guna.
You know. You know. You know. They, like the hippies, who used to drink. And
smoke. And take drugs. And do all sorts of, you know, you know, terrible
activities. Anti-spiritual, d..., anti-devotional activities. They were also
elevated. That is the mercy of pure devotee. But normally, you know, we have to
understand that bhakti is not always easily accessible. Even in the Vedic
cultural context, bhakti is not always available. So, you know, bhakti is always
rare. You know. So, when bhakti is not available for people, at that time, are
they doomed to be religious? Are they doomed to be, you know, you know, a, live
materialistic, godless sinful lives? No. The Vedic culture also creates a
facility by which they can be gradually elevated. And that is the system of
demigod worship. So, we have to und..., we have discussed elaborately in our
Isopanishad classes about demigod worship. We discussed about how the prodigal
son's story, Ve..., expanded. The Vedic context. How, when the son is not ready
to return back to the father. Son, and then, the father sends a minister. And
the minister gets the son, who has gone out of the kingdom, back into the
kingdom. So, getting the son back into the kingdom means that it is like the
fath..., if the son has come back within the father's jurisdiction, although
indirectly. So, like that. When the f..., son starts serving the father. Like
that. That f..., there are, through his intermediary. Through a minister. And
that is like the soul coming back to the house of the Vedas. And serving Krishna
indirectly. That is through devatas. So, this, Krishna will describe in the next
verse. So, Prabhupada's emphasis in the purport is "kāmais tais tair
hṛta-jñānāḥ". That the, their knowledge has been destroyed by "kāmaiḥ". But
then, the Bhagavatam says, even if one has, Bhagavatam actually recommends, the
sup..., pure devotional service. But as we see in this verse, which Prabhupada
would often quote from, 2.3.10 from the Bhagavatam. So:

        akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā
        mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ
        tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena
        yajeta puruṣaṁ param

You know. So, even whatever desires one has. "akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā". Whatever
desires one has. "mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ". One will become elevated. And
liberated. If one just "yajeta puruṣaṁ param". If one worships the Supreme Lord.
And how does one worship the Supreme Lord? "tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena". With intense
bhakti. So, if we just worship the Supreme Lord with intense bhakti, we can all
become liberated. That is, that is the, you know, glory here. "akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo
vā". "mokṣa-kāma". "akāmaḥ" refers to one who has no material desires.
"sarva-kāmo". All kinds of material desires. "mokṣa-kāma". One who has the
desire for liberation. You know. You know. So, this is the Bhagavatam's
recommendation ultimately that whatever be one's level that that person worship.
But they worship the Supreme Lord. But those who cannot understand this
principle, they may worship the other devatas. And they will also become
elevated, gra..., by, gradually. So, Prabhupada's emphasis, actually, there is
no need for this. Again, he quotes from the, you know, "Cai...",
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta", establish "ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya". That
Krishna is the Supreme Lord. And He should be the supreme object of worship for
us. So, now, let us look at the system of demigod worship. And see what happens
after this.

        yo yo yāṁ yāṁ tanuṁ bhaktaḥ
        śraddhayārcitum icchati
        tasya tasyācalāṁ śraddhāṁ
        tām eva vidadhāmy aham

So, "yo yo yāṁ yāṁ tanuṁ bhaktaḥ". So, whatever, "tanuṁ". "tanuṁ" refers to
form. You know. Whatever form, one choo..., feels attracted to. One desires to
worship them. "icchati". "icchati" is, you know, desire. "ārcitum icchati". You
know. One desires to, "iccha...", "ārcitum" is worship. "icchati" is desire. And
how, normally, when we have to worship, how will we worship? There has to have
some f..., there has to be some faith. So, "śraddhayārcitum icchati". One
desires to f..., worship with "śraddha". "tasya tasyācalāṁ śraddhāṁ". So, He
makes the "śraddhāṁ", "ācalāṁ". "ācalāṁ" means He makes the "śraddha"
unshakeable. "tām eva vidadhāmy aham". I make that "vidadhāmy". "vidadhāmy"
means I give one strong faith. "ācalāṁ śraddhāṁ". So, it is very significant
here. That means, here, Krishna is explaining that He is so kind that He does
not, you know, reject demigod worship directly. Nor does He reject the people
who are demigod worshippers. Now, He is concerned not with His own
glorification. But He is concerned with others' elevation. Krishna is not
concerned with His glorification. He is concerned with others' elevation. Our
elevation. And that is why He, normally speaking, you know if the kin..., if a
boss is there in an office. You know. The boss wants everyone to know that I am
the boss. And if somebody else comes along. And, you know, for example, there is
a boss. And there is, say, there is a ge..., there is a CEO. And there is
assistant manager. So, then, somebody comes to the office and starts praising
that assistant manager as if he is the CEO. The boss will become angry. You
know. How dare you? You know. You are so ignorant. And you will go, he will get
angry with both of them. You know. Why are you glorifying? You know. Why are you
praising like that? And he will get angry with the person who, who is accepting
that praise, also. But Krishna is not concerned like that. You know. He just,
Krishna is happy when devotees glorify Him. But He understand that the gl..., 
glorification is expression of devotion. And that glorification is not flattery.
That glorification is not, you know, you know, is not centered on the ego. It is
meant for the reciprocation of love. See, when we love someone, we appreciate
that person. And naturally, when we appreciate, we glorify that person. So, like
that, when we understand, then we move forward in our spiritual progression. You
know. When we move forward in the spiritual progression, then actually speaking,
you know, what do you mean by we move forward in spiritual progression? We move
forward in understanding, you know, the, you know, compassion of Krishna. You
know. Sometimes, devotees start doubting. You know. You know. If Krishna is the
Supreme. And why the Vedas talk about other devatas? And sometimes they talk
about other devatas as supreme, also. Why do they say like that? When we
understand the compassion of Krishna, then actually the system of demigod
worship increases ou..., our faith in Krishna. It does not decrease our faith.
Why? Because we understand how large-hearted Krishna is. How large-hearted. How
is it? He is so large-hearted that he is not concerned whether people recognise
my position or not. Whether people glorify me or not. You know. If they
understand that and they do that, that is great. Because that is the, that is
the way to ultimate liberation. That is the way to ultimate happiness. And that
is the way to supreme fulfillment. But if they are not ready to do that, at
least, let them get elevated from the lower modes to the higher modes.
Therefore, what Krishna does is, He gives the demigods the power. He, and He
gives the demigod worshippers the faith. So, Krishna says:

        tasya tasyācalāṁ śraddhāṁ

I make their "śraddhāṁ", "ācalāṁ". So, ok, you want to worship that particular
devata. I will give faith in that devata. And then, by worshipping, you know,
that devata, I, by worshipping that devata, you will get elevated. "tasya
tasyācalāṁ śraddhāṁ". So, I give faith. And I elevate. I facilitate the
elevation. So, then, "tām eva vidadhāmy aham". "vidadhāmy aham". So, I give it.
So, Krishna, as present in Supersoul in the heart. And He, from the Supersoul,
He is the Supersoul, ok, He sees, ok, you are, you desire to worship this
particular devata, I will give the faith. And that way, we understand Krishna's
broad-mindedness. And a devotee appreciates this. Of course, a devotee does not,
himself, you know, herself get involved in de..., you know, demigod worship.
When we understand Krishna's glories, then we focus more on Krishna's glories.
Exclusively. Singularly. But we appreciated the broad heart of Krishna. And that
is what Krishna is revealing over here. That is why we will see in this purport
that, you know, in the translation, you know, you know, Prabhupada starts with I
am in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. Now, somebody may say there is no
reference to anything like Supersoul in the trans..., in the verse. You know.
There is no Paramatma. There is no ruddhei. Where is Krishna talking about
anything? So, actually, Prabhupada often, you know, integrates the translation
and the purport to illumine the translation, purports. So, sometimes, when he
wants to explain certain points to us. So, for that point, you know, Prabhupada
does such things. So that ou..., our conceptions will become clearer. We will
not get into an unnecessary misunderstandings. You know. "tasya tasyācalāṁ
śraddhāṁ". So, where is faith, ultimately? Faith is a matter of the heart. And
Krishna is present in the heart. And Prabhupada is pointing that Krishna is
present in the heart. And Krishna is the person who gives us faith. So,
depending on our desires. Whatever kind of faith we want, Krishna will give that
kind of faith to us. So, He gives us faith in Himself when we choose to develop
faith in Him. So, "tām eva vidadhāmy aham". I give that faith to him. Now, after
that, Krishna will describe further, hmm, that, you know, Prabhupada explains
this, you know, there is significant point, Prabhupada makes over here.

"Some may ask why the all-powerful God gives facilities to the living entities
for enjoying this material world and so lets them fall into the trap of the
illusory energy."

"The answer is..."

Prabhupada says:

"that if the Supreme Lord as Supersoul does not give such facilities, then there
is no meaning to independence."

So, one such facility which the Lord gives for exercising the independence is
the facility of demigod worship. You know. You know. So, through that demigod
system or demigod worship, also, Krishna allows the living entity turn towards
Him gradually by slowly, but surely, moving forwards. And they, so by
worshipping Tama Guna, they will gradually rise from Tama Guna to Raja Guna. And
to Sattva Guna. So, here, Prabhupada explains that, you know:

"both the demigod and the living entity are dependent on the supreme will."

So, here, in this verse, Krishna has talked about how the living entity's faith
is enhanced by the devata. And now, He will talk about how the devata is
empowered by Krishna.

        sa tayā śraddhayā yuktas
        tasyārādhanam īhate
        labhate ca tataḥ kāmān
        mayaiva vihitān hi tān

So, "sa tayā śraddhayā yuktas". Equipped with this faith. "tasyārādhanam īhate".
That person. "ārādhanam". "ārādhanam" is the same as "arcitum". That person
worships. "īhate". Aspires. Endeavors. So, equipped with this faith, the person,
worshippers. And then, wor..., the person worships. And then, person gets the
result. "labhate ca tataḥ kāmān". The person gets the desires fulfilled. So,
"kāmān" word is used, same as in eight point twent..., 7.20 word. "kāmais tais
tair hṛta-jñānāḥ". So, because of "kāmaiḥ", one is doing this. And here,
"labhate", "kāmān". One gets the "kāmān". And Krishna is telling, "mayaiva
vihitān hi tān". It is actually by My mercy that he is getting it. "mayaiva
vihitān". You know. You know. You know. You know. Actually, Krishna tells here
that it is I who am the giver of result. Just as when a minister gives a salary
to the, you know, you know, prince who is now, the prince has gone away from the
father. And the father has brought him back to his kingdom. And when the father
has brought him back. But the prince is not ready, ready to come back home.
Prince is the king. The father is the king. Father puts him under a minister.
When the minister gives some salary, gives some rewards to the, you know,
prince, then at that time, who is ultimately giving it? It is Krishna who is
giving. It is, sorry, it is the minister who is giving. So, like that, when the
devatas give some results, it is ultimately the Supreme Lord who is giving the
results. It is not anybody, it is not the devatas give, have independent power
to give results. Devatas' powers are there. But their powers ultimately come
from Krishna. From the Supreme Lord alone. And that is why, when there, if there
is a confrontation between devatas and the Supreme Lord. Then, you know, the
devatas always pale. And they fail. Because, you know, you know, they cannot
come, con..., their power comes from Krishna. They cannot confront and con...,
and conquer Krishna. And that is when in the Bhagavatam, we will see Brahmaji,
Indra, you know, the, all other devatas, whoever they may, Shiva, in the, and
other devatas, when they confront with Krishna, actually, they are overcome. So,
this is the point of the whole, you know, passage. The point is that, you know,
of this whole section is that, it is, their power is coming from Krishna.
"mayaiva vihitān hi tān". So, whatever blessings anybody gives, that blessings
comes from Krishna. So, you know, as we have discussed this elaborately in our
Isopanishad course, we will not go into this. You know. More in detail. You
know. You know. You know. But let us move forward now to understand the
principle as it comes in the Bhagavad Gita. So, Prabhupada explains again:

"For the living entity who desires to return to Godhead, material desires are
impediments."

Material desires wha..., are what? Impediments. So, you know, one, a devotee
does not get caught in such desires. A devotee focuses on glorifying Krishna.
And returning back to Krishna. You know.

        antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ
        tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām
        devān deva-yajo yānti
        mad-bhaktā yānti mām api

So, "antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ". The "phalaṁ", you know, that one gets by the
worship of the devatas is "antavat", is temporary. "tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām".
Actually, so, who aspires for this? Those who are "alpa-medhasām". "medhasām" is
brain substance or intelligence. And "alpa" is, you know, little. Less. Skinty.
Not much. Those whose intelligence is very s..., less. "devān deva-yajo yānti".
So, those who worship the devatas, they go to the devatas. "mad-bhaktā yānti mām
api". And those who worship Me, come back to Me. Krishna is telling over here.
So, in this way, He is explaining the difference between different kinds of
worship. Different levels of worship. So, "antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ". When one
worships the devatas, actually, that demigod, the tempory, demigods' abode, the
temporary, demigods' benedictions are temporary. And the demigod worshippers
that themselves are temporary. They are s..., as souls, they are eternal. But,
you know, whatever attainments they get, at the, as long as they are existing at
the material level, you know, their existence is themselves remain material, at
the, at temporary. You know. Our bodily existence is temporary. So, the demigod
worshippers, they m..., again, they get elevated. What is the ultimate fruit
that they can get? Demigod worshippers, the ultimate fruit that they can get is
by the, you know, by the mercy of the Supreme Lord, somehow, they get elevated
from demigod worship to the worship of the Supreme Lord. That is the ultimate
blessing that they can get. And, you know, instead of being "sakam", they become
"nishkama" in the worship of the Supreme Lord. Or they are otherwise at the
material level. The benefit that they may get is, they may move from the worship
of ma..., you know, m..., the, move from materialistic consciousness to pious
materialism. They may, and then, they may go to the demigod's, you know, abode.
Where they will live with the demigods. But that is also not, you know, you
know, permanent. The demigods' abodes themselves are temporary. So, even if
they attain those abodes, they will be existing temporarily only. And quite
often, they will not even att.., attain those abodes. Because, today especially,
when people perform demigod worship, they do not do with, you know, proper, you
know, they do not do it with proper, you know, scriptural rules and regulations.
So, "taṁ taṁ niyamam āsthāya" means, there has to be "niyamam". And one has to
"āsthāya". One has to follow those "niyamam"s faithfully. Those rules
faithfully. So, you know, you know, even the demigod worship has to be done
according to rules and regulations. Now, the rules and regulations for demigod
worship may be different from the rules and regulations for worship of, you
know, m..., other people. Sorry, a worship of the Supreme Lord. Or the worship
of demigods, of different demigods may have slightly different rules of worship.
But there are rules nonetheless. And it is only when one follows the rules that
one gets elevated. So, today, we have, you know, demigod worship in India, for
example, we may have worship of Ganesh. And in the worship of Ganesh, in the
Pandal, people are having movie songs. So, many people do not find anything
objectionable in such a saying. Because thei..., their whole idea is that, you
know, the deceit of reli..., religious practice is they think that it is just
one kind of entertainment. And, you know, ok, people are coming to Ganesh, also,
for the entertainment only. And people hear movie songs, also, for
entertainment, only. So, what is the problem doing two forms of entertainment
together?

But actually, it is a complete, you know, you know, you know, a complete
misunderstanding. The demigod worship also should be done for the glorification
of the demigod. Ultimately, we should glorify only the Supreme Lord. But if we
are worshipping the devata, then we should glorify that devata in the worship.
The best way to glorify that devata would be to glorify that wor..., devata as a
devotee of the Supreme Lord. So, as, you know, Caitanya Mahaprabhu has written
Caitanya Caritra, Carita, you know, set of verses, called as the Shivashtakam.
So, there, he is glorifying Lord Shiva as the devotee of the Supreme Lord. But
if one does not do that kind of glorification, then, at least, within demigod
worship, one can glorify the demigod properly. You know. So, this, this, as per
the powers of the demigods. But today, even that is not done. The demigods', you
know, image might be there. But actually, one is worshipping, you know, one is
only singing movie songs over there. And maybe in the morning, or in the
evening, when the ma..., m..., aarti is there, little bit, you know, some so...,
songs of the demigods. Praising the demigods may be there. But even those songs
are often, you know, sung by professional musicians. Who are singing not out of
devotion. But they are singing because of, you know, you know, the desire for
profit. You know. You know. You know. They are singing so that they can become
famous. They can earn money. So, that sort of, you know, you know, worship of
the devatas is not going to lead to much spiritual advancement. You know. You
know. Actually speaking, by the worship of devatas, also, even if it is done
properly, that is only gradual spiritual advancement. You know. When Krishna is
saying that the worship of Himself. If it is done with, you know, with material
motives, from there to come to pure surrender may take many lifetimes. And if
somebody is doing worship of devatas with material motives. From there to come
to Krishna worship may take a very long, much more l..., much longer time. And
that is why, you know, you know, it is a, it is not a particularly encouraging
or elevating. It is not particularly, you know, you know, it is not something
which, as devotees, we should encourage. Whenever we get the forum, you know, we
should spea..., we do not have to hurt people's sentiments if they are doing
demigod worship. But we can guide them. Many people are uninformed. And because
they are uninformed, they just do not know that there is something wrong over
here. So, we can, you know, we can gently, you know, but, you know, gravely
explain that how demigod, if at all somebody has to do demigod worship, then we,
they should do them, wor..., worship properly. The best way is by connecting
the, you know, glorification of the demigod with the ed..., ed..., with the
education of the position of the demigod as the Supreme Lor..., as the servant
of the Supreme Lord. But that is why Krishna is telling over here. It is not
that all of this will lead to the same result. So, if somebody is doing a
worship of the devata, it is not that that by worshipping that devata, that
person will go back to Krishna. Ok. This, very clearly, Krishna is telling:

        devān deva-yajo yānti

That those who worship the devatas will go to devatas. And:

        mad-bhaktā yānti mām api

Those who worship Me will come back to Me. And because, you know, attaining Me
is eternal attainment. You know. Attaining the abode of the devatas is temporary
attainment. Therefore, the two cannot be equated. And that is why He says,
"alpa-medhasām". Those who worship Me are less intelligent. You know. So, now,
this "alpa-medhasām" can be contrasted with what was talked about in 7.19 at the
start of this section. You know. "jñānavān". So, those who are "jñānavān", they
surrender to Me. Then, Krishna says that, you know, those who are, those who
su..., Krishna continues, the word of, you know, use of the word "jñānāḥ" in the
next verse. In 7.20. And He says that, you know, "kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ".
So, the knowledge has been stolen away. And somebody may say, ok, knowledge has
stolen away by material desires. But they at least started worshipping the
devatas. They did not get into sinful, materially sinful, you know, activities
for fulfillment of material desires. Yes, that is good. So, therefore, they have
some "medhasām". But their "medhasām" is "alpa-medhasām". It is not very great.
Because they are not aspiring for the eternal. They are aspiring for something
temporary, only. "devān deva-yajo yānti". So, those who worship the devatas will
go to the devatas. And that is why it is less intelligent. You know. For a human
being, who is capable of attaining eternal result, a seeking something temporary
is selling oneself short. It is what? Selling oneself short. One could get so
much, something so much greater. But one chooses to, you know, settle for
something such small, so small. You know. We discussed if somebody is, a student
is in IOT. And this IOT is a primer educational institute. And in this, while
being in IOT, the student does not think of how I can study. And how bright
career. Student just thinks, you know, where can I get the best food to eat? And
the hostel, you know, mess is terrible. So, what I will do is, I will go around
in the nearby. Not just in the campus. Outside, also. I just, whole day, that
person spends time only searching. Where can I get the best food to eat? Well,
if the goal is to eat food, one does not have to be in IOT. You know. One can
find food anywhere to eat. So, if one has got the privilege of being in IOT,
and now, we all need to eat. So, eating is important. But eating is not
all-important. So, eating is just one part of life. The real purpose of being in
IOT is to study and have a bright career. Similarly, you know, our life has a
material side. And the material side is important. So, it is not to be entirely
rejected. Or neglected. But we have to understand, also, that the material side
of the, m..., of life, is not all-important. You know. Even the animals are
taking care of the material side. So, we have to rise to a higher level of
understanding. We have to rise to the level of understanding that there is a
spiritual side of our life. And that is what should be our f..., primary focus.
So, when we understand that and focus on that, then we can attain ete...,
eternal result. As long as we are focusing on the material side, we will get
only a temporary result. That is why "alpa-medhasām". So, after describing this,
now, Krishna will describe the second category. So, what is going on in this
section? Krishna is talking about those who surrender. Those who do not
surrender. So, when He talks about those who do not surrender, He talks about
those who, you know, you know, those who do not surrender to Him b..., m...,
those who surrender to something other than Him. But which is connected with
Him. So, that is the devatas. So, now, apart from the devatas, somebody may also
wor..., start worshipping the, you know, con..., impersonal conception. For
those kind of people, Krishna talks about in this verse now.

        avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ
        manyante mām abuddhayaḥ
        paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto
        mamāvyayam anuttamam

So, "avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ". Hmm. "avyaktaṁ" means which is unmanifest. You
know. "vyaktim āpannaṁ". Hmm. Became manifest. So, those who think that I was
unmanifest earlier. And have become manifest now.

        avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ
        manyante mām abuddhayaḥ

Those who think like this. They are "abuddhayaḥ". Why are they "abuddhayaḥ"?
Because "paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto". They do not know my supreme nature. What is
that supreme nature? "mamāvyayam anuttamam". That I am "avyayam". Imperishable.
And I am "anuttamam". I am the finest. "uttamam". "tamam" is darkness. "uttamam"
is that which is beyond darkness. You know. "uttamam" is also superlative
glorification. Best. That is also used for the, used to describe "uttamam". So,
"avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ". Hmm. One is unmanifest before. But then, one becomes
manifest. You know. So, that now, what is this talking about? This is referring
to, not just the impersonal conception in terms of brahmavada. It is terms,
impersonal conception in terms of mayavada. We discussed the difference between
brahmavada and mayavada is, brahmavadis att..., brahmavadis are attracted to the
impersonal conception. You know. And they, they do not know about the personal
conception. Or they are not attracted to that personal conception. Because they
are not associated with the devotee who has attraction to the personal
conception. So, these are the brahmavadis. So, they are not offensive. But
mayavadis are those who are not only attracted t..., who to the imp..., per...,
impersonal conception. But they also consider the personal conception to be
transitional. To be temporary. In fact, they are, consider that personal
conception to be a convenient fiction. Convenient fiction means that they think
that this is just a tool by which one can move from a lower-level of reality to
a higher-level of reality. So, because we are, you know, you know, because we
are conditioned to think in terms of form. So, we cannot think of the formless.
And therefore, just think of some form. And meditate on that form. And then
afterwards, you can transcend that form. That is the conception. But that
conception is, Krishna is telling, those who think like this are "abuddhayaḥ".
So, they are, "abuddhayaḥ" means having no intelligence. "buddhayaḥ". "buddhi"
is intelligence. "a", the prefix "a" actually re..., here acts as a contrast.
So, m..., it is, it acts as a, m..., m..., prefix which negates what comes after
that. You know. You know. Now, when Krishna is describing "abuddhayaḥ". Why is
He saying so strongly about this? Because these are mayavadis who offend His
form. "avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ". That means they think that, actually, eternal
reality is the impersonal conception. That is Brahman. And temporarily, that
Brahman has manifested as, you know, Bhagavan. So, what is their idea? That,
al..., Brahman alone is transcendental. Now, there are many brands of mayavada.
You know. When we use the word mayavada, we use it like a rubber band. You know.
Expandable. And practically, anybody and everybody who has a, i..., some im...,
impersonal coneption. We put all of them in the category of mayavada. Mayavadis.
You know. That is not necessarily t..., you know, are wrong. But nor does it
entirely accurate. So, we discussed the difference between brahmavadis and
mayavadis. So, those who are offensive, their idea is, we will talk about one
particular conception of mayavada. Their idea for example is that the Brahman is
the only reality. And, you know, Brahman alone is transcendental. And we know
that there is tattva-traya. There is J..., Jig..., Jagat, Jiva and Jagadisha. So,
Jagadish is the Supreme Lord. There is Ja..., Jiva is the living entity. And
Jagata is the material nature. So, this is tattva-traya. You know. Jagat, Jiva
and Jagadish. Which is often talked about in the, you know, philosophical
circles. In the Upanishads, as well elsewhere. So, when these three are talked
about, Jiva, Jagat and Jagadish, at that time, what is the focus of this
discussion? What is the purpose of this discussion? The focus, the purpose of
this discussion is a gradual ascend. You know. That one understand these three
categories. And one understand that, you know, the Supreme Lord is the ultimate
reality. And all other are His energies. Which rest on Him. This, Krishna has
talked about in the S..., Seventh Chapter itself. In verses four, five, and six.
"bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ". And "apareyam itas tv anyāṁ". But the mayavadi idea is
that the Bhagavan, the Brahman alone is the ultimate reality. That Brahman alone
is transcendental. And so, this is different transcendence. This is goodness,
passion and ignorance. So, their idea is that when Brahman comes in contact
with, you know, goodness. Then, what results is Jagadish. What results is what
we call as Bhagavan. So, that means, Bhagavan is what? Bhagavan is Brahman
contaminate..., contaminated by contact with matter in the form of goodness. And
when Brahman comes in contact with the mode of passion, that leads to the
formation of Jiva.

So, all of us are Brahman. But when Brahman comes in contact with passion, that
leads to formation of Jiva. And when Brahman comes in contact with ignorance,
that leads to the formation of matter. Jan..., Jada. Jada-tattva. That is Jagat.
So, their conception is that, you know, ultimately, you know, Bhagavan is also
material. Everything is Brahman. But when Brahman is covered by different kinds
of illusions, Brahman covered by Sattvik illusion is Jagadish. Brahman covered
by Rajasic illusion is Jiva. Brahman covered by Tamasic illusion is Jagat. So,
this is their idea. Now, the problem with this idea is that, actually, it makes
Bhagavan not transcendental. But it makes Bhagavan, or Jagadish here in this
context, in this, you know, particular t..., f..., terminology as material. When
time and time again, Krishna has categorically explained that, you know, He is
not material. In the same chapter, Krishna has talked in 7.12 and 13:

        matta eveti tān viddhi
        na tv ahaṁ teṣu te mayi

So, in 7.12, He has said that, you know, you know, everything in this material
world comes from the three modes. But these modes are on, they are in, I am, are
in Me. They are not in them. They, I am, they are in Me. I am not in them.
"matta eveti tān viddhi". They come from Me. "na tv ahaṁ". I am not in them.
They, "na tv ahaṁ teṣu te mayi". They are in Me. And again, the next 7.13 also
says:

        mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam

So, He is saying that, everything is covered by the three modes. But I am
transcendental to three modes. So, in this way, Krishna's statement is very
clear. Very categorical. But unfortunately, the impersonalists, they make that
Brahm..., Bhagavan who is transcendental to be material. And when they make Him
to be material, then they make Bhagavan, who is the indispensable ultimate
truth, into a dispensable temporary tool. What do they do? They make the
indispensable Absolute Truth into a dispensable temporary tool. You know. You
know. How temporary tool? Their idea is that, ok, you can meditate on Bhagavan
as long as you are not very intelligent. As long as you are not very evolved.
So, you can worship on meditate on a form. And ultimately, you have to go beyond
form. So, often, these people, they may not even tell this reality initially.
For general people, they say that, ok, for less intelligent people, they will
tell about demigod worship. And for more intelligent people, then they will talk
about something higher. You know. It is not like that. Actually, you know, even
for more intelligent people and for less intelligent people, bhakti is so
all-encompassing that kinds of people can take it up. So, here, we say,
"jñānavān māṁ prapadyate". That in the, wise people surrender to Him. And
Krishna will talk about in that Ninth Chapter, in 22nd, 23rd verses. That, you
know, you know, that even those who are lowborn:

        māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya
        ye ’pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ
        striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās
        te ’pi yānti parāṁ gatim

That even the lowborn can become elevated and liberated. So, in that sense,
actually, anybody and everybody can become elevated and liberated. So, there is
no need to have this misconception. At least, it is not scripturally based. The
misconception that only those who are, m..., m..., less intelligent. They should
worship the, you know, you know, Bhag..., personal aspect. So, this is a, not
just a misconception. But it is a monstrous misconception. Why monstrous? Like a
monsterous. Monster devours and destroys. So, this is a monstrous misconception.
That devours and destroys our bhakti. Because, you know, you know, you know,
materialism directs our love away from Krishna. But, you know, this sort of
mayavada makes us think that giving up that love for Krishna is spiritual
advancement. See, materialism at least does not put us under illusion that I am
spiritually advanced. Materialism makes us feel, yes, ok, forget about spiritual
advancement. Materially, material enjoyment will give me great ha..., greater
happiness. When we are practicing spiritual life, you know, then we could
understand, ok, material enjoyment is not what it is made out to be. It is made
out to be such a big thing. But actually, the pleasure is very temporary. So,
there has to be something higher in life. So, that ultimate higher taste is a
taste of bhakti. But when one starts worshipping the impersonal conception and
the mayavadi misconception, then one starts thinking that bhakti is
transitional. And going beyond the feelings of bhakti is actually supreme. And
that is terrible. You know. We have the, that is a terrible misconception which,
you know, deprives people of the higher taste of bhakti. And ultimately, leaves
them with nothing. Why it leaves them with nothing? Because, you know, there is
no tangible taste in contemplating on a formless reality. So, the conception of
Brahman, which the impersonalists have, which the mayavadis have, it is devoid
of attributes. It devoid, devoid of pastimes. Devoids of reciprocation. And
actually, there is very little ecstasy in contemplating on that. And because of
that, not getting a spiritual taste, people come back to material taste. That is
why Srila Prabhupada writes in the First Canto, First Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavatam that this, you know, impersonalism has actually led to increasing
materialism in many ways. So, some mayavadis have this idea, you know, now, we
know there are five rasas. So, these five rasas are based on the progressive
levels of intimacy. So, in da..., santa, there is distance. Distant revelation.
And in, progesssively, as we move forward towards madhurya, there is intense
intimacy. So, that is, so the mayavada, so these are, all five are eternal
rasas. Which are there in the spiritual world. And different devotees are in
these rasas. But the mayavadis take the same hierarchy. And that which is
eternal, they make it transitional. They say, initially, when you are
worshipping God, you think of an object as very, veneration. But when you
advance further, then you understand that is object of service. Then, when you
advance further, you go closer to God. When you understand He is a friend. He
is not just your master. Then, when you go further, then you understand that,
actually, God is not your parent. You get to, you have to care for God as you
would care for you child. And then, when you go further, then you understand
that you care for God as if He is your most intimate beloved. And then, when you
go further, so, each of these, we are going closer. Closer. Closer. In dan...,
dan..., in "santa-rasa", you are far away. "dasya-rasa". Clo..., further close.
"sakhya-rasa". Further close. "vatsalya-rasa". Closer. "madhurya-rasa". Closer.
And then, when you come closest. Tuck. You become one with God.

So, they came that the, so, actually, they think that the impersonal merging is
higher than "madhurya", also. So, this sak..., terribly misun..., terrible
misunderstanding. Because whatever, there is someo..., there is some joy in
meditating on the Absolute Truth. There is, it is called as Brahmananda. But
their Brahmananda is nothing as compared to Bhaktyananda. So, in the hierarchy,
from negative axis, that is material enjoyment, the zero point is, you know, the
impersonal realisation. There is neither material happiness, nor positive
spiritual happiness. Then, beyond that, as we move forward. And then, there is
this scale where the highest spiritual happiness comes in. "madhurya-rasa". But
the impersonalists, what they do is, that which is the, that which is at the
bottom end of the spiritual hierarchy, they, you know, as surreptitiously, they,
you know, clandestinely, they con..., by their misinterpretation, they place
that at the highest level. So, Brahman is the first level in spiritual
realisation. After that comes Paramatma. And Bhagavan is the highest. But they
change the whole thing upside down. And they say Bhagavan is lower. And Brahman
is the highest. So, the, you know, Brahmananda is the lowest. But they make the
Brahmananda as higher than "madhurya", also. And in this way, they completely,
you know, you know, you know, make a mess of people's spiritual conceptions. And
that is why Krishna says "abuddhayaḥ". Such people come, they are, n..., have no
intelligence. And Krishna will talk about their destination later in 13 and,
in 9.13 and 14. At that time, we will discuss further about this. But "paraṁ
bhāvam ajānanto". They do not know My transcendental nature. What is that
transcendental nature? Krishna has talked again, and again, and again in the
Bhagavad Gita. "ajo ’pi sann avyayātmā". He has talked about in 4.6. "janma
karma ca me divyam". He says, these are not, these form and activity is, He
says, appearance and activities  are not mundane. They are transcendental. They
are transcendental. So, when one understands this, then one can actually take
shelter of Krishna. And then, go beyond the impersonal for..., reality to the
personal reality. That is the ultimate goal of life. That is the ultimate
perfection of life. So, the impersonalists are also making, going to make some
spiritual advancement. If they are not offensive to the Supreme Lord. You know.
So, if they are offensive, then they can get into lot of trouble in their
spiritual progress. And they can create a lot of trouble for others, also. So,
in this section, from 13 to 24, we have discussed, you know, why one should
surrender to Krishna. And then, those who surrender, those who surr..., those
who do not surrender to Krishna. Those who surrender to Krishna. And then, after
that, two categories among those who do surrender, but not to Krishna. One is
the devatas. Those who surrender to devatas. And the other is those who, you
know, go towards the impersonal conception. Now, Krishna will talk about, will
elaborate in the assurance given in 7.14 that by surrendering to Him, one goes
beyond maya. So, how does that happen? How does surr.., surrender to Him take
one beyond maya will be the discussion of the last section. 25 to 30. That we
will discuss in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
