Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9UqNlbdHJM0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=9UqNlbdHJM0&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_107_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_10_Text_19_to_26_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=bviMQMY1NUjd2xm3hLdfIgUD3lx8MTU0ODQ4ODk4M0AxNTQ4NDAyNTgz

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are about to start wth the description of the "vibhūti"s of Krishna. So, Arjuna
has accepted from 10.12 onwards the conclusion that Krishna is the ultimate
truth. And then, he makes a request. In 10.16-17-18, asking:

        vistareṇātmano yogaṁ

Please describe in detail Your glories.

        yābhir vibhūtibhir lokān
        imāṁs tvaṁ vyāpya tiṣṭhasi

Your "vibhūti"s by which You have pervaded this world. So, Krishna will start
describing from 10.19. You know. Let us look at the first verse. So, from here
onward, 19 to 42. It is a list of, you know, the "vibhūti"s of Krishna. Along
with some, espe..., some m..., introductory verses. And some concluding verses.
So, we will look at the introductory verse. And then, try to understand what is
happening when Krishna is identifying Himself with certain things in the world.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        hanta te kathayiṣyāmi
        divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ
        prādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha
        nāsty anto vistarasya me

So, "hanta te". "hanta" is yes. Actually, "hanta" is expression of joy. Or
delight. "kathayiṣyāmi". Yes. I will speak. "divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ". You, my,
m..., "ātma-vibhūtayaḥ". My glories. My opulences. You know. You know. At
divine, they are, I will speak about them. But when I speak, what will? I will
speak. "prādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha". "prādhānyataḥ". I will speak the principle
ones amongst them. "nāsty anto vistarasya me". Because My glories are endless.
Actually, there is no limit to those, you know, opulences. Now, at first glance,
this might seem to be like an egomaniac statement. You know. If we ask, you
know, somebody comes to a get together. A party. Or a meeting. And we tell that
person, please introduce yourself. And he says, how? My introduction is endless.
You know. I will just speak a few points about my introduction. You know. What
kind of arrogant person this is? So, well, he would speak like that. Feel like
that. And maybe even speak like that about that person who says my glories are
endless. They, and, and we would be justified in many ways in speaking such a
thing. Then, how do we understand that Krishna speaking like this about His own
glories? That My glories are endless? Here, the important point is again to see
that there is a context to what Krishna is speaking. In the con..., if we think
that Krishna is proud, then we just have to look at Kri..., what Krishna is
doing. He is a charioteer. So, actions speak louder than words. And Krishna's
actions are showing that, out of love, He is becoming the servant of His
devotee. And He is taking the menial position of a charioteer. Which is like a
chauffeur's position. You know. And, you know, certainly, that is not a position
that a status-hungry person will ever take up. But what Krishna is doing over
here is, answering Arjuna's question. And giving all of us an opportunity to
redirect our attraction from the things of this world to the Lord who is the
source of all those doings. And whose attractiveness manifests fragmentally in
the things of this world. So, you know, you know, there is a doctor who, you
know, who says to, to a patient who is critically sick. The patient must do
some very, you know, urgently needed surgery. Otherwise, the patient will die. But
the patient is doubtful. Should I do this surgery? Is the doctor competent
enough? Will I recover? Is it necessary? All the doubts are there. So, maybe,
the patient is thinking. Maybe, I will go to some other doctor. And some other
doctor. And when the patient, doctor recognises that. No. This patient is sick.
And needs surgery immediat..., and doctor may say, actually, I have done
hundreds of surgeries like this. And even if you go to any of the other doctors,
all those doctors are my students, only. And I have trained them. And now, if
that is a fact, if that is a reality, if it is true that that doctor has only
trained the other students. Then, when the doctor speaks that reality, that is
not out of ego. That is because of necessity. So, it is necessary for this, you
know, patient to have the regulative, faith in the doctor by which the doctor
can heal the patient. Similarly, you know, the con..., conditioned soul has the
doubt. Should I surrender to Krishna? Will it really make me happy? You know.
There are so many other things which also promise happiness. Maybe, I should go,
enjoy those things, also. So, Krishna tells, actually whatever attractive you
find in this world, Krishna will tell this in 10.41. In the conclusion of this
chapter that:

        mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam

"mama tejo-’ṁśa". It is all, but a spark of My splendor. The spark. So, Krishna
is telling that actually, you do not have to. You do not have to go in all these
directions. Because a spark can give only a little bit of light. There is the
whole flyer. The whole sun can give much more light. So, Krishna says, all the
things of this world, whatever beauty they have, that is like a spark. And I am
the whole. I am the source. And what I can give you is far greater. Therefore,
you know, it is for this purpose that Krishna speaks. And to the extent we are
attracted to the things of this world, to that extent, we are diseased. In our,
the misdirection of our desires from God to the things of the world, you know,
without seeing their connection with God, that misdirection is the cause of our
suffering. So, you know, the redirection of our desires is what is required.
That is the whole process of healing. And that redirection requires
philosophical understanding. So, Krishna is offering that philosophical
unerstanding to us. And, you know, that is why He says, yes, there are so many
attractive things in this world. And they are all connected with Krishna. So,
Krishna will not give a list of everything in the world. He will give
"prādhānyataḥ". Principal to teach the, to demonstrate and, you know,
emphasize the principle. Which He will give in the conclusion. So, the word
"vibhūti". "vibhūti". What does it mean actually? The word "bhūta" is often used
for existence. You know. You know. You know. "brahma-bhūta". That means
spiritual existence. So, "vib...", the word "brahma-bhūta" comes many times in
the Bhagavad Gita.

        brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

That will come right at the, towards the end. 18.54. That one who is situated in
the "brahma-bhūta" platform, that person is joyful. Because free from hankering
and lamentation. So, "bhūta" means existence. "vibhūti" means special existence.
"vi" is, "vi" generally a prefix that, you know, means "vishesha". "vibhūti"
means, you know, actually, special existence. Special manifestation. So, in this
world, there are hundreds of things. You know. If a log of wood is lying on the
ground. That is "vibhūta". But that is not a "vibhūti". That is also existing.
But if from several logs of wood, an ar..., artistic masterpiece, maybe a
table with intricate curve, carvings. And, you know, polishing is there. Oh.
That attracts the attention. So, "vibhūti" means those things, those "bhūti"s,
tho..., tho..., that are "vishesha". Those material manifestations that helps
them special attraction. Those which attract our attention. And Krishna will
explain that these which attract our attention, you know, can be connected with
Krishna. So that we become attracted to Krishna instead of those things. So, let
us try to understand how this "Vibhuti Yoga" works. So, "vibhūti" is the
manifestation, the extraordinary manifestation of this world. Now, yoga means
connection. So, "Vibhuti Yoga" which is the name of this chapter in sanskrit.
"The Opulence of the Absolute" is the English name. "Vibhuti Yoga". So, how does
"vibhūti" bring about yoga? You know. The things of this world attract us. You
know. There may be a giant building. A magnificent, you know, shape. Or star
spor..., or excellent sport star. An eloquent speaker. All these are various
things in the material world. Things. People that attract us. So, "vibhūti"s are
there always. And they will attract us. But when we understand philosophically
that these "vibhūti"s are coming from Krishna, then that Krishna connection,
that perception of the Krishna connection becomes the yoga. So, there may be
some mo..., movie star. Who is extremely good-looking. People are attracted to
that movie star. That also, that beauty of that movie star. Or that is also
a "vibhūti". But that "vibhūti" does not remind people of Krishna. That does not
lead to yoga. That leads to bhoga. That leads people to sense gratification. You
know but when one understands that, ok, the, you know, var..., various beautiful
manifestation of this world, various powerful manifestations, whatever
attractive manifestation is. Beauty. Power. Strength. Beauty. Power.
Intelligence. Whatever. All of them, they are getting a, you know, they are just
reflecting a spark of Krishna's splendor. So, when we, when there is perception
of the Krishna connection o..., with, from the "vibhūti" to Krishna. Then, that
will lead to yoga. And it is that connection, that Krishna is highlighting in
this chapter. So, you know, now, there are different ways in which one can
approach the spiritual reality. Let us look at these ways. So, in Vedanta, there
are basically, you know, Vedanta is the Ve..., Ve..., you know, the
"Vedānta-sutra" is the primary book of Vedanta. But Vedanta is one of the six
systems of philosophy. And that has theistic. And athei..., and personalistic
and non-personalistic interpretations. So, but Vedanta focuses on radical
differentiation between matter and spirit. Naiti. Naiti. Naiti. That is the
Upanishadic way. The Vedantic way. Am I, Am I this body? Am I these fingers? Am
I these hands? Am I this skin? Am I this blood? No. No. No. No. So, in this way,
no. No. No. By thus saying no, what happens is, one rejects matter. And then,
moves towards spirit. And that is why generally in the Upanishadic, the Vedantic
way, renunciation of the world is considered very important. Because matter is,
you know, matter is false. Matter is illusory. Matter causes bondage. So, one
should give up matter. So, there is a radical differentiation between matter and
spirit. That is the Vedantic way. Now, there is the Bhagavat viddhi. Yes. Now, we
will see the, just before that. Before we see this way. This Vedantic
differentiation between matter and spirit. We see this in the Bhagavad Gita,
also. In the Second Chapter, especially. Krishna is describ..., is pointing
towards the soul with many negative epithets. You know.

        nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi
        nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ
        na cainaṁ kledayanty āpo
        na śoṣayati mārutaḥ

So, in 2.23, He describes that, no. No. No. The soul is not burnt by fire. The
soul is not pierced by weapons. The soul is not win..., you know, you know,
blown away by the wind. The soul is not, you know, you know, you know, dissolved
by water. Like that.

        acchedyo ’yam adāhyo ’yam
        akledyo ’śoṣya eva ca

Same. Negatives. "a". "a". "a". "a". No. No. No. N..., there is previous verse.
2.23 was no. No. 2.24 is "a". "a". "a". Both no and "a" are negative describers.
Negative prefixes. So, the differentiation between matter and spirit on a
radical basis is talked about in the Bhagavad Gita, also. You know. The Bhagavad
Gita is an integration of, you know, various, you know, strands of Vedic
thought. And at this one, this particular Vedantic, you know, you know,
differentiation between matter and spirit is also talked about in the Bhagavad
Gita. So, apart from this Vedantic way of differentiating between matter and
spirit. And then, leaving matter so that one can app..., approach spirit. There
is alt..., other ways, also. There is the Bhagavat way. The Bhagavat way, the
focus is on sound. Sound is the way from matter to spirit. That is the Bhagavat
viddhi. So, what does it mean?

       iti mūrty-abhidhānena
       mantra-mūrtim amūrtikam

The "Bhāgavatam" describes, you know, you know, "iti mūrty-abhidhānena". One can
worship the form. What will? "mantra-mūrtim amūrtikam". That Lord who is
unmanifest. "amūrtikam". As now manifest as "mantra-mūrtim". As the sacred
sound. So, when we chant the Hare Krishna maha mantra. When we hear Krishna
Katha. At that time, what are we doing? We are i..., we are actually taking
shelter of sound. And that sound is enabling us to rise from matter to spirit.
So, sound is extremely important. And we will see that, often, when we are
feeling anxious. If we can just, you know, connect with the sound of the holy
name. Hear some soothing kirtan. Hear some, you know, now, you know, some
prayerful bhajan. Then is, immediately, the mind becomes calm. Why? Because our
consciousness is raised. Whatever be the specific cause for the agitation and
anxiety of the mind, the generic reason is the increase in the modes of passion,
ignorance. So, there is ignorance. Passion. Goodness. And transcendence. So, the
sound of the holy name exists and, and the sounds connected with Krishna, they
exist at the transcendental level. So, you know, beyond whatever causes, we,
might be there. You know, for the specific, you know, you know, for the specific
causes that may be there, that is what, of our problems, the, we may have to
address them at the practical level. But at the same time, when we hear and
think about Krishna at that, and especially exp..., expose ourselves to sound
vibrations. Then, those sound vibrations being at the transcendental level, they
lift us to the transcendental level. And by that way, we become purified. We
become purified and pacified. We rise from the contaminations, the lower modes
towards goodness and transcendence. And by that, the anxiety itself drops away
gradually. So, sound is the way from matter to spirit. That is the Bhagavat
viddhi. And that is our principle meth..., method of worship. We hear about
Krishna. Along with that, there is Tantra viddhi, also. Now, the word tantra
sometimes has a negative connotation. But that is not necessary it is negative.
The matt..., idea of tantra is matter itself can be used in a way to spirit. So,
tantra, you know, now, tantra is of two types. There is light...., right-hand.
And left-hand. So, right-hand tantra is auspicious. It is called as deity
worship. Deity worship. And the "Pāñcarātra" scriptures, where, you know, are
based on that principle itself. That, you know, you know, when the Lord
manifests as a deity, you know, the Lord manifests in all-attractive way. You
know. The Lord Himself is all-attractive. But here, when He manifests as a
deity, He is all-attrative. He becom..., manifests in all-attractive way means
that people can perceive Him. And if the deity is beautiful, deity is de..., you
know, gorgeously decorated. Prayerfully worshipped. Then, people feel, oh, so
beautiful. People feel attracted. So, the point is, matter, now, is the deity
matter? Actually, the deity is now, deity is Krishna. But the deity is made of
material elements. And the material elements are, you know, you know, you know,
you know, spiritualised by the invoking of the deity, invoking the Lord through
the "prana pratistha". So, the important point is that matter can be a means to
spirit. So, we use our senses to behold the deity. To serve the deity. To cook
for the deity. To dance for the deity. And in this way, even our material body,
material senses can be used in Krishna's service. So, now, these two are
different approaches. Now, I am not the body. I am the soul. I am not material.
I am spiritual. That is one approach.

And deity worship is another approach. The underlying phi..., purpose and
philosophy is the same. The pupose is, we have to raise our consciousness from
the material level to the spiritual level. You know. And that can be achieved by
various means. If somebody just stays at the material level, consciousness. Even
if that person seems to be carefully worshipping the deity, that person does not
really, you know, make spiritual advancement. Unless there is a tran..., and there
is a redirection of the desires from material to spiritual. Otherwise, the
person may rem..., remain ritualistic worshipper. So, now, in tantra viddhi,
there is left-hand and right-hand. So, right-hand is deity worship which is
sattvic worship. And then, there is, here, left-hand tantra is tamasic worship.
So, tamasic means, you know, we may have seen some images on television. In the
west, also, this is their voodoo which craft. You know, Somebody makes a,
somebody wants to hurt some, some, hurts somebody else. Then, that person goes
to a person who can do black magic. Tantric. And the tantric, you know, makes a
figurine of that person. And then, that person pinches that person with a
needle. Aaa..., and that person far away starts screaming. Now, much of this may
be exaggeration. Some of which may be entirely fabrication, also. But there is,
you know, you know, there is underlying reality in it. That there are people.
There are people who have those powers. And tantra is a means by which people
can be hurt. So, generally, left-hand tantra is destructive. And devotees, you
know, do not, practice lef..., you know, or c..., encourage anyone to pracice
that kind of tantra. It is tamasic. You know. And in this tantra, only, there is
the whole idea that, you know, sex can also be a means to approach God. Now,
when sex is used within dharmic framework, then it is, you know, then that
performance of dharma gradually elevates a person. So, but the idea here is that
sex itself can be means to approach God. Matter can take one to spirit. That is
not idea that is supported in the scriptures. In fact, it is a dangerous idea.
Because, you know, you know, there are few things that make us as bodily
conscious, as material conscious, materially conscious as sex. And they think
that by doing that activity more and more, one will become spiritually
conscious. You know. That is like saying that by drinking poison, I will become
healthy. You know. It is not possible. You know. You know. So, now, what is
happening in Vibhuti Yoga? Let us look at this. So, the point is, extraordinary
material manifestations reflect spark of Krishna's glory. That is what He will
tell in 10.41. We will come to that in due course of time. Then, you know, you
know, such manifestations naturally attract our attention. And so can be used as
impetuses, is, to remember Krishna. The purpose is to focus on Krishna. Not the
specific manifestation. You know. So, we look at attractive things. Most people
will just look at the attractive things and become attracted. You know.
Spiritualists will look at the attractive things. Will fo..., you know, admit
that these are attractive. But then, will look at the, you know, source of the
attractiveness of that thing. And will move from that particular thing to
Krishna. Move the attention. That is how one makes spiritual advancement. So,
that is what Prabhupada will explain in this chapter of, you know, you know, you
know, you know, this "Vibhuti Yoga". So, let us look at the "vibhūti" as
described in this chapter. So, ten, you know, this starts from ten point
twent..., 19 was an introductory verse where Krishna was telling that, now, I
will describe these to you. And I will describe the principle once among these.
You know. So:

        aham ātmā guḍākeśa
        sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ
        aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca
        bhūtānām anta eva ca 

"aham ātmā guḍākeśa". So, Arjuna is referred to here as "guḍākeśa". "guḍākeśa"
means one who has conquered sleep. Actually, the word "guḍākeśa" has many
means. Meanings. So, one of the meanings is, you know, you know, "guḍā", you
know, the "guḍā" is darkness. The, the "guḍākeśa". One who has conquered sleep.
Another meaning of "guḍākeśa" is "guḍā". "guḍā" refers to Gud Jagri. And "ḍā" is
Brahma. "iśa" is Shiva. So, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura explains that
"guḍākeśa" means one who gives sweetness like Jagri even to Brahma and Shiva.
So, what does this mean? That actually the reciprocation of love between the
Lord and His devotees is so endearing that it attracts even great personalities
like Brahma and Shiva. And that reciprocation is possible when the devotees have
devotion. The Lord always has love for the devotees. But sinc..., the devotee
is, with sincerity and the intensity of the love of the devotees, that, you
know, brings forth the love from the heart. And makes the loving pastimes
possible. So, in, so, you know, here, Arjuna because of the sincerity and the
intensity of his devotion to Krishna, has, you know, made, you know, Krishna
ha..., Krishna serve him as the charioteer. And seeing this extraordinary
reciprocation of love brings tears, gives extraordinary devotional sweetness,
even to the hearts of Brahma and Shiva. So, the person whom, b..., allows this
wonderfully sweet manifestation of the Lord's, you know, love, you know, you
know, who makes this lo..., manifestation of Lord's love possible, that person
is called as "guḍākeśa". So, "aham ātmā guḍākeśa". I am the "ātmā". Which
"āt...", what kind of "ātmā"? "sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ". Who is situated in the
hearts of all living beings. "bhūtāśaya". I am situated in the heart of all
living beings. "sarva-bhūtāśaya". So, now, does this support an impersonalist
conclusion? All, the same soul is situated in all living beings. And I am that
soul. No. Krishna has earlier clearly stated that. "yena sar...", you know,
that, actually, the soul is, you know, fragmental. The soul is actually never to
be cut. What it is, "acchedyo ’yam". Soul is, what it is, it is always that
way. "avikāryo ’yam". It is unchanging. And Krishna has also said that the soul
is present in one body. In from here, if soul goes to another body. So, if the
soul is, the same soul is present in your body. And my body. The same soul is
present in all bodies. Then, there is no point in saying that the soul goes from
one body to another body. So, this clearly, or the word "ātmā" here, refers not
to the bo..., soul. It refers to the Supersoul. So, Krishna is basically, in
this first verse, telling, in the beginning itself, when He starts His
description of the opulences. He begins by describing how, His pervad..., how He
pervades space and time. So, it, space means, this living, in this existence,
there are many living beings. And Krishna says in the heart of all living
beings. "sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ". So, I pervade their heart. And then, there is
time. There is past. Present. And future. There is beginning. Middle. And end.
And Krishna says:

        aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca
        bhūtānām anta eva ca

I am the beginning. The middle. And the end. What does it mean? Beginning,
middle, and end of all living beings? Actually, you know, you know, what it
means essentially is that, you know, you know, "aham ādiś ca". I am the, we see
that, actually, the beginning, we could, you know, take it at various levels.
That all of, all of crea..., existence, beginning, there is just, the spiritual,
there is just "Mahavishnu". So, in that sense, He is the beginning of
everything. The name in, when we look at specific universe, there is,
"Garbhodakaśāyī" Vishnu is the first. And even within life, actually, the way
life eme..., every life emerges, it is quite a miracle. You know. The way, you
know, the ma..., male and the female parts come together. And how while I get
as I got this form. And eventually, a, you know, fully developed child comes
out. And that child goes up to become a person like you and me. That is quite an
extraordinary thing. So, life itself is a miracle. And that miracle is possible
by the arrangement of God.

        aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca

I am the middle, also. How is He the middle, also? Because ultimately, we are
not maintaining our body. You know. You know. It is not that, you know, I know
everything that is happening in my body. After I eat, I do not know how
digestion takes place. There has to be air around. Otherwise, I feel
suffocated. But it is not that I know how recipari..., respiration, or bo...,
know, you know, respiration takes place. Or how the fresh air, actually,
circulates, you know, and nourishes my body. I do not know any of these things.
So, I may play some part in maintaining. But I, I do not know maintain myself
entirely. It is Krishna who is the middle. There are so many things happening
in the body. Which we do not know about. You know. You know. We have discussed
earlier about how there is the voluntary systems in the body. And there are
involuntary systems. So, voluntary system is for example how I sit. If I sit in
a cramped way, then I might, you know, develop some pain. So, it is my
responsibility to sit properly. There are certain things in the body which are
in my control. But there are many which are not in my control. And yet, their
functioning is also important for my capacity to act efficiently. So, who is
maintaining all that? That is ultimately Krishna. So:

        aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca
        bhūtānām anta eva ca

So, Krishna will talk about how ultimately I am death. So, when death happens,
it is a fearsome, awesome, powerful event. You know. Everything that the person
has been worn..., work, working on, one moment, He takes away. You know. You
know. You know. Death rem..., demonstrates the finality, the, the finality of
death is unappealable. Generally speaking, in this world, in this world, if a
patient, if a person gets a court verdict against. You know. You are found
guilty. Then, that person can appeal. So, similarly, when we have some problems,
when somebody behaves inapp..., also, improperly. Or at least, we think it is
behaving improper..., he is behaving improperly with us. We can always appeal to
someone. But with the finality of death, it is unappealable. It is final.
Absolutely final. So, that is also an indicator of the power of God. Krishna is
saying that, now:

        aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca
        bhūtānām anta eva ca

which can also refer to the, you know, aspects of Brahman, Vishnu and Mahesh.
You know. Brahma gets his knowledge from Ti..., Vishnu. And Vishnu also is the
manifestation of Krishna. You know. And, you know, you know, Shiva also
ultimately gets his power from the Supreme Lord. So, that means the creation,
maintenance and destruction. Which are the beginning, middle and end phases of
existence. They are all done by the guna-avataras. You know. The, of, you know,
you know, passion, goodness, and ignorance, respectively. And these
guna-avataras are ult..., are manifestations of Krishna. So, in that sense,
Krishna says, I am all these things. Then, He describes after that:

        ādityānām ahaṁ viṣṇur
        jyotiṣāṁ ravir aṁśumān
        marīcir marutām asmi
        nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī

You know. You know. So, of the "Ādityas", I am Vishnu. You know. What does this
refer to? Actually, there can be multiple meanings of this. "ādityānām ahaṁ
viṣṇur". So, the word "ādityā" can have a literal meaning. The word
"ādityā" can have a specific meaning, also. Or a generic meaning, also. Now,
"ādityā". Now, actually, there are these, you know, when the, you know, sun
mo..., moves in its orbit. When the, basically, whichever way you are, if we
look at cosmology. There are 12 months. And accordingly, the, you know, space
can be divided into 12 sections. Zodiac as we know. There are constellations. It
is a whole complex system. But basically, the path, the cosmo..., the path of
the sky can be divided into 12 deve..., divisions. And according to Vedic
cosmology, each division is presided over by one-one form of, you know, you
know, "Āditya". And among them is, the most powerful among those forms is,
Kri..., form, then Vishnu. So, Krishna is saying that I am the "Āditya"..., one
of, among the "Āditya"s. You know. The most powerful among the "Āditya"s.

        ādityānām ahaṁ viṣṇur
        jyotiṣāṁ ravir aṁśumān

So, there are many effulgent objects. But the sun is so effulgent. You know. The
one sun has been, you know, has produced more energy. You know. F..., s...,
s..., than any or all of the energy plants that we have combined together. In
fact, all our energy plants, which is reflective just small fraction of the
energy that sun has sent out. So, this is Krishna, among all the effulgent
objects, I understand.

        marīcir marutām asmi

So, "marutām". Now, in the Vedic cosmology, it is understood that, actually,
what we see as just chance, impersonal forces, there are planned, personal
agents behind those forces. So, when we say, ok, this wind is blowing this way.
That wind is blowing that way. That is all fine. You know. In the ocean, you
know, or in the sh..., you know, you know, or in the, you know, rivers. The
direction of the wind is important. And the boatsmen, or the navigators, they
want to catch the right wind. So that they can go faster. And they will be
obstructed less. So they may say, ok, this wind is moving like this. This wind
is moving like this. And they may, give the names. Northeastern wind. This wind.
Tropical wind. Temperate wind. Whatever. That is fine at one level. But we also
understand that beyond all this, there is a higher reality. We have discussed
earlier about the billiards example. You know. The, all, f..., if we just look
from the limited perspective, the billiards board. Tuck. Tuck. Tuck. The sticker
is moving. The sticker is colliding with the ball. And the balls are moving here
and there. But then, outside the billiard board framework, if we see, then there
are persons who are holding the ticks. Sticks. And the expertise of those
persons determines whether the balls will go into the hole or not. So,
similarly, within limited perspetive, we say, ok, this wind is blowing in
northeast direction. That wind is blowing in the southwest direction. Whatever.
So, these are fine. As far as the limited perspective of gross material
reality is concerned. But beyond that, there is an alternative perspective,
also. A deeper perspective. And that is the perspective which incorporates or
integrates the cosmic controllers. So, there are various Maruts who are in,
there are, who are in charge of different winds. And among them, "Marīci" is the
most powerful. So, he represents Krishna. Now, when Krishna is saying, I am
these. What does it mean? You know. The "vibhuti", you know, can be understood
in one sentence. It is, vibhuti is one among the many, one above the many. What
does it mean? One among the many. One above the many. So, actually, you know,
you know, among the many material manifestations that are out there, so, one is
special. And, so, it is one among the many. And the "Vibhuti Yoga" enables us to
connect the one among the many with the one above the many. The Supreme Lord is
transcendental. The Supreme Lord exists at the spiritual level. And at the
spiritual level of reality, the Supreme Lord is all-attractive. And, you know,
that is the person to whom we want to be attracted. You know. You know. So, what
the, pa..., chapter of "Vibhuti Yoga" does is, it let..., it uses the one among
the many to take us to the one above of the many. So, one among the many is
particular manifestation of the Lord. You know. Material manifestation. Somebody
is extraordinary in this world. So, in the Vedic universe, all these are
extraordinary persons. You know. We may find the one familiar today. We may not
know the names. But we can have names from our context, also. This is the
"Vibhu...", principle of "Vibhuti Yoga" will apply. So, if there is, you know, a
very powerful cricketer. Now, there is a cricketer in India, who is called as
God by everyone. So, so and so is my God. And cricket is my religion, people
say. So, now, that cricketer has talent, has poten..., has, you know, you know,
extraordinary rec..., you know, abilities and records. You know. So, that person
is one among the many. Now, a materialistic person sees the one among the many.
And gets attracted. And then, after some time, when the one among the many loses
that power. Then, people say, you should retire now. Retire now. Why are you
waiting for so long? Let others come off. And people feel, face. So, these are
when we make a, human being into a God. It is not the that human being may
actually be talented, also. May have extraordinary abilit..., capacities. But
still, one cannot go on forever. So, the, with, that is, it is, that opulence is
a spark. That opulence is not the whole. The, you know, so, f..., we need to
move from the spark to the whole. So, how do we move from the spark to the
whole? By the connection. By the connection, that is established through
"Vibhuti Yoga". So, when we understand, ok, this person has talents. But how
have those talents come? They have come from the Supreme Lord. And, you know,
the Supreme Lord's attractive, all-attractiveness, that is manifested in various
ways. So, Krishna is using this point of the, let one among the many take us to
the one beyond the many. So, it is not that that person will take us. But we
take our consciousness which are attracted to that person. You know. Who is the
one among the many.  Distinctive. You know. Special among all these at the
material level. From there, we go to the spiritual level. So, one among the
many, the word among indicates, that that is also that sp..., that level itself.
That person is also material. So, that person is also existing in material
existence. And is material. One among the many. One above the many means,
refers to that person who is transcendental. So, from the one among the many to
the one above the many. That is how "Vibhuti Yoga" elevates us. Now, here, one
of the points is:

        nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī

"nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī" means among the, you know, stars, I am the moon. So,
here, you know, we have to understand a difference of nomenclature. You know.
You know. You know. Sometimes, we may, we, the, see, the, the Vedic universe is
diferent from, you know, in its conception is different from the conceptions of
the modern universe. So, you know, now, the word "nakṣatrā", you know, refers in
general to celestial bodies. So, stars in the nomenclature that is adopted by
modern science refers to particular celestial objects. Which reflect, you know,
which are, your know, themselves sources of light. And within the Vedic
cosmology, and within the mo..., modern cosmos, there are stars. Which give out
light. And there are planets which do not give out light. Planets simply reflect
light. And similarly, satellites are also like that. They also do not, they also
reflect light. So, you know, so, the sun is reflecting the light of the moon.
That is the understanding of modern science. But at the same, now, the bo...,
the Vedic scriptures contain both examples. You know. When the example is given
that, you know, at one place, it is said that, actually, the moon gives light.
You know. Just as the sun gives light in the day. And the moon gives light at
the night. Another place, it is said that, you know, you know, you know, in the
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta", it is said that, Lord Chaitanya is the principle moon.
And all the associates are like the stars. So, just as the stars, you know, give
fraction of light. And moon gives much more light. So, like that, the, Lord
Chaitanya gives su..., su..., supreme light. And the, you know, associates
give a little bit light. So, here, it may seem that the moon gives out light.
But Prabhupada also talks in some purports that, just as the sun gives light.
And the moon reflects the light. Similarly, the devotee reflects the light that
is coming from Krishna. The devotee's all-attractive, attractive qualities are
not, you know, Kri..., are not that devotee's independent qualities. They are
coming from Krishna. So, now, what does it mean? Sometimes, the moon is referred
to as an independent source of light. Sometimes, in the moon is said as a
reflector of light. So, actually, saptagni, saptarshi. Saptarishi. Actually,
saptarshi, so, sapta, sapta, sapta. There are re..., in the Vishnu Sahasranama,
there are thousand names that glorify Vishnu. And that there is series of names,
there is saptarshi. Actually, the Sarasvatī. Saptarshi. Saptagni. So, actually,
there are seven kinds of fire. And not all kinds of fire are exactly the same.
You know. They are of different nature. So, now, we know one kind of fire. You
know. We take a matchstick. We could take a matchstick. Trigger it. And then, we
will light some bonfire. That is the kind of fire we know. But there are
different kinds of fires. So, some fire, you know, you know, you know, so, some,
some fires are different from other fires. So, because, that is why there are
said to be seven kinds of fire. So, now, when the seven kinds of fires are
represen..., mentioned, what it indicates is there are different kinds of
energies, also. So, from the perspective of modern science, you know, it is true
at one level that the kind of light that the sun gives, those, moon does not
give that kind of light. So, that kind of light is simply reflected by the moon.
That is one aspect to it. The other aspect to it is that the moon also is not
just a barren, celestial object. We understand from the perspective that moon is
also higher reality. And because the, the moon also has higher reality. That is
the reality of the, you know, you know, of being a heavenly planet. Soman. Soma
Deva is the, in charge of the moon planet. And then, it gives a different kind
of light, also. That light may not be perceivable to us right now with our
perceptions. But that is also different kind of light. And the, it gives that
kind of light, also. So, actually, there is, when Kri..., when the point is made
that:

        nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī

The point, emphasis is what? That, you know, to our visible vision, when there
are many celestial objets. And among them, the most effulgent, most attractive
is this moon. So, similarly, you know, that, so, the moon attracts our
attention. And we understand the attractive potential of the moon, the capacity
to attract of the moon comes from Krishna. So, in that way, we move our
attention, you know, you know, from the world, from the moon to Krishna. So, the
point here is not on the specific source of energy or kind of energy. When we go
into that, then we can go into technical details. And reconcile the point that
the moon is not giving out the kind of light that the sun gives out. But in that
sense, the moon is simply a reflector of light. That is true. But the moon also,
being a higher planet, exists at a higher level. And gives, also, different
kind of light. That is not known to us. So, that is how we understand when they
recite the moon gives out light at some places in the scripture. So, but here,
the simple point is, based on an observational analysis, that, ok, the moon
gives out, among celestial objects that we see in the sky, the moon looks most
attractive. It looks, oh, so magnificent. So beautiful. Especially, full moon.
On a, you know, clear night. It looks attractive. So, Krishna says that that
moon's attractive potency comes from Me. "nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī". Then, He goes
on. And describes further. You know.

        vedānāṁ sāma-vedo ’smi
        devānām asmi vāsavaḥ
        indriyāṇāṁ manaś cāsmi
        bhūtānām asmi cetanā

So, "vedānāṁ". Among the Vedas. I am the Sāma Veda. Now, why is He Sāma Veda?
Actually, there are different Vedas. And they all serve specfic purposes. You
know. Of course, there is overlapping, also. So, Rigveda is generally used to
invoke that de..., inv..., invoke the various of devatas. You know. Yajurveda,
so, when the devatas, cel..., celes..., now, this is broa..., this is broad
classication. There may be some overlapping, also, in this. Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura gives this kind of classification. He says, when the devatas
had to be involved. Fire sacrifices are performed. They had to be invokved. So,
Rigveda contains man..., many verses which are for invocation. Yajur. Yajur
means to worship. Yajurveda contains wor..., wor..., the directions of how to
worship. How, when the Yajna is there, what all the mantras are so genit. And
Sāma is glorification. It contains beautiful verses that glorify the, you know,
that glorify the higher beings. So, you know, so, so, now, there is a very
beautiful section in the, over this. That is why it is said, among the Vedas, I
am the Sāma Veda. And, you know, "devānām asmi vāsavaḥ". So, actually, among the
Gods, I am Indra. I am Indra. Why Indra? Because Indra is the most powerful of
the Gods. He is the king of the God, it is said. "indriyāṇāṁ manaś cāsmi". So,
among the senses, sometimes, the mind is considered to be separate from the
senses. Because it is a part of subtle body. But often, the mind is groupped
with the senses.

        manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi

In 15.7, also, Krishna will say, there are six senses, which includes the mind.
And with these senses:

        prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

The living entity is struggling in material existence. So, now, among these, you
know, you know, these senses, the five senses are all centered around the mind.
And the mind is formidable. In fact, the "Bhāgavatam", in the anti-brahmana
section, the mind is like God itself. The God-like power of the mind is very
difficult to subdue. So, that is powerful mind. Where does the power of the mind
come from? That power is a manifestation of Krishna. So, that does not mean
that, you know, we have to put the mind on the altar. And do pūjā of the mind.
None of these are referring in that way. These are not meant to be, you know,
surrogate objects of worship. These are not alternative Gods whom we can worship
in replacement to Krishna. No. It is clearly told before this that these are the
vibhutis of Krishna. And these vibhutis help us to rise from the world to the
transcendental level. And that is the objective of these vibhuti. You know.
Objective means, an objective of this "Vibhuti Yoga" chapter. So, to help us to
direct our attention. So, when we think of the power of the mind. My God. You
know. It can, the mind can, as Thomas Baker said, the mind can make heaven out
of hell. And hell out of heaven. So, the way the mind can shape our perception,
completely inverted, distort, pervert, you know, our perception, it is scary.
So, that kind of power, when we see, then we understand. Ah, this is, this is
how God is powerful. This gives an ink..., the inkling, a small glimpse of the
power of God. "indriyāṇāṁ manaś cāsmi". And then, "bhūtānām asmi cetanā". So,
among the living entities, I am consciousness. So, actually, what makes living
entities living is, in many ways, is consciousness. So, without this
consciousness, they would not be called as living. They would be dead. And dead
matter may have its utility. But it cer..., certainly not, does not have what
life has. So, what distinguishes, what makes, you know, living entities
distinctive, is their consciousness. And Krishna says, I am that consciousness.
So, this does not mean again, the atma and the Paramatma are the same. We know
that the consciousness comes from the atma. So, it is not that Krishna is saying
I am that atma. And I am the consciousness of that atma. Krishna is saying that,
consciousness is what attracts. You know. Sometimes, if a person is completely
poker-faced. You know. Poker-faced means, totally inexpressive at all times. You
know. It is almost as if that person is unconscious. When the person goes into
coma. When the person becomes so fast asleep that there is no consciousness at
all. Then, that person is not very attractive. You know. What makes a person
attractive is consciousness. So, the more alive, the more conscious, the more
reciprocal, the more vibrant, the more active the person is, the more that
person has the capacity to be attractive. If, if that person is doing things
right. So, consciousness is of the foundation of everything else that may, that
makes a person attractive. Therefore, Krishna says, I am that consciousness.
Then, He further describes:

        rudrāṇāṁ śaṅkaraś cāsmi
        vitteśo yakṣa-rakṣasām
        vasūnāṁ pāvakaś cāsmi
        meruḥ śikhariṇām aham

So, "rudrāṇāṁ śaṅkaraś cāsmi". Among the Rudras, I am "śaṅkaraḥ". So, we know
that there are eleven Rudras. So, among them, one of them is "śaṅkaraḥ". And
"śaṅkaraḥ" is considered to be most powerful. Sometimes, these names are used
"interchangeably". You know. So, you know, you know, basically, we know that
from the, at this beginning of the creation when Brahmaji told a per..., told,
you know, the Kumaras, now, I have been given the service of, you know, creating
and, you know, procreating the universe. So, you help me in that. So, you beget.
So, you beget children. And then, grandchildren. And then, great-grandchildren.
And then, great-great-grandchildren. And great-great-great-grandchildren. And in
athis way, populate the universe. And then, the Kumaras said, there is nothing
great about that. We are not going to do it. So, Brahmaji felt angered by that.
And there is, anger came out as Rudra, as Rudra. And then, that Rudra expanded
into eleven expansions. So, the most prominent among them is "śaṅkaraḥ". So,
Krishna is telling that, I am that "śaṅkaraḥ". Again, this does not mean that
Krishna and Śiva are the same. You know. There are some commentators, there is a
famous kashmiri scholar, Abhinavagupta. He tried to reinterpret the whole
Bhagavad Gita to try to say that Bhagavad Gita proves Shiva is the Supreme
Personality of God. Now, you know, whatever one does, there is no reference to
Shiva apart from this, in the whole Bhagavad Gita, apart from this, you know,
one reference. And then, in the Eleventh Chapters, Shiva is one of the devatas,
also, who is being seen, you know, in the universal form. So, it is, it is a
completely, you know, futile attempt to try to prove that Shiva is the supreme.
Based on the Bhagavad Gita. This is "ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo". And in this, when
"ahaṁ" is being said, that person does not have a Trishul in his hand, and, you
know, and, you know, snake in his head. That person who is saying "ahaṁ sarvasya
prabhavo" is Krishna. So, this is simply telling that, ok, these Rudras are
well-known. And among them, the most attractive is "śaṅkaraḥ". So, "śaṅkaraḥ"'s
power, that comes from Me. So, do not be attracted to him. Become attracted to
Me.

        vitteśo yakṣa-rakṣasām

The "Yakṣas" and "Rākṣasas" are also, you know, you know, parts of the universal
existence. And they are considered to be little bit, you know, you know, rajasic
and tamasic. The "Rākṣasas" are much more tamasic. The "Rākṣasas" are a little
bit tama..., "Rākṣasas" are a little bit negative. But they are presided over by
Kuvera. So, Kuvera is the, you know, is the good one among the bad one in one
sense. Among the bad ones. So, he is attractive. And that, that attr..., makes
him attractive. "vitteśo". And he is the treasurer of the devatas. So, you know,
it is that with, that Kuvera, I am that.

        vasūnāṁ pāvakaś cāsmi

"vasūnāṁ pāvakaś cāsmi". So, there are kinds of, you know, fires. So, you know,
"pāvakaś cāsmi". You know. You know. So, actually speaking, so there are
different Vasus. And the Vasus are also parts of the universal family. And one
of them is Agni. So, Agni, I am that Agni. And then:

        meruḥ śikhariṇām aham

"meruḥ śikhariṇām". There are actually, there are "śikhari". There are many
mountains. Those which have "śikhar". So, among them, I am Meru. So, it is a
famous mountain within the universal cosmology as given in the Vedic scriptures.
And then, it is said that Krishna is, He is, I am that. Again, the point is the
various manifestations are described how it is a Lord, it is, they are all
reflecting the Lord's glory.

        purodhasāṁ ca mukhyaṁ māṁ
        viddhi pārtha bṛhaspatim
        senānīnām ahaṁ skandaḥ
        sarasām asmi sāgaraḥ

So, "purodha". "purodha" refers to the priest. Priest. So, among them,
"mukhyaṁ". "viddhi pārtha bṛhaspatim". So, there are many priests who are all
respected. But among them, the priests of the Gods, that is, "Bṛhaspati". Most
respected. And He represents Me. It is, I am that. What does this indicate
again? That when we think of how much "Bṛhaspati" is respected. We think, oh,
how great Krishna must be. So, "senānīnām ahaṁ skandaḥ". So, "skandaḥ" is
the, is "Kārttikeya", is the son of, you know, Shiva and "Pārvatī". And he is
the commander of the devatas. So, there are many commanders, but he is
formidable. You know. He leads the army of the Gods to victory against the
demons. So, he is very powerful. So, among various commanders that might be
there. Krishna says, I am there. I am saying, I am "skandaḥ". And "sarasām asmi
sāgaraḥ". So, there are many bodies of water. "sarasām". But the biggest body of
the water is the ocean. It is so vast that even the biggest lakes or rivers,
they become small in front of the ocean, vastness of the ocean. So, similarly,
the most attractive, ultimately attractive being is Krishna. Then, after that,
you know, He goes on. You know. You know. 25th verse is, discuss:

        maharṣīṇāṁ bhṛgur ahaṁ
        girām asmy ekam akṣaram
        yajñānāṁ japa-yajño ’smi
        sthāvarāṇāṁ himālayaḥ 

So, "purodhasāṁ", among the priests, it was described that I am "Bṛhaspati". But
among the "ṛṣī"s, among the "mahā-ṛṣī"s, I am "Bhṛgu". Generally, prie..., what
is the difference between "maharṣī"s and prie..., prie..., and "purodhasāṁ"s?
The "purodhasāṁ"s are, the "purodh" is that they do sacr..., ritual, they do
sacrifices. So, normally speaking, when the devatas have to do sacrifices, they
are called "Bṛhaspati". To oversee the sacrifice. Whereas the "rṣī"s, you know,
they are not like, you know, hired or paid fees. They are not priests of a
particular dynasty. They are, they are people who are focusing on attaining
transcendence. And accordingly, they are doing austerities. They may be married.
And they may be renounced. Whichever way it is. But they are focusing on, you
know, transcendence. So, "rṣī". "maharṣīṇāṁ bhṛgur ahaṁ". So, among these
"maharṣī", "Bhṛgu" is an extremely powerful one. "girām asmy ekam akṣaram". So,
among the various syllables, I am "ekam akṣaram". "praṇava". So, you know, you
know, there are various sound, syllables. And among them, "om". Because it
invokes the Absolute Truth, it is considered very special and powerful. So, that
"om" manifests Krishna. You know. Then, "yajñānāṁ japa-yajño ’smi". So, this is
very significant. 10.25. That Krishna is talking, say, and now, He has developed
the att..., thought of, in the Third Chapter. The Fourth Chapter. The Fifth
Chapter. That "yajñā" is not just a specific activity of fire sacrifice. "yajñā"
is the principle of sacrifice. For the sake of the Lord. So, once that principle
is established, after that, Krishna explains that among the various kind of
sacrifices, we see here, He is saying, you know, "yajñānāṁ japa-yajño ’smi". So,
I can, or, I, we can sacrifice some, you know, honey. We can sacrifice some
grains. Some ghee. Some silk. But actually, the most difficult thing to
sacrifice is our consciousness. We do not have to destroy our consciousness by
sacrifice. Sacrifice means to offer during that period, at least. So, we may be
chanting. At that time, we take our consciousness and offer to Krishna. That is
the sacrifice which will give us the greatest result. Because by doing that
sacrifice of offering our Krishna, consciousness to Krishna, manifesting as the
holy name, we will get purified. We will get elevated and liberated. We will
attain prema for Krishna. So, that is very significant reference for the glory
of the holy name. And especially, not just the glory of the holy name, this is a
verse which can be used to substantiate the point that, you know, chanting is
also a "yajñā". Prabhupada used the word "Sankirtana Yajna". Quite often. So, we
may wonder what is the scrpitural basis for the idea of sankirtana being a
"yajñā"? "yajñā" is, generally, people think, fire sacrifice. But here, the
reference is there, not just from some esoteric scripture. It is directly from
the Bhagavad Gita. That, you know, you know, among the "yajñā"s, I am
"japa-yajñaḥ". So, here, Krishna is indicating this special, you know, special
position of "japa-yajñaḥ". And He is saying, therefore, equating that with Him.
And "sthāvarāṇāṁ himālayaḥ". So, among the immovable objects. So, "śikhariṇām"
refers to those which are very, very toll. Among tall mountains, He says, I am
Meru. But among giant, in terms of wei..., ver..., in terms of weight, in terms
of sheer magnitude, you know, and, you know, so, you know, the Himālayas are
great. And He says, "sthāvarā". "sthāvarā" and "jangam" are standard, you know,
you know, you know, references. "sthāvarā" means non-moving. "jangam" means
moving. So, among non-movable objects, I am the Himālayas. Then, after that, He
goes on and describes:

        aśvatthaḥ sarva-vṛkṣāṇāṁ
        devarṣīṇāṁ ca nāradaḥ
        gandharvāṇāṁ citrarathaḥ
        siddhānāṁ kapilo muniḥ

So, there are various trees. Amon them, He says, I am the "aśvatthaḥ".
"aśvatthaḥ". You know. "aśvatthaḥ" tree is like a banyan tree. It is very
difficult to break down. You know. Very, cut down. Because there are so many
sub-branches which come from its sub-branches. And they are all rooting. And it
creates a very strong environment for itself to live in for a long time. So,
that strength and longevity of the "aśvatthaḥ", sh..., remember of Krish...,
remembrance of Krishna. You know. "devarṣīṇāṁ ca nāradaḥ". So, "Nārada" was
mentioned earlier in this chapter.

        asito devalo vyāsaḥ
        svayaṁ caiva bravīṣi me

"asito devalo vyāsaḥ". So, there, it was, you know, what was mentioned over
here. You know. You know. Actually, you know, like that, various sages are
mentioned over here. You know. So, the, "Nārada" is also a special sage. And
"Nārada" is mentioned here, also. "devarṣir nāradas tathā" was there. And here,
"devarṣīṇāṁ ca nāradaḥ". So, there are many "devarṣī"s. But among them, "Nārada"
is special. And that specialty of "Nārada" represents Krishna. There is
"gandharvāṇāṁ citrarathaḥ". There are many "gandharvā"s. But there is one
specific, specific "gandharvā" was very special. Very powerful. His name was
"Citraratha". Actually, he had a fight with Arjuna at one time. And Arjuna
defeated him completely. And it was extraordinary. Because Arjuna was a
celestial. And, he, you know, sorry, this "gandharvā" was a celestial. And
Arjuna was a mortal. But still, Arjuna was so skilled in fighting that he
defeated him. And his chariot got burnt. So, this Citraratha said that, and he
accepted defeat. He said, let us have, let us be friends. Let us not keep
fighting. So, when he said that, from now onwards, I will accept the name
Dadraratha. Not Citraratha. Why? Because, He, Arjuna had thrown, you know,
flowing a torchlight at him. And his charioteer got burnt by that. So, that is
why he said, my charioteer was burnt by you. Therefore, I will call myself
Dadraratha. But the point is he was a very powerful "gandharvā". A leader among
the "gandharvā"s. And Krishna says, when you see that, you should understand
that is also a manifestation of my, you know, My power. "siddhānāṁ kapilo
muniḥ". So, there are many realised, perfected beings. Among them, Kapila Deva
is special. He is extremely powerful. In Ninth..., Third Canto of
"Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam", his, you know, instructions and his pastimes are described.
And how, after giving, after giving, receiving prayers from his father, after
giving guidance to his mother, Kapila Muni lea..., Kapila Muni leaves. And then,
he goes to, you know, you know, goes to a celestial pla..., goes to a particular
place where he keeps doing tapasya to set an example for the world. And he is
fully realised. So, he is example of Krishna's omnipotence among the "siddhā"s.
"siddhānāṁ kapilo muniḥ". You know. You know. This Kapila is actually the
incarnation of the Devahuti..., sorry, incarnation of Supreme Lord. The son of
Devahuti. When Prabhupada published his book. "Teachings of Lord Kapila" So, when
Prabhupada told the publishers. His disciples that write below that, "The Son of
Devahuti". You know. "Teachings of Lord Kapila: The Son of Devahuti". Now, the
devotees, you know, this is not the way people refer to in the waste..., west.
You know. If you want to say, the teachings of Aristotle. The son of so and so.
You know. You will not write the, the, why, why, why the name of the mother over
there? You know. Nobody does that. So, devotees said, Prabhupada, this will look
very odd. Why should we put this over here? Why? Prabhupada said, put it. So,
devotees did not understand that, at that time, they did not know about the
Vedic culture so much. The point is that, there was a theistic Kapila. And there
was an atheistic Kapila. So, most people, when they hear the name Kapila, they
think of the atheistic Kapila. So, to distinguish between the theistic Kapila
and the atheistic Kapila, you know, the con..., the, what was his, the most
defining distinction was the teachings. Teachings differentiated. That person
has taught, you know, taught just material analysis which is often non-theistic,
does not talk about God much. But, you know, the teachings of, you know, the
"Bhāgavatam", Kapila is theistic. It is devotional. It culminates in pure
devotion. And those teachings were given to Devahuti. So, you know, so, the, so,
"Teachings of Lord Kapila: The Son of Devahuti". So, here, the son is
instructing the mother. That is itself extraordinary. But then, the son is
instructing the mother in his particular set of teachings. Which are different
from the teachings of the other fie..., other Kapila. So, to de..., underscore
that point, Prabhupada wanted to say like this. So, the point in this context is
"siddhānāṁ kapilo muniḥ". That I am Kapila. You know. I am, you know, that is,
Kapila is the greatest among "siddhā"s. So, that greatness represents Me. So, we
will continue, you know, the further vibhutis in the next class. 

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
