Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZcbcpKsxpOI
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=ZcbcpKsxpOI&event=video_description&redir_token=RyGORyLVAXOC8PhgGKRVsCIBbVt8MTU0ODQ4OTQyMkAxNTQ4NDAzMDIy&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_116_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_12_Text_10_to_12_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the Twelfth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita discussing bhakti yoga. In that,
we have dis..., discussed the first section how, you know, worship of the
personal aspect of the Absolute Truth is preferable to worship of the impersonal
aspect. Let us look at the overview here, quickly. You know. So, one, verses 1
to 7 talked about how worship of personal form, you know, is higher than the
worship of the impersonal Brahman. And then, verses 8 to 12 talk about the
progressive stages of bhakti. That is what we were discussing. We discussed 8
and 9. Now, we will discuss the Tenth one. And after this, next section will be
qualities that endear one to Krishna. So, in this way, this chapter basically
talks about first, ba..., you know, first, ok, how bhakti is the best process
for transcendence. Then, how bhakti can be practiced at multiple levels. And how
one can cultivate the qualities that will make one into a devotee. So,
ultimately, who is a devotee? A devotee is not, the one who loves Krishna. And
one whom Krishna loves. So, these qualities help us to endear ourselves to
Krishna. That means we become better devotees by that. So, in this way, the
chapter talks about bhakti yoga in different, three different ways. Let us look
at, you know, eight, you know, 12.10.

        abhyāse ’py asamartho ’si
        mat-karma-paramo bhava
        mad-artham api karmāṇi
        kurvan siddhim avāpsyasi

So, "abhyāse ’py asamartho ’si". "asamarthaḥ" means, you know, incapable.
"abhyāse" was what I was talked about in the previous verse.

        abhyāsa-yogena tato
        mām icchāptuṁ dhanañ-jaya

So, by the practice of "abhyāsa-yoga", obtain the desire to attain Me. So,
"abhyāse ’py asamartho ’si". That if you are incapable of doing "abhyāse". Then,
"mat-karma-paramo bhava". That make My karma the supreme goal. Become dedicated
to working for Me. "paramo" can become supreme. "paramo" can also mean
"mat-paraḥ". Fix the mind on Me. Make Me your ultimate aspiration.
"mat-karma-paramo bhava". So, there is a difference between "mat-paramaḥ" and
"mat-karma-paramaḥ". So, "mat-para" means our heart, our soul, you know, our
mind, our intelligence, our whole inner being is offered to Krishna. That is
"mat...". So, "mat-para" is in, in, you know, is a higher level than
"mat-karma-paramo". So, "mat-karma-paramo" means we are doing various works. But
we understand the work that I do for Krishna is the most important. And work for
Him. So, what I try to do is, I do work for Krishna. And I try to make all my
work internal offering to Krishna. And then, what will happen by this?
"mad-artham api karmāṇi". If you in this way work for Me, "kurvan siddhim
avāpsyasi". "siddhim avāpsyasi". You will attain perfection by this, also. So,
Krishna is, you know, taking the level s..., lower. Lower. Lower. And He is
telling that, ok, just like, you know, if a person is, you know, trapped at the
bottom of a well. And somebody, you know, sends down a rope. And this person
says, ok, you stretch your hands up. And then, you stand on your toes. And pull
up. And then, I can catch the rope. That person says I cannot do that. And then,
that person brings a rope further down. Ok. Now, you just raise your hands. A
little bit up. You can catch the rope. Then, when that person cannot do that,
also. Then, the rope comes further down. And then, the person says, ok. Now, the
rope is right around your waist. All that you have to, just tie around your
waist. I will pull you out. So, it is like that. Krishna is extending down the
mercy lower and lower. And He is saying over here. "mad-artham api karmāṇi". If
you work for Me in this way. "kurvan siddhim avāpsyasi". "siddhim", you will
attain. What is "siddhim"? You know. That "siddhim" is, the word "siddhim"
literally means perfection. So, Krishna has used the word "siddhim" several
times in the Bhagavad Gita. You know. The most prominent use, which is relevant
over here is. 

        manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu
        kaścid yatati siddhaye
        yatatām api siddhānāṁ
        kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

So, Kri..., "yatati siddhaye". Very few people attain, attai..., endeavor for
perfection. In 7.3, Krishna says. And out of those, out of, you know, you know,
thousands, few endeavor for perfection. And out of the, out of those who
endeavor for perfection, even fewer actually achieve perfection. So, in this
way, what Krishna is telling over there is, He uses the word perfection to rfeer
to the quest for transcendence. So, you know, you know, sometimes, the word
"siddhim" is also used for yogic perfections. Or mystic perfections. You know.
There, there is "Anima Siddhi". There is "Laghima Siddhi". And that is with
respect, these are material perfections. But this whole chapter is a bhakti yoga
chapter. And that is why the yogic or mystic "siddhis" are not being talked
about over here. Here, Krishna is talking about the devotional perfections. And
those devotional perfections ultimately culminate in pure love for Krishna.
Krishna is saying that, even by working for Me, you will ultimately come to the
level of attaining Me. So, now, when we look at this, "mat-karma-paramo bhava".
Work for Me. Let us try to understand this now. So, in working for Krishna,
there can, you know, you know, be two sublevels. You know. Work for Krishna. One
can be the direct, do His work. That is render service to Him. And then,
indirect can be offer him the fruits of our work. Now, what is the difference
between the two? Do His work means, for example, say, during the marath..., book
distribution marathon, we may go out and distribute books. Or we may ourselves
try to share Krishna's message. We may do some services in the temple. So, that
is do His work. So, it is Krishna's work. It is Krishna's mission. And we help
in Krishna's mission. That is do His work. And then, there is also indirect.
Offer Him the fruits of the work. So, how do we offer in the fruits of the work?
By offering Him the, you know, you know, part, part of the work that we are
doing. That means, say, we have our job. We have our profession. And we,
whatever we on, we give charity from that. And we try to spiritualise of the
work that we. So, "mat-karma-paramo", technically would mean do My work. But for
a devotee, even the family life, the family is, also, devotee tries to integrate
with the spiritual life. Devotee tries to work for Krishna. And integrate the
whole family into the, you know, devotional service of Krishna. The devotee
sees that, my family members, if they are devotees, that is wonderful. But even
if they are not devotees, still, they are also parts of Krishna. And it is
ultimately by Krishna's arrangement that I am placed in the situation amidst
these family members. And let me try to, you know, you know, serve Krishna, you
know, by taking care of them materially and spiritually. So, in this way, this
is what, you know, "mat-karma-paramo bhava". So, Prabhupada writes in the
purport that, he talks about this principle of material engagement. That:

"Every endeavor requires land, capital, organization and labor."

So, there is human resources. There is financial resources. There is
infrastructural resources. And then, there is, you know, organisational
resources. So, these are the four resources. Human resources is labor.
Infrastructural resources will be land. And then, financial resources will be
capital. And then, there is infrastruct..., and then, there is organisational.
You know. Everything that we have, we have to organise it properly. So, you
know, you know, say, a person wants to construct a, you know, construct, a
builder wants to construct a buinder..., building. So, then, the per..., there
is capital required for that, you know, not only. There is, first of all, land
is required for anything. So, we need the land on which we will be constructing
the building. Along with that, capital is needed to purchase all the materials
for constructing the building. Capital is needed for higher labor, also. Who
will be actually do the building. And then, there is organisation required. Now,
there has to be some specially trained people who will manage and oversee the
project. And they will make sure that everything is going according to plan. So,
these are required. You know. You know. Finances. Land. Mar..., you know,
fin..., capital. Organisation. And labor. So, Prabhupada is saying all these are
included in "mat-karma-paramo bhava". So, when, so, whatever is, these possible,
one can work for Krishna. So, Prabhupada writes:

"The only difference is that in materialism one works for sense gratification.
The same work, however, can be performed for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa, and that
is spiritual activity."

So, when we perform for the satisfaction of Krishna, that becomes spiritual
activity. You know. You know. You know. Prabhupada talks about, how, you know,
publication can also be done. You know. This vol..., what, now, how does this
raise one to Krishna?

"This voluntary service to the cause of Kṛṣṇa consciousness will help one to
rise to a higher state of love for God, whereupon one becomes perfect."

So, "voluntary service to the cause of Kṛṣṇa consciousness". You know. What,
whatever we are doing, we could do it for other purposes. But we are doing it
for Krishna. It is a voluntary service. And when we do this voluntary service
for the sake of Krishna, for the cause of Krishna Consciousness, by that, we
make spiritual advancement. Now, after this, Krishna goes one level downwards.
An then, He says, if you cannot, if somebody cannot do that, also. Somebody
cannot work for Krishna, also. Then, we may, may think, oh, such a person who
cannot work for Krishna, get out. You are going to be a materialist. You are
going to be a sinful person. You are going to go to hell. No. Krishna does not
exhibit such an attitude. Krishna accommodates even those who, you know, you
could say fo..., do not accommodate Him. You know. This is Krishna's, you know,
great love that He accommodates even those who do not accommodate Him. See,
Krishna is Himself already so accommodating. He says, first, you offer your
heart to Me. Or at least, then try to think about Me. If you cannot do that,
work for Me. Now, somebody says, what more can Krishna do? If, if you do not
want to do even this much for me, then I will reject you. Krishna says no.
Krishna is such a loving God that, you know, you know, He accommodates even
those who refuse to accommodate Him. So, how does He do that? He, by encouraging
them towards a general spirit of sacrifice. Let us look at this verse. 12.11.

        athaitad apy aśakto ’si
        kartuṁ mad-yogam āśritaḥ
        sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ
        tataḥ kuru yatātmavān

So, "athaitad apy aśakto ’si". "athaitad". "aitad" means, what was described in
the previous verse. "aśakto ’si". If one is not able to do even that. "kartuṁ
mad-yogam āśritaḥ". So, "mad-yogam āśritaḥ". You know. That means what?
"mat-karma-paramo bhava". Working for Me. Even, that means, that level of
connection with Krishna by working for Him, if one cannot do even that. Then,
what should do, one do? "sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ". That give up all the work.
"sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ". So, give up the fruits of all the work. You know.
Give, give up the, basically the fruits of work. "tataḥ kuru yatātmavān". So,
"ātma-vān". Be self-situated. Now, this is a beautiful word. "ātma-vān". Krishna
has used this word "ātma-vān" earlier, also, in the Bhagavad Gita. Especially in
2.45.

        trai-guṇya-viṣayā vedā
        nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna
        nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
        niryoga-kṣema ātmavān

So, "ātm...", there Krishna is saying that go beyond the three modes. And become
situated, you know, in the transcendence. And when you are situated in, in 
transcendence, be free from dualities. "nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho". Be in, be
in, you know, pure goodness. That is transcendence. And "niryoga-kṣema ātmavān".
Be free from, you know, you know, be free from the considerations of gain and
loss. By holding unto the atma. Now, the word "vān" means possessor. Just like
we have "dhanavan". That means one who is the possessor of wealth. Or bhagyavan.
One who is the possessor of fortune. So, like that, "dhanavan". So, like that,
"ātma-vān" means one who is the possessor of the soul. Now, we may, normally,
our idea is that the possessor, and the possessed or the possession are
different. You know. For example, you know, I may have this computer. So, I am
the possessor. And this is the possession. So, the normal understanding is that
the possession and the possessor have to be different. You know. So, then, if
the possession and the possessor have to be different. Then, if I am the atma,
then I am, I am the possessor. But if I have to become "ātma-vān", then I have
to become the possession. So, how can the same be the possessor as well as the
possession? You know. You know. How can the same be the owner and the owned? So,
this is the indicative of the link at the level of consciousness. That means if
a person may be an owner. Like some..., sometimes, when people get old. And
nowadays, very unhealthy, tragically, very heart-breaking, sometimes, people get
disease. Like Alzheimer's. And they just lose their memory completely. When they
lose their memory. Or not just memory, actually. They, they just lose their
capacity for rationale thinking. Capacity for recognising. Capacity for
appropriate and ad..., adequate emotional responses. So, at that time, the
person may be the owner of the house. But if the person has got Alzheimer's,
that person is not aware that I am the owner of the house. That person just does
not know anything at that time. So, like that, you know, we may be in possession
of something. But we may not know that we are in possession of that thing. Of
course, the other is also possib..., possible that we do not possess anything.
And we think we are the possessors. Actually, we do not own anything. You know.
Whatever we think is my house. And my home. My car. And all these things.
"ma....".

        janasya moho ’yam ahaṁ mameti

They are all temporary. Thing, as we have discussed earlier, things may belong.
But for how long? You know. They, they are just temporarily there with us. So,
that is one way of looking at it. Another way of looking at it is, ok, for as
long, whar..., whatever period they are there with me, they are there. Fine. And
I will use them as much as I can. But still, the point remains that when I am
using them, even at that time, I run in, you know, I, you know, you know, the,
k..., you know, when I have certain things. For a temporary period. At that
time, I am the possessor of them. But even when I am the possessor, I should, I
need to remember that I am the possessor. If I have a bank account secretly
kept. And I myself forget that I have the bank account. You know. It is as good
as I do not possess that. So, when "ātma-vān", the word is used over here. What
it means is, we all, we have, you know, we are the soul. But, and the soul
itself being a part of Krishna, the soul, you know, and, that means at the level
of the soul, all of us are like princess. We are all the beloved children of
Krishna. And He is our all-attractive Supreme Lord. So, we, in that sense, you
know, at the spiritual level, we are all fabulously wealthy. Because we are
connected with Supremely wealthy person. Now, when we are like this, you know,
why do we feel ourselves often bereaved? Often deprived? Often in a state of
en...? That is because we have forgotten our connection with Krishna. So, to
become "ātma-vān" means to become aware of ourselves as the "ātma". And to
become aware of the precious and irreplaceable, you know, wealth that is
available to us at the level of the "ātma". So, now, what makes us, you know,
not "ātma-vān". We could say "anātma-vān". You know. We, we are no longer
conscious of the "ātma". That is material infatuations. The more a person is
obsessed with material things, to that extent, that person cannot understand the
spiritual reality. To that extent, that person becomes oblivious of the
spiritual reality. So, here, Krishna is telling that even if one starts the
sacrifice. You know. One stops working. And one starts sacrificing. Then, from
that point onwards, one slowly develops the spirit of, you know, you know, you
know, the, you know, sacrifi..., the spirit of selfless sacrifice. And that
gradually makes one self-aware. With gradually may, as it is said, you know, you
know, the only way we can find ourselves is by losing ourselves in something
greater than ourselves. You know. The best way to fi..., the only, in fact. Not
the best way. The only way, it is ultimately. The way, the way we can find
ourselves is by losing ourselves in something greater than ourselves. When we
try to, you know, when we are obsessed with, you know, you know, you know,
trying, oh, I am like this. I am like that. I am like that. I am like that. You
know. You know. Then, when I. I. I is a centre of our consciousness. Then, that
"I Conciusness" becomes like a black whole. Which sucks us. Sucks us inside. And
to ourselves. And then, we feel either, you know, inferiority complex. Or
superiority complex. Now, when I. I. I. And I am, I am thinking of myself. And
then, look around. And see. Oh. Others are better than me. Then, I feel
miserable. And if I think that I am better than others, then, then I get
superiority complex. I get pride. And arrogance. And ego by that. So, either
way, the, you know, we cannot find ourselves this way. We just get lost. You
know. But, you know, when we pore ourselves out in doing something greater than
ourselves. Then, the obsession of our thoughts with ourselves breaks, goes away.
And then, as we are, we observe ourselves in something greater than ourselves.
The best cau..., such cause is the cause of loving and serving Krishna. When we
do that, you know, then, you know, that inspiration which comes by observing
ourselves in something greater than ourselves, that helps to bring out, you
know, the latent divinity. The latent spiritual potential. The latent material
qualities. The skills. And the great encamption. All that comes out when we find
inspiring enough cause. In which we can power ourselves. So, the whole principle
of bhakti is, it is not that the devotee is constantly thinking, I am not the
body. I am the soul. I am not the body. I am the soul. I am not the body. I am
the soul. A devotee is not obsessed in that. Yes. We can analyse.

And whenever, you know, you know, material temptations trouble us, we can surely
think that, yes, I am not the body. I am soul. And these things are not going to
satisfy me. Why should I do these, those things? That is good. A devotee should,
can and should think like that. But over and above that, a devotee should also
think about how I am the, I am the ser..., you know, actually, I am a servant of
Krishna. A devotee's primary focus is on how can I serve Krishna? Krishna's
mission. Krishna's message. It is so wonderful. I want to share it with the
world. I want to do whatever I can. My small part in sharing it with the world.
And as a devotee becomes absorbed more and more in this cause, then the
self-consciousness, in terms of self-obsession, decreases. And, you know, you
know, you know, you know, from that point onwards, a devotee becomes more and
more, you know, sp..., you know, spiritually, you know, aware. A spiritually.
See, there is the con..., there is self-consciousness. And there is
self-realisation. You know. When people say that I am self-conscious. So, the
two are not the same things. You know. For example, some, when somebody is told
to give, you know, the, a speech on a podium for the first time. Then, that
person, in an informal setting, may be able to talk continuously for three
hours. But when the person is placed on a podium, on the stage. He is told
to speak. Even, you know, three minutes speaking becomes difficult. Because when
we are in the public eye, we often become self-conscious. But, you know, when we
are self-conscious, that is, it is, that does not mean that we are
self-realised. There, the word self, you know, conscious and realised might
s..., have similar connotations. But the self that he was talking about is quite
different. So, the self when we talk about self-consciousness, that means, you
know, I am just thinking about myself. Myself. But the self that I am thinking
about is not truly me. I am thinking, when I am thinking self-conscious, I am
thinking about, is my dress proper or not? You know. Is my, eyes looks good or
not? Is my facial expression good or not? Am I having a good smile on my face?
How? So, when we talk about self-consciousness, in that sense. It is a do not be
self-con..., do not be too self-conscious. That self-conscious often refers to
how others perceive us. And how we look in the eyes of the others. That will
never lead to self-realisation. So, actually, a devotee has to stop worrying too
much about how other world perceives. And a devotee has to focus on per..., you
know, thinking about how I can, you know, engage in those activities which will
purify me. Which will please Krishna. And therefore, by Krishna's grace, are,
the, my inner spirtiual awareness, my spiritual, you know, consciousness will
awaken. And then, I will be able understand that I am the "ātma". So, you know,
you know, we do not have to be self-conscious. We want to become self-realised.
And to become self-realised, we have to be Krishna Conscious. So, you know, now,
here, when I am using the word self-conscious. And it is in a particular sense.
That being conscious of how the world thinks about us. And how the world looks
at us. A devotee does not have to be too self-conscious. And then, now, here,
the word "ātma-vān". What is Krishna telling? That gradually, that if one cannot
even work for Him. You know. And slowly, step by step, by sl..., working for
Krishna. You know. You know. Sorry, by working in a general spirit of sacrifice,
"karma-phala-tyāgas". Then, what will happen? The ethos of sacrifice will be
developed. And once that ethos of sacrifice is developed, as it matures, one
will become self-aware. "tataḥ kuru yatātmavān". So, Prabhupada writes in the
purport something very interesting. Which indicates how broad is Krishna's
concern. And how accommodating Krishna is. You know. You know. You know. So:

"It may be that one is unable even to sympathize with the activities of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness because of social, familial or religious considerations or because
of some other impediments."

You know. So, then:

"For one who has such a problem, it is advised that he sacrifice the accumulated
result of his activities to some good cause."

"to some good cause.". So, what is the point here that is being made? "to some
good cause.". You know. The important point is that, you know, you know,
cultivate the ethos of selflessness. Cultivate the value of sacrifice. So,
gen..., we have discussed elaborately in our "Śrī Īśopaniṣad" cour..., class
about humanitarian work. About social service. You know. From the Bhagavad
Gita's perspective here, in, the Bhagavad Gita does accommodate, you know, you
know, the principle of sacrifice which is often evident in the activites of, you
know, people who are doing some social welfare. You know. They are concerned for
others. And that concern for others is the beginning. You know. It is a
significant step forward in their, in the evolution of their consciousness.
Which will ultimnately, gradually bring them to Krishna Consciousness. So,
Krishna is bringing the ladder of mercy down. Down. To accommodate even those
who cannot accommodate Him. That means, because say, one's family is very
anti devotional. And because of that, one cannot practice, you know, spiritual
life. So, at that time, it is not that one has to entirely give up everything.
No. One can at that time also keep practicing spiritual life. You know. In a
discrete way. Whatever is possible. And then, you know, one can, you know, in
other ways, develop the essential spirit of sacrifice. And selflessness. That is
at the heart of Krishna Consciousness. You know. Now, Prabhupada goes on and
quotes some other in..., you know, Prabhupada's purport is so accommodating
here. In Bhagavad Gita, what is he saying? "yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānām". So,
"yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānām". This is 18.46. Actually, the full verse is:

        yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ
        yena sarvam idaṁ tatam
        sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya
        siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ

You know. That, you know, by worshipping that Supreme Lord with one's work, you
know, "siddhiṁ vindati". One will attain the supreme perfection. You know. So,
it, while, who is that Lord, one, whom one should worship? In that connection,
it is said that "yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ". That that Lord, from who, whom, you
know, you know, elv..., all of existence has emanated. From whom, all the
"pravṛttir"s of the living entities have emanated. "yena sarvam idaṁ tatam". By
whom, the whole creation is pervaded. Is that Lord. So, what the point that is
being made over here is that, you know, whatever propensities we have. Now, we
are not talking about sinful propensities here. The word propensities is used in
terms of varnashram kar..., situation. You know. Somebody has ksatriya
propensitiy. Vasya propensity. Shudra propensity. You know. You know. You know.
So, that has been, you know, that one has to respond to. Ac..., act according to
it. But do not just act according to them in a materialistic way. Act according
to them with a spiritualistic understanding. So, spiritualistic understanding
means that, you know, you know, you know, you know, one has to recognise that
these propensities, you know, are ultimately material. But the person who is
activating these mat..., propensities. Because of whom those propensities are,
you know, getting the, you know, energy. Getting the consciousness to act. So,
the propensities are situated in the subtle body. The soul is spiritual. So,
whatever propensities I have, I cannot wish them away. But I can accommodate and
elevate them. I can, you know, engage them in Krishna's service. You know. So,
that is how one should work. So, if one cannot engage in Krishna's service, at
least, na..., general ethos of selflessness. So, here, we see the ladder of, you
know, mercy going downward. Downward. Downwards. And in this way, one can come
to spiritual consciousness. So, you know, we should not, you know, label people
based on just, you know, their, you know, ecclesiastical affiliations. Jiva
Goswami, in his writings, makes this point. Very important point. That one
should not accept a spiritual master based on ecclesiastical consid...,
considerations. Ecclesiastical considerations means, eccl..., the word
ecclesiastical, you know, comes primarily from the church. That, it, within the
church, there is a hierarchy of power. There is an organisational structure.
So, the structure of the church is called as ecclesiastics. That is the word.
Eccl..., adjective used to describe that. So, Jiva Goswami explains that one
should not, you know, chur..., you know, accept a spiritual master simply based
on acce..., ecclesiastical considerations. That means I am from, you know, the,
I am from this caste. And this is a goswami in my caste. Therefore, I will
accept this person. That is ecclesiastical consideration. You know. Ok. That,
you know, you know, there is, it is not that just because somebody is in our
particular position in a hierarchy, that does not automatically make that person
spiritually advanced. So, we should not give unduitage to ecclesiastical things.
So, that means if someb..., somebody might not appea..., externally be, you
know, connected with any spiritual organisation. But if that person has an ethos
of selflessness. You know. That person has concern for others. We should be able
to see the good in that person. Yes. That person may not have "atma jnana" right
now. That person may not have Bhagavad bhakti right now. And, you know, if we
want to look at the negative, what is that person? You know. Brea..., that
person breaking the regulative principles. He does not have, that person does
not have this. That person does not have that. And we can blame that person for
so many things. But we do not necessarily, that is not the only way of looking
at things. The other way of looking at things could be that, you know, you know,
yes, what that person does not have is a f..., f..., may be, it fact. But what
that person has, also, we can see. That person truly has an ethos of
selflessness to some extent. Then, we can appreciate that.

Janaki Pandit says that, you know, we should see, take gold even from a filthy
place. And that was Srila Prabhupada's vision. How else could Srila Prabhupada
have engaged the hippies who from the material vision, even, you know, who, what
to speak of the spiritual vision, even from the material vision, they did not
have many good quali..., many good quali..., many good qualities. You know.
Unclean. They were, in many ways, you know, very unregulated. They were
unemployed. They were rebellious. Undisciplined. You know. But Srila Prabhupada
saw. They have a spark of spirituality in them. And he found that spark. And
enabled it to grow. So, therefore, you know, that is how one moves forwad,
forward upwards. Towards Krishna. So, now, after describing this, Krishna goes
to the next level. Let us look at the next level. You know. This is the single
most complicated verse of the Bhagavad Gita. And the different acharyas have
given different commentaries. And we will look at the, we will try to look at
some of those commentaries in this verse.

        śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj
        jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyate
        dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas
        tyāgāc chāntir anantaram

So, "śreyo" means better. "śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj". That, you know, you know,
better than "jñānam" is practice. "jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyate". Better than
"jñānād" is "dhyānaṁ". You know. So, you know, if you can, sorry, "śreyo hi
jñānam abhyāsāj". That, you know, that, you know, "jñā...", better than "jñānam"
is "bhyā...", is "abhyāsāj". Better than, you know, you know, let us look at
Prabhupada's translation.

"If you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the cultivation of
knowledge."

That means "abhyāsāj" is higher than "jñānam". And better than knowledge however
is, you know, meditation. "jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyate". And then, "dhyānāt
karma-phala-tyāgas". Better than "dhyānāt" is "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ". And then,
"tyāgāc chāntir anantaram". By "tyāgāc", one will get peace. So, what is so
complicated about this verse? Better to understand the normal hierarchy that is
there in the Bhagavad Gita to look at, to understand what is the problem with
this verse. So, we will look at, so, this is how it is. We, this is, you know,
you know, "Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura"'s analysis of this verse. Then, there
is "Baladeva Vidyabhushana"'s analysis of this verse. And then, is Prabhupada's
analysis. But before we go into this analysis, first, we need to understand what
is the problem. You know. So, you know, this, you know, ok, there is some
hierarchy that is described. Actually, this hierarchy seems, the problem with
this hierarchy seems to be that it just makes the whole previous hierarchy of
the Bhagavad Gita taxidermy. Upside down. So, what is the earlier hierarchy of
the Bhagavad Gita? If you see, you know, the, you know, karma yoga, and karma
yoga is one level of practice. You know. After karma yoga, one comes to
"jñānam". And then, after "jñānam", higher than that is "jñānam...", "dhyānaṁ".
Then, higher than "dhyānaṁ" is bhakti. In bhakti, there is for sadhana-bhakti.
Then, there is, you know, kevala-bhakti. There is pure devotion. So, or, you
know, you know, spontaneous devotion. Raganuga-bhakti. Whichever way you want to
look at it. So, the normal hierarchy is "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ". That is a part of
karma yoga. Then, after that, you know, you know, when one goes beyond that, one
starts practicing "jñānam yoga". So, "jñāna yoga" means that one practices the
principle of pure devotion. You know. Sorry. Not principle of pure devotion.
Prin..., you know, principle of contemplation. Contemplative analysis. It is
primarily in, you know, philosophical, speculative analysis that is there. That
is "jñāna". And then, beyond that, there is, you know, "dhyāna". Where there is
meditation. And at that meditation, generally, that, it is aimed for meditation
on the Supersoul. So, because one is moving closer to the spiritual reality. So,
that is meditation. "dhyāna" is considered to be higher than "jñāna". And above
"dhyāna" is the level of bhakti. Because one is fixing the mind on Krishna. In
"jñāna", one is trying to move towards to the Paramatma. So, in
"karma-phala-tyāgaḥ", one is basically getting detached from matter. But one
does not have much clear conception of spirituality. In "jñāna", one starts
getting the Brahman conception. One tries to search for that Brahman. In
"dhyāna", one starts focusing on the Paramatma. And in bhakti, one starts
focusing on Bhagavan. So, that is how, this is the normal hierarchy. That
"karma-pha...", karma yoga is "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ". Then, "jñāna". Then,
"dhyāna". And then, bhakti. But what does this verse say?

        śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj
        jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyate
        dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas

So, now, it is very interesting that, actually, "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ" would be
the fourth level, normally. So, "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ". Then, "jñāna". Then,
"dhyāna". And then, you know, "abhyāsāj". But here, it is telling, you know:

        dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas
        tyāgāc chāntir anantaram

So, it is saying that actually better than, so, it has become almost like this.
So, there is "jñāna". Better than "jñāna" is "dhyāna". But better than "dhyāna"
is "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ". And if one, this "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ". Then, then, what
exactly is "abhyāsāj"? "hi", "śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj". So, actually, this, you
know, "abhyāsāj" is put lower. So, if "abhyāsāj" refers to bhakti, then what is
actually happening over here? So, first of all, "abhyāsāj", if it is referring
to bhakti yoga, it should be the highest. And "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ" should be the
lowest among this hierarchy. But the hierarchy is, it, this is the hierarchy.
Now, please try to understand what I am saying. Understand the problem. Then, we
will see how, how the different acharyas have so brilliantly tried to come up
with a solution. So, the normal hierarchy is, first karma yoga.
"karma-phala-tyāgaḥ". Then, "jñāna". Then, "dhyāna". And then, after that is,
you know, "abhyāsāj" yoga. That is bhakti. But the Bhagavad Gita 12.12 is t...,
inverting this hierarhy by saying that "abhyāsāj" yoga is the lowest. You know.
Then, "jñāna", "śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj". So, as compared to "abhyāsāj",
"jñāna" is higher. Then, "jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyate". "dhyāna" is higher than
that. Then, after that is "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ". So, "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ" is not
such an elevated level. So, why is it consid...? Why is it saying like this? So,
Srila Prabhupada ex..., explains this in a simple way. You know. By a changing
the referent. By changing the referent means, sometimes, this happens in
language. When we are talking, you know, you know, you know, we may be referring
to you. You know. Or he. But he in my mind may be somebody else. It is, you
know, when, when the other person may think that he refers to this person. So
and so person. But I may have been having some other person in mind. So, we have
to understand what is the, when there is an ambiguous reference like that. Just
a pronoun is there. That, you know, in English, it is ca..., f..., often called
a misunderstand that comes because of the ambigu..., ambiguous antecedent.
Antecedent means that which has come before. That which is being referred to.
So, if I start with this. Or he. At the start of a paragraph, you know, you
know, for example, now, if I start this Bhakti Shastri course. And then, I start
by saying that, you know, he said that he is very angry with everyone. You know.
We may wonder who is this he? Because I have not mentioned who is that he. So,
if I start something with just he, then the antecedent. What is this "he"
referring to? He is a pronoun which refers to something. What is that refer to,
that can sometimes be, you know, be confusing. So, now, when it is right at the
start of a conversation, we will understand it is obviously confusing. But
sometimes, in the middle of a conversation, also, it may become a little
confusing. Because, you know, I may refer to a particular person. But I may be
discussing that person. Particular person. But my thoughts go to somebody else.
And, you know, somebody, others do not follow my thought. When I use the word
"he", I might be referring to somebody else. And others may not be sure, clear
about that. So, what Srila Prabhupada explains is, now, what, let us look at
Prabhupada's explanation of this. Then, we will look at the acharyas'
explanation. You know. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada says 12.12 refers back
not to 12.11. But to 12.10. What does this mean? That, you know, you know, you
know, you know, actually, when Krishna is giving a hierarchy over here.
"karma-phala-tyāgaḥ". So, that "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ" ref..., is, saying, is not
referring to 12.11. But it is referring to 12.10. "mat-karma-paramo bhava".

So, here, now, the word "abhyāsāj", it does not always have to refer to bhakti,
only. We will see that the word "abhyāsāj". The word "abhyāsāj" essentially
means practice. So, you know, you know, Krishna has used the word "abhyāsāj"
many times. Probably, the, among the most well-known verses is, you know,
Krishna's reply to Arjuna's question on "cañcalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa". In 3.33 and
34. So, in 35 and 36, when Kri... Arj..., Krishna replies. At that time, He
says, you know:

        asaṁśayaṁ mahā-bāho
        mano durnigrahaṁ calam
        abhyāsena tu kaunteya
        vairāgyeṇa ca gṛhyate

By practice. And by detachment. You will be able to conquer the mind. It is
difficult to control. But you will be able to. So, the word "abhyāsena" is, in
one sense, you know, non-specific word. It is, it is practice. What that
practice may be, we do not know. So, it can be the practice of karma yoga. It
can be the practice of "jñāna yoga". It can be the practice of "dhyāna yoga". It
can be the practice of bhakti yoga. Now, we might presume, you know, that from
the context, you know, the word "abhyāsāj" has been used, you know, in 12.9. You
know.

        abhyāsa-yogena tato
        mām icchāptuṁ dhanañ-jaya

So, you know, Kri..., the word has been used. "abhyāsa" over there. So,
therefore, this "abhyāsa" will refer to that. What has been talked about in
twelwe point, you know, you know, 12.9. But then, we discussed earlier how that
does not make any sense. So, you know, we have to look at the, you know, when
the word, when the meanings of the words are not just situated in a dictionary.
We have to, you know, we have to see the words in their broader context. And
words in sanskrit are multivalent. One word can have many meanings. That is true
of all languages, actually. So, because of that, because words are multivalent.
You know. You know. Therefore, we should focus on, you know, understanding the
meanings of words based on the overall agreement of those meanings with the,
first, with the message. And the, you know, you know, with the dest..., message
of the book. So, here, Prabhupada explains "abhyāsāj" to refer to nishkama karma
yoga. And then, he says that, you know, ""mat-kar...", the "tatah", "kar...",
you know, "karma". "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ". So, no. Sorry. "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ".
You know.

        dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas
        tyāgāc chāntir anantaram

So, that "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ" is referring to, you know, not just the "tyāgaḥ"
of karma yoga. That is referring to "mat-karma-paramo bhava". In 12.10. So, in
this way, you know, then, the hierarchy makes sense. Let us look at the
hierarchy once again now. So, what is Krishna telling? You know. Let us look at.
"śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj". So, "jñāna" is better than "abhyāsā". So, if
"abhyāsā" refers to nishkam karma yoga, then certainly, "jñāna" is higher. Then,
"jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyate". That "dhyāna" is higher than "jñānā". That is also
true. Then, "dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas". So, you know, you know, how is this?
That actually if "karma-phala" refers to the karma that is offered to Krishna.
Then, definitely, that bhakti is higher than "dhyānā". And then, if that is the
case, then we will also have this "tyāgāc chāntir anantaram". Krishna has said
this in 5.29, also. "jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati". One will get supreme "śāntim".
So, this is the explanation that Srila Prabhupada gives. Now, of course, Srila
Prabhupada also does not very specifically say this. So, we have to look at, you
know, start Prabhupada's purport. And study it repeatedly. And "Bhurijana
Prabhupada", in his "Surrender Unto Me", has also elaborated on this. And that,
this is the understanding we can get about how Srila Prabhupada is diss...,
dissolving it. Now, let us try to understand how, you know, you know, Baladeva
Vidyabhushana resolves this. So, Baladeva Vidyabhushana, you know, so, the way
he takes it is, he does two, you know, two special things in his expl..., in his
insight. So, first is, he says "śreyo" and "viśiṣyate". They do not necessarily
mean that they are higher in the hierarchy. But he says, they are easier to
perform for the unqualified. That means they are more accessible. So, "śreyaḥ"
and "viśiṣyate" are not from the perspective of the Absolute Truth. Because
here, Krishna is accommodating various levels of people. And because He is
accommodating various levels of people. So, what is high..., what is higher?
What is special? What is better? That is not point, the point of view of
Absolute. That is point of view of accessibility for the seeker. So, what
Krishna is telling over here is that:

        śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj
        jñānād dhyā ...

So, let us look at this now. You know. You know.

        śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj
        jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyate
        dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas
        tyāgāc chāntir anantaram

You know. You know. So, if we look at it from the point of view the, you know,
overall hierarchy, this very naturally ge..., gels with the hierarchy of the,
you know, Bhagavad Gita. So, easier to perform for the unqualified. So, yes.
Karma-yoga. It is easier to perform. Because one who does not know any...,
anything about transcendence. One does not know about, you know, Brahman.
Paramatma. Or Bhagavan very clearly. Just understand this material world is a
place entanglement. I want to get out of it. For that person, karma yoga is the
easiest, easiest to perform. So, in that sense, this is the most accessible. You
know. You know. Then, ater that, "dhyāna"is there. You know. You know. You know.
You know.

        śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj
        jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyate
        dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas

So, then, you know, actually speaking, for this person, who is, you know, trying
to seek spiritual advancement. Then, relatively speaking. Among these two,
"dhyāna". And "jñāna". Which is easier? It varies. But the way the Bhagavad
Gita's hierarchy has progressed, the hier..., the Bhagavad Git has preferred, if
we see, in the, you know, First to Five Chapter you know, Second to Five
Chapters, you know, Kri..., Chapters, Two, sep..., Chapter, Five, Krishna talks
about karma yoga. And then, Krishna does not talk about "jñāna yoga" directly.
Krishna talks about "dhyāna yoga". So, the way, Krishna has presented it,
actually, "dhyāna", He, He recommends "dhyāna yoga" more than bhakti yoga.
Sorry, more than, you know, "jñāna yoga". So, "dhyāna yoga" is there. Then,
after that, "jñānam yoga" is there. Certainly. So, actually, the idea is one
starts with detachment. Then, one starts contemplating on the Absolute Truth.
And then, one realises, one gets acquired, realised self-knowledge. And then,
after that, when one starts practicing bhakti. The practice of remembering
Krishna. Then, one will be at a very steady level. At a very steady level. So,
you know, you know, we see this in, you know, 7.17 and 18, also. In se..., and
7.17 and 18. 6, 7.16, Krishna talks about the four kinds of people who approach.
And then, He says, among them, you know, the "jñānī" is the best.

        teṣāṁ jñānī nitya-yukta
        eka-bhaktir viśiṣyate

He says, the "jñānī" is the best among them. So, in that sense, after "jñāna",
the sadhana-bhakti, that is performed, is very strong. If one goes that way.
This, how this, "Baladeva Vidyabhushana" an..., analyses this hierarchy. So,
he, the way, the critical insight which he uses is, "śreyaḥ" and "viśiṣyate"
does not at..., talk about, you know, the, persp..., from the perspective of
ultimately what is the best. It talks from the perspective of what is most
accessible for the seeker who does not have any other, you know, any other
spiritual qualification. Any spiritual qualification per say. Now, we generally
say bhakti is the most accessible. "su-sukhaṁ kartum avyayam". So, if bhakti is
the most accessible, then why is it being said over here that, you know, you
know, this is the most access..., that karma yoga is themost accessible. See,
bhakti becomes accessible when there is "krpa". But it is not that "krpa" is
available to, for everyone all the time. So, when the "krpa" is not available,
then karma yoga is the best way for a person to move forward. Now, we will have
to become a little more technical. So, phew, you know, now, let us try to
understand what Balad..., Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura does. We have seen how
"Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura" is, specialises in giving technical, different
levels. You know. So, first, let us see how Chakravartipada does this. In terms
of all the verses. So, he says that this hierarchy, this is "Visvanatha
Chakravarti" explains over hierarchy from 12.8 to 11. So, first, he says, there
is, there are aspects of bhakti which are internal. And external. So, he says,
within the internal, there are two levels. There is "smarana-atmika". And
"manana-atmika". You know. So, "smarana-atmika", so, these are actually, the
two, in the 12.8 itself. So, in 12.8 was:

        mayy eva mana ādhatsva
        mayi buddhiṁ niveśaya

So, "mayy eva mana ādhatsva". Now, the way, Srila Prabhupada explains this.
Prabhupada has put both, put this whole verse in one level. What is that? Our
inner le..., our whole life. And our inner world is offered to Krishna. That is
how Srila Prabhupada explains it. That is a perfectly valid explanation. But
another way of looking at it is that, and the mind and intelligence refer
to two different levels. You see. Generally, on the spiritual path, it is easier
to become intellectually convinced, then to become mentally purified. Or
mentally transformed. You know. It is eas..., if I just contemplate the
philosophy. And analyse seriously. I can understand that, ok, sense
gratification leads to misery. But then, that itself does not mean that I will
lose the desire for sense gratification. I may still very well have the desire.
And I have to battle with that desire. So, once the mind accepts something. That
means, we have more or less become realised. If the mind accepts it, this thing
leads to misery. I will not do this. And that is a very steady platform for
self-realisation. You know. That is what is, you know, being recommended over
here. That the mind is, the mind should become, you know, purified. So, that is
why, you know, "smarana-atmika". Where the mind is meditating on Krishna. With
the mind, "mayy eva mana ādhatsva". So, 12.8A is considered to be higher level.
This is "manana-atmika" bhakti. And then, below that is, "sma...", so, sorry.
This is "smarana-atmika" bhakti. With the mind, we remember. Spontaneously, we
remember things. "smarana-atmika" bhakti. That is meditating on Krishna with the
mind. Then, he says "manana-atmika", then, after that is "manana". Now,
generally, we might, you know, mistake the word "manana" with mind. But the
word "manana" is conscious contemplation. See, generally, when we say "smarana".
"smarana" is more like spontaneous recollection. So, what is the difference
between the two? You know. Spontaneous cre..., remem..., you know, spontaneous
recollection. And conscious contemplation. Spontaneous recollection means if we
love somebody. Even a mother loves the child. And then, she sees, maybe, you
know, some baby paraphernalia at a frie..., a friend's house. Immediately. You
know. Tuck. The thought go towards, you know, oh, what will my baby be doing?
That is spontaneous recollection. So, when there is "smarana-atmika", there is
spontaneous recollection. But, you know, you know, before, you know, there can,
we can, before us to come to that level. "Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu" has had
that level. As soon as he would see a river, he would think, oh, he would think
of the Yamuna immediately. That is spontaneous recollection. But for us, we do
not have that. So, we have to come, first, begin with conscious contemplation.
So, conscious contemplation. And then, spontaneous recollection. So, conscious
contemplation is "s...", "manana-atmika". "manana-atmika". That means one
contemplates seriously. Soberly. And by such serious sober contemplation, one
slowly rises to higher levels. So, you know, here, one may not have an
attraction. Just like if somebody has to solve a problem of mathematics. You
know. It is not that the person is in love with math..., mathematics. But that
person understands, ok, for this exam, I have to solve this problem. So, let me
think seriously about it. That is conscious contemplation. So, this is one level
lower. But both of them are internal bhakti. The mind is fixed. The intelligence
is fixed. Now, you know, then Chakravartipada says that the next level is, you
know, you know, "abhyāsā rūpa". "abhyāsā rūpa" is it, 12.9:

        abhyāsa-yogena tato
        mām icchāptuṁ dhanañ-jaya

So, by the practice of "abhyāsā", w..., attain, you know, strive to gain the
desire for me. You know. Strive to attain Me. You know. So, endeavor to fix the
mind on Krishna. That is "abhyāsā rūpa". So, why "abhyāsā rūpa"? Because the
form here is practice. Practice. These are internal bhakti. And then,
Chakravartipada goes and says the next two levels. So, are external bhakti.
External bhakti is what? First is "Mad-artha karma". That is work for Me. You
know. You know. So, when He says, work for Me. That is serve Krishna with the
external senses even if mind is not on Him. So, work for Me. For example, when
we say, decide to do some service for Krishna. We do, may be doing some, you
know, making some flowers for Krishna. Cooking for Krishna. Or maybe carrying
some, carr..., helping clean the temple. Carrying some things here and there.
So, when we are doing it, it may not be that our mind is fixed on Krishna at
that time. It may well be that our mind is running here and there. But still,
externally, we engage ourselves in, you know, you know, in the practice of, you
know, in, in the, if, f..., in the devotional service externally. So, that is
external bhakti. And then, you know, then, he says, this is 12.10. And then,
12.11 is what? You know. Nishkama karma yoga offered to Krishna. So, when
Krishna has talked about 12.11, Chakravartipada, he explains that, even when
Krishna is saying:

        sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ
        tataḥ kuru yatātmavān

That do "karma-phala-tyāgaṁ". That give up the, you know, fruits of work. Then,
he is saying that, actually, his point is, "Chakravartipada"'s point is this
whole section is talking about bhakti, only. The Chapter is bhakti yoga. The
section before this has talked about bhakti yoga. And the section after this
has talked about bhakti yoga. So, because the section before and the section
after are all about bhakti yoga. So, even this section is about bhakti yoga,
only. And that is why his point is that, even when Kri..., even if Krishna does
not use the word explicitly "māṁ". So, still, the "māṁ" is understood that it is
to be offered to Krishna. So, he analyses these two different levels as,
"Mad-artha karma" means directly working for Krishna. And
"sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ" means that, you know, you know, doing whatever work,
you know, whatever work is our curr..., circumstantial requirement. But then,
offering it to rishna. So, first is doing the work of Krishna. That means,
whatever Krishna wants us to do it. Second is what we want, we do it. But we
offer the fruits of it to Krishna. So, in this way, these are two distinct
levels. But both of them help one to move upwards towards Krishna. Now, with
this context in mind, this is hierarchy. I will repeat this hierarchy. Because
this is important to understand how he resolves the pro..., problem of 12.12.
So, you know, you know, basically, he categorises these verses, 8 to 11 into
five categories. So, two categories come in, you know, you know, thr..., three
categories come in internal bhakti. Two in external bhakti. So, in, in the
internal bhakti, first is, the mind is spontaneously attracted to Krishna. And
is lost in the remembrance of Krishna. That is "smarana-atmika". The second is
that, one consciously, or fixes the mind on Krishna. With, and does
intellectual contemplation. That is "manana-atmika". And the lo..., lower,
below it that is in 12.9. That is one is trying to fix the mind on Krishna.
Whether it is intellectually or whatever. One is not successful. The mind goes
here and there. But then, one fixes it on Him. And then, that is "abhyāsā rūpa".
So, now, you know, off, I said, in the external level. One works for Krishna. Or
one does whatever work one has to do. And then, offers it to Krishna. These are
two levels of external bhakti. The, so, now, with this explanat...,
understanding of the previous hiearchy. No, let us see how Chakravartipada
resolves the problem. So, you know, now, 12.12 says:

        śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj

So, now, he says, you know, according to him, the word "jñāna" refers to
"manana-atmika" bhakti. The word "jñāna" refers to, because, you know, "jñāna"
generally is the intellectual faculty. And "dhyāna" involves a mental faculty.
So, "manana", "manana" is contemplation. It is fixing the intelligence. So, you
know, you know, as, as compared to "jñā...", you know, "abhyāsā", "jñāna" is
higher. Which is natural. You know. It means one is striving to fix the mind on
Krishna. And one is fixing the mind on Krishna. You know. Then, better than
"jñāna" is "dhyāna". Why? Because here, not only is, you know, one
intellectually trying to absorb oneself in Krishna. But one might, one is,
spon..., may, one here, the level, at the mind spontaneously attracted to
Krishna. He is recollecting Krishna. So, "smarana-atmika" is higher than, you
know, "manana-atmika". You know. So, in this way, until the, by explaining what
"jñāna" and "dhyāna" mean from the context of the hierarchy as he has explained
earlier. You know. Chakravartipada resolves this. Now, interestingly, if we see,
if we look at this verse. You know. There are these words. "śreyaḥ". And
"viśiṣyate". "śreyaḥ" and "viśiṣyate" means superior. Or better. Now, there are
no such words in the third and the fourth line. Now, there is no explicit word.
"dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas". You know. "dhyān...". "dhyān...". Then, "dhyānāt
karma-phala-tyāgas". "viśiṣyate". So, there is no such word like that. So, what
Chakravartipada takes this to mean is that, he, these, the relationship between
two is not us, a relationship of, you know, comparative hierarchy. But it is a
relationship of a casual chain. What do I mean that? It is not a comparative
hierarchy means? It is not that, you know, "dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas". That
"karma-phala-tyāgaḥ" is higher than "jñān...", "dhyāna". He says no. "dhyānāt
karma-phala-tyāgas" means from "dhyāna", "karma-phala-tyāgaḥ" will come. You
know. So, what does it mean? You know. You know. You know. So, he says,
"karma-phala-tyāgaḥ" refers to bhava-bhakti. Why bhava-bhakti? Because at the
level of bhava-bhakti, there is no desire for bhukti and mukti. Then, there is
no desire for bhukti and mukti, could, naturally, then, you know,
"karma-phala-tyāgaḥ". So, "dhyāna" refers to bhava-bhakti. And one when is at
the level of bhava-bhakti, then what happens? That the "tyāgaḥ" that results
from it, the "tyāgaḥ" leads to "śāntiḥ". So, this can be correlated with
"kṛṣṇa":

        bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kāmī — sakali ‘aśānta’
        
        kṛṣṇa-bhakta — niṣkāma, ataeva ‘śānta’

So, "ataeva ‘śānta’". When does that person become peaceful? When the person has
no, you know, s..., independent desires. Apart from the desire to serve Krishna.
This is how it, now, let us look, understand this from another perspective. So,
what is he saying? You know. So, as compared to "abhyāsā", "jñāna" is better.
You know. So, what does that mean? That means, as compared to, "abh...", you
know, "jñāna" refers to "manana-atmika" bhakti. Ins..., instead of struggling to
fix the mind on Krishna, if one's intelligence is convinced, then one will fix
the mind on Krishna. And, you know, you know, you know, you know, better than
that is if one's mind is spontaneously attracted to Krishna. Then, there will be
sp..., there is spontaneous con..., meditation on Krishna. And when there is
such meditation on Krishna, then that makes one detached from everything else.
One has no other desires. And naturally, ren..., "tyāgaḥ", renunciation comes
about. And when there is "tyāgaḥ", there is "śāntiḥ". So, in this way, this is
a very insightful explanation that multiple acharyas have given. So, you know,
you know, you know, some devotees, you know, some of you may be, you know,
pulling your hair. Trying to understand what is going on. It is all, it all be,
all seem so complex. So, we have to understand that, actually, the Bhagavad Gita
is the word of God. In terms of conclusions, it is very clear. But in terms of
technicalities, there are complexities. And, you know, these complexities have
been, they have been done, you know, you know, gloriously. They have been
researched by our acharyas. And painstakingly, they have given explanations. You
know. Sometimes, some devotees have these romantic idea about studying previous
acharyas' purports. They are, they are, they think that studying previous
acharayas' works means, you know, there are some esoteric pastimes on Radha and
Krishna. How Radha and Krishna are, when they are grows of Vrindavan. How they
embraced each other. And then, when I read that, my hair will stand on end. And
then, I will feel ecstasy. So, some devotees have this romantic conceptions of
the previous acharyas' commentaries. Now, we should not have only that kind of
conceptions. The acharyas, when they are writing the commentaries, certainly,
their hearts are devoted to Krishna. They are also offering their heads to
Krishna. That means, they are using all their intelligence to comprehend
Krishna's words. And, you know, glorify Krishna's message. So, you know,
studying the acharyas' commentaries is also hard work. It is not just devotional
ecstasy, in terms of, you know, when knowing some pastimes which nobody else
knows. You know. Most devotees, whenthey want to study the acharyas'
commentaries, what they want to do? They want to read some books like, some
books on pastimes. Where they can succ..., tells, gets, find some new stories
which nobody knows. And then, impress others. Oh, I know this story about
Krishna. Yes. That is also a part of our legacy that acharyas have given us. But
the acharyas have also done serious philosophical study. And that is also there
as a part of our legacy. So, both of them are important. And "Tattvajñāna", whch
the Gaudiya Sampradaya acharyas have given us is remarkable. When we,the deeper
we go into it, the more we appreciate it. So, of course, now, I have not gone
into, I have, because our, in our Sampradaya, "Baladeva Vidyabhushana". And
Balad..., "Chakravartipada". "Chakravartipada" are primary commentators. That is
why I have not gone into the commentaries of the other, other acharyas over here
while explaining this. But suffice it to say that there is s..., even if we want
some intellectual nectar, there is so much intellectual nectar within the
jurisdiction of devotional service, itself. And for those of us who find this
very complex, then we do not have to get overwhelmed. For us, Srila Prabhupada
has been very merciful. And Srila Prabhupada consistently sticks to the
fundamentals.

Because ultimately, you know, the important point is to apply the fundamentals.
See, we can look at it from two different perspectives. There is a doctor. And
the doctor, when the doctor has to give a medicine. The doctor will give the
medicine. Ok. Take this medicine. This medicine. This medicine. So, Prabhupada,
us, chant Hare Krishna. Practice devotional service. And, you know, you will
become purified. Eventually, you will become liberated. That is the
prescription. But for the doctor to give that prescription, the doctor has to
study. And when we look at the medical science behind that, that can be quite
complex. So, similarly, now, Prabhupada gives us the philosophy. But Prabhupada
also focuses on an emergency mode sort of presentation and treatment. He does
not go into technicalities too much. But for those who want to go into the
technicalities, there is abundant room for intellectual investigation. And
intellectual relish within devotional service, also. And those who find this
overwhelming, we can focus on Srila Prabhupada's books. And we can relish the
simplicity of the process that he has given. And the potency of that process.
And bringing transformation in our hearts. So, in the next chapter, we will,
next class, we will discuss about the qualities that endear oneself to Krishna.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
