Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W8tsGwPuI4k
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_095_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_08_Text_14_to_22_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&redir_token=1ZnOh1NNzVEFgut-cQ1o96gI3458MTU0ODQ4ODYyOEAxNTQ4NDAyMjI4&v=W8tsGwPuI4k

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the Eighth Chapter. So, let us have a quick overview of the Eighth
Chapter before we move into the next section. So, here, we are, you know, we
discu..., we have finished first three sections. The whole focus of the chapter
is on remembrance of Krishna. And especially on remembrance at the time of
death. So, in, from 9 to 13, which we discussed in previous class. The
remembrance by yoga-mishra bhakti was discussed. Now, Krishna will talk about
remembrance by shuddha-bhakti. And then, He will talk about, you know, you know,
becoming fixed in the remembrance by comparing natures of the material and
spiritual worlds. So, let us look at 8.14.

        ananya-cetāḥ satataṁ
        yo māṁ smarati nityaśaḥ
        tasyāhaṁ su-labhaḥ pārtha
        nitya-yuktasya yoginaḥ

So, "ananya-cetāḥ satataṁ". Without any deviation. "ananya-cetāḥ".
"ananya-cetāḥ" means the consciousness goes to other things. "ananya-cetāḥ".
Without letting the consciousness go anywhere. "satataṁ". Constantly. What does
one, you know, do? "yo māṁ smarati nityaśaḥ". That one who remembers Krishna
constantly. So, what happens to such a person? "tasyāhaṁ su-labhaḥ pārtha". I am
easily obtained for such a person. "nitya-yuktasya yoginaḥ". "nitya-yuktasya".
One who is ever engaged thus. So, here, Krishna is telling that for one who
remembers Him, and with undeviatingly and constantly, He is easy to obtain. In
the whole Bhagavad Gita, this is the only verse which uses the word "su-labhaḥ".
Which indicates the process is easy. So, this is significant. Because this
verse, by no stretch of interpretaion, can be used to refer to anything other
than bhakti-yoga. And Krishna is telling that bhakti is the easiest way to
attain Him. So, "su-labhaḥ". So, if we look at the, what the previous verse has
talked about. Earlier, yoga-mishra bhakti, it is said:

        yad akṣaraṁ veda-vido vadanti
        viśanti yad yatayo vīta-rāgāḥ
        yad icchanto brahma-caryaṁ caranti
        tat te padaṁ saṅgraheṇa pravakṣye

When Krishna talked about that in this chapter itself in the yoga-mishra
section, yoga-mishra bhati section. So, you know, you know, therein, in 8.10, He
explains that, one has to practice "brahma-caryaṁ". One has to c..., become
free from attachment. One has to know the import of the Vedas. One has to chant
"oṁ". And one has to, in this way, you know, practi..., i..., practice serious
spiritual life. In their renou..., in the, away from the world. In the renounced
order. Then, one can attain "viśanti". One can enter into that Absolute Truth.
But here, Krishna is telling "su-labhaḥ". And what is He saying? All that one
has to do is just remember Him. So, you know, you know, this, if we look at the
overall flow of this chapter. You know. Krishna has talked about how a..., a...,
by the process of ashtanga-yoga, one can remember Him at the time of death. But
here, He is saying that, that same thing can be attained, that same goal. What
is the goal? Goal is "paraṁ puruṣam". "divyam". "yāti". It was told that the,
one has to attain the "paraṁ puruṣam". So, when one has to attain the "paraṁ
puruṣam", you know, you know, what is the means to, you know, what is that
"paraṁ puruṣam"? Ultimately, it is Krishna. That is clear in this chapter. We
discussed earlier. So, Krishna is saying, I can be attained. And I can be
attained easily. That means whatever is the result that could have been attained
by the process of ashtanga-yoga. That can be attained also through the practice
of, you know, you know, the bhakti-yoga. Undeviating, undistracted bhakti-yoga.
Now, when Krishna talks about this, what He see..., what is the implication? The
implication is that, bhakti-yoga is far preferable to ashtanga-yoga. That, as
compared to the, you know, demanding and grueling path of ashtanga-yoga. By the
path of bhakti-yoga, we can move faster much more easily in our spiritual life.
You know. So, now, when Krishna is talking about bhakti-yoga over here. What is
He, you know, you know, implying? He is implying that bhakti-yoga is easier than
ashtanga-yoga. Now, we can go back and consider Arjuna's admission in the Sixth
Chapter. In verses, 33 and 34. Where he says that, you know, this process is not
practical for me. Now, Prabhupada uses, you know, Arjuna's statements to
emphasise that ashtanga-yoga is not practical. And therefore, one should chant
Hare Krishna. And practice bhakti-yoga. So, now, you know, you know, Krishna,
you know, you know, some commentators of the Gi..., you know, Gita. Who,
especially who whould be, who critique Prabhupada's commentary, they say that
Krishna never rejects the process of ashtanga-yoga. Although, Bhaktivedanta
Swami gives the impression that, you know, they refer to Prabhupada as
Bhaktivedanta Swami. So, Bhaktivedanta Swami gives the impression that Krishna
rejects Bhagavad that Krishna rejects the process of ashtanga-yoga. Thus Gita
rejects the process of ashtanga-yoga. So, Krishna never does that. Krishna will
just, tells Arjuna that it is difficult. But if you practice it, you will
succeed. And you have to control the mind. If you do not control the mind, you
will not be able to succeed. You will not get anything. So, it seems as if
Krishna never re..., reje..., you know, you know, does not agree to Arjuna's,
you know, reluctance about the process of ashtanga-yoga. So, you know, is
Prabhupada, you know, not representing the Gita properly when he is saying that
the Gita rejects the path of ashtanga-yoga? Actually, we have discussed this
earlier. Prabhupada's strategy of presentation is that he gives the conclusion
of the Gita throughout the Gita. So, you know, we see very clearly that at the
end of the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna rejects all other paths.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja
        ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo
        mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

There, Krishna says that give up all varieties of religions. And just surrender
to Me. If you surrender to Me, you know, then, I, whatever sinful reactions you
may get, because of having given up other duties. Because of having done, you
know, you know, abandoned your other responsibilities. Because of have not
followed other paths. If you get any sinful reactions, I will take care of them.
Do not worry. So, Krishna, here, is very categorically telling, rejecting other
paths. "parityajya". There can be very few word that are stronger than
"parityajya". Just give it up. "sarva-dharmān". And it is categorical.
"sarva-dharmān". So, that means, if we look at the Gita. And its conclusion. It
very clearly rejects all other paths. And enthrones the path of bhakti. "mām
ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja" is clearly bhakti. So, what p..., Krishna does throughout,
th..., you know, what Krishna does at the end of the Gita, Prabhupada does
throughout the Gita in his purports. That is Prabhupada's compassion. That he
wants us to en..., he wants to ensure that we do not miss the conclusion of the
Gita. That we understand the conclusion properly. And we go along the, we go
properly along that conclusion. So, now, you know, you know, when we, you know
talk about this point that Prabhupada is giving the conclusion in the B..., you
know, throughout in his purports. What about the flow of the Gita? Now, within
the flow of the Gita, also, you know, Krishna does not deny the point that, when
Arjuna says that, it is difficult. He is, it is, you know, Krishna says, it is
difficult. So, the Sixth Chapter has been talking about ashtanga-yoga. Krishna
says, yes, practice. By practice. By:

        abhyāsena tu kaunteya
        vairāgyeṇa ca gṛhyate

By "abhyāsena" and "vairāgyeṇa", one will move forward. And Krishna, you know,
you know, overall does not recommend specifically the process of ashtanga-yoga
over there, also. Krishna says, do "abhyāsena". And do "vairāgyeṇa". So, He says
that one has to follow the pro..., process for transcendence. And one has to
control the mind. Then, one will attain success. It is essential to control the
mind. It is difficult. But it is essential. So, you know, Krishna does not, you
know, you know, specifically endorse the path of ashtanga-yoga. If we look, you
know, looking for the endorsement by Krishna. We find it over here in the Eighth
Chapter. Kri..., the word "su-labhaḥ" is a very strong en..., endorsement. And
this is easy, He, is easy. And it will give the same destination that can be got
by ashtanga-yoga. But if I not take it? So, that means what Krishna is doing is
in the Sixth Chapter, He is outlining ashtanga-yoga. And there, Arjuna expresses
apprehen..., reservation. Apprehension. And Krishna says yes. But one has to
keep practicing. Path of transcendence. And if thereafter, if we see, Arjuna's,
you know, the context in the Sixth Chapter. The question after that is ab...,
about a deviated yogi. So, Krishna's question, answer, also, to that is nothing,
you know, nothing to specifically do with ashtanga-yoga. It is generic. So, both
Arjuna's question and Krishna's answer, you know, are talking, you know, are
referring to generic topics. Arjuna's stimulation for the question is, the
stimulation for Arjuna's both question is that the path of, you know,
ashtanga-yoga, which Krishna has just, you know, you know, you know, you know,
delineated in the Sixth Chapter till 6.32. That is a difficult path. That is why
he feels, oh, I, I do not think I can have the equanimity of the mind. I do not
think I will be able to succeed in one life. So, that is why he asks these two
questions. One is, you know, the first question is from 6.33, 34. And the second
question is from six point, you know, you know, 37 to 39. So, either way, the
point which I am making over here is, if i..., this, all this seems too
technical. The simple point here is that Arjuna asks, Arjuna feels that the path
of ashtanga-yoga is difficult. And Krishna, in His response, you know, neither
rejects ashtanga-yoga, nor endorses ashtanga-yoga. Krishna simply says that,
yes, but one has to perceive in the transcendental p..., transcendental path.
And if one perceives this, one will get the supreme destination. Then, after
that, in the Seventh Chapter, Krishna introduces this. The process of
bhakti-yoga. And then, in the Eighth Chapter, He contrasts ashtanga-yoga and
bhakti-yoga. And He says that bhakti-yoga is easy. So, therefore, the answer to
Arjuna's point that:

        tasyāhaṁ nigrahaṁ manye
        vāyor iva su-duṣkaram

That controlling the mind is "duṣkaram". It is almost impossible. It is like,
what is it like? He says, it is like fixing the mind on, it is like controlling
the wind. It is impossible, he says. So, Krishna, as a response, is here
"su-labhaḥ". Yes. Actually, fixing the mind, you can attain Me easily. Fixing
the mind on Me, and you can attain Me easily. So, He is recommending the process
of bhakti-yoga as the easy way for attaining success on the transcendental path.
Now, we may say, actually, fixing the mind on Krishna, and fixing the mind
constantly on Krishna, is also not easy. Yes. Ultimately, no spiritual path is
entirely easy. You know. If achieving something material also requires effort.
And everything material that we achieve is temporary, then that which is to be,
that which is going to give us eternal result, we cannot expect that that will
come very easily. That will also require endeavor. No doubt. So, when we
understand this point that it will also require endeavor. So, what? What next
after that? Then, we have to understand that, anyway, there is endeavor. But
relatively speaking, which is the easiest? It is bhakti-yoga. Because the mind
gets some positive engagement right from the beginning. There are various
reasons why bhakti-yoga is highest, you know, is the best. But here, in the
context of the mind, you know, just trying to withdraw the mind from the
negative. And then, afterwards, trying to, you know, prove what is the positive
reality on which to focus the mind, that is an onerous process. That is a
burdensome process. But if one knows how to draw the mind ou..., back. And then,
you know, one does not have to just focus on drawing the mind back. Just one has
to undoubtedly take the mind away from the negative. From the agitating. You
know. Titillating. You know. Material temptations of this world. But one has to
f..., one knows that I can fix the mind on Krishna. And Krishna is such a
captivating. You know. Enchanting. You know. Fulfilling higher reality to fix
the mind on. So, therefore, the whole process becomes much easier. You know. If
somebody tells us. Please do not think of a blue monkey with, you know, red
tale. Now, we may never thought of a blue monkey with a red tale. But when we
are told do not think of it, immediately the mind will come of man..., mi...,
come, mind will come with a picture. So, the nature of the mind is that whenever
it is told do not do anything. It often goes to that. So, you know, if the, is
if the, if the mind is, you tell the mind. Do not think of this. Do not think of
this. Do not think of this. You know. Sa..., saying no is never pleasant. If we
have something positive to say yes to, then, you know, the absorption in that
positive enables us to say no to the negative much more easily. So, this is the,
you know, point. That this is the easy way. "ananya-cetāḥ satataṁ". Then, you,
for describing this. So, Srila Prabhupada's whole purport centers on the point
that, actually, we have to fix the mind on Krishna. And here, Prabhupada quotes
from the, now, Prabhupada, the quo..., does a very interesting development of
thought over here. You know.

"The Lord helps such devotees in various ways."

So, the "Kaṭha Upaniṣad", it says, you now, Prabhupada quotes 1.2.23. So:

        yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas/ tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanuṁ svām

So, "yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas". So, the la..., person whom the Absolute
Truth selects, that is the person who understands the spiritual reality. That is
the meaning. "yam evaiṣa vṛṇute". By who, by whom, "vṛṇute" is selected. That
person attain. "tena labhyas". "tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanuṁ svām". That person
understand the spiritual reality. So, whom does Krishna selects? That He
explains in the Bhagavad Gita. And other literature. He is not wha..., He is
arbitrarily partial. He is, you know, reciprocal. And He is universally
reciprocal. The, acco..., you know, so, if we approach Him with devotion. We
approach, want to have, understand Him to be the Supreme Person. Then, He will
reciprocate as the Supreme Person with us. So, Krishna is saying:

        yathā māṁ prapadyante

In 4.11. And then, He says in Bhagavad Gita 10.10:

        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

So, Krishna helps us. So, now, this is the second point. See, the first point
is that it is much more easier to fix the mind on Krishna than it is to just
withdraw the mind from material reality. That is what makes bhakti easy. Another
reason why bhakti easy is that it is, you know, Krishna who helps us to make
spiritual advancement. Krishna gives us His mercy. Krishna gives us intelligence
from within. By which, we can fix the mind on Him easily. So, therefore, you
know, His mercy also makes it, you know, much more easy for us to gain, you
know, you know, ta gai..., you know, to f..., you know, b..., gain the
concentration of the mind on Krishna. Now, somebody may say that, ok, but
Krishna says, first we have to practice "dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ". Sorry,
first, sa..., first, we have to practice, in 10.10, Krishna says:

        teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ
        bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam
        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ
        yena mām upayānti te

Now, He says, first, we have to, you know, first, we have to fix the, you know,
serve Him with, you know, with the affection that lead. "bhajatāṁ
prīti-pūrvakam". Then, He will give us buddhi. So, what about if, when we do not
have affection? Actually, we all have some affection. So, it is not that, only
for the pure devotees, Krishna will now give "buddhi-yogaṁ". Krishna will give
for everyone. Now, depending on how much is our affection. And how much is our
attention to serve, Krishna will in proportion give us intelligence. So, Srila
Prabhupada in his letters frequently talks about when devotees come up with
intelligent id..., ways of spreading Krishna Consciousness. Then, Prabhupada
appreciates. And he says that because you are so sincerely trying to serve
Krishna, Krishna is giving you intelligence of how to s..., how to spread the
Krishna Consciousness movement. How to share Krishna Consciousness. And
Prabhupada would quote this for "dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ". So, it is, n...,
Krishna can give us, also, guidance. And Krishna, anybody who has the intention
to remember Krishna. And has whatever little affection. With that intention and
affection, we try to serve. And Krishna will reciprocate. So, a devotee thinks
of Krishna everywhere. So, you know, in fact, a devotee creates the holy place
wherever he, he goes. That is why Srila Prabhupada quotes over here from the
"Chaitanya Charitamrita". You know. Prabhupada quotes over here.

"It was Śrī Advaita who told Lord Caitanya, “Wherever You are, O Lord – there is
Vṛndāvana.”"

What does this mean? He is telling that, actually, you know, He is saying that
the essence of Vrindavan is the remembrance of Krishna. And if the Lord Himself
present, then one can remember Him very easily. And, so, a devotee can invoke
Krishna's presence by remembrance everywhere. And can remember Krishna
everywhere. So, therefore, it is not necessary for a devotee to be present in
the holy place. Nor does a devotee have to go to a secluded place li..., as a
yogi. In the jungle. A devotee can be anywhere and everywhere. And it, remember
Krishna. And then, Prabhupada talks about the five rasas. And he healthy,
concludes again with the full maha mantra. He says, we should chant Hare
Krishna. That is the, that is the best way to remember Krishna. So, now, here,
we, He, Krishna establishes how raise remembrance through the process of
bhakti-yoga is far easier. And therefore, it is pre..., preferable. So, He, now,
He continues that theme. And He, you know, seemlessly jellies that theme in the
next theme. Ok. How does one get the impetus to fix the mind on Krishna?
Krishna is saying if you fix the mind on Him, then He can be easily attained.
But then, how does one get the m..., impetus to fix the mind? So, Krishna says,
actually, you know, one can think of the result of fixing the mind on Krish...,
Him. And one can think of the result of fixing, of not fixing the mind anymore.
Of fixing the mind, of letting the mind dwell on things other than Him. So, let
us look at the next verses. So, this is a next section starting.

        mām upetya punar janma
        duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam
        nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ
        saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

So, "mām upetya punar janma". That is. It is a famous verse. We often quote the
"duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam" in it. Yes. Actually, this world is "duḥkhālayam". It is
"aśāśvatam". It is temporary. And it is miserable. This is exactly opposite to
the statement that this world is that the movie is, and the novel is, they have
the idea, and they lived happily ever after. So, happily ever after, this is
exactly the opposite of that. You know. Krishna says, "duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam".
So, it is not happy. And it is "aśāśvatam". It is, there are no ever after on
this world. You know. So, it is exactly the opposite, you know, conception. But,
you know, the, all, this is the focus, the, of our quoting the verse. Normally.
But the, let us look at what the context of the verse is. And what the whole
verse is saying. So, Krishna is telling. He is making it as a, He is not making
it as a declaration. I declare that this world is "duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam". He is
just making it a passing fact. Yes. It is taken for granted that this world is
"duḥkhālayam". But if you worship Me, then you will not have to come back to Me.
Those who worship Me, those who, you know, you know, they will, they will not
have take birth again. But they will attain the supreme destination. "paramāṁ
gatāḥ". So, you know, it is, fo..., for the, from the Bhagavad Gita's, you know,
perspective, you know, it is like, you know, you know, it is, you know, taken
for granted that this world is "duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam". There is no need to
argue. And debate. And, you know, declare. It is something which both the
conversational si..., s..., c..., acce..., accepted. And it it like, say, you
know, a person tells, you know, you know, a doctor tells that person who is
sick. You know. If you take this this treatment. Then, you can be discharged
from the hospital. And you can go back home. You do not have to come back to
this, you know, miserable place. So, now, there is no need to d..., d...,
discuss. Or debate that a hospital is a miserable place. Or a jail warden may
say. You know. If you behave yourself properly, you will be discharged from the
jail. And then, you will not have to come back to this stinking, you know,
filthy place. So, now, neither the jail, neither the, you know, you know, jail
warden, not the, you know, prisoner they are thinking, oh, this is a desirable
place. And I do not want to go out of here. You know. The, both of them know
that the prisoner wants to go out. The question is, how to go out. So, like
that. And the context of the Gita. It is said that this world is "duḥkhālayam
aśāśvatam". No doubt. And if we just, "mām upetya", if you worship Me. Then, you
will not have to come back to this world. "saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ". You will
attain. They, they, so, those are "mahātmā"s. Those who are "mahātmā"s, they
will attain the supreme destination. So, now, you know, this is the second time
the Bhagavad Gita uses the word "mahātmā". So, 8.15 is where, Kri..., where has
Krishna used it earlier? In 7.19. Where He said that those who understand Him to
be "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti".

        bahūnāṁ janmanām ante
        jñānavān māṁ prapadyate
        vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti
        sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ

The souls are, the great souls, "mahātmā". And they are very rare. So, that,
that was clearly referring to devotees. Isn't it? You know. Because the point is
"māṁ prapadyate". So, surrender is essentially an act of bhakti. So, it is
referring to those "mahātmā"s as devotees. And here, also, if the previous verse
was talking about "ananya-cetāḥ satataṁ". And here, also, "mām upetya" is there.
So, here, also, the word "mahātmā" is used to refer to devotees. And the
Bhagavad Gita refers again to bha..., "mahātmā" in the next chapter. Wherein 9.13
will declare:

        mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha
        daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

        daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

        bhajanty ananya-manaso
        jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

So, actually, you know, He see, says that, those who worship Me, you know,
whole-heartedly. Knowing that I am imperishable. I am everything. That actually,
that understanding, similar to "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti". So, they are also
actually, focusing on, you know, you know, Krish..., the, that that reference to
"mahātmā" is also focusing on Krishna. It is not focusing on anything else. So,
"nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ". So, actually, this is the ultimate reality. And there
is no reality beyond this. So, the "mahātmā"s are those who understand Krishna
to be the ultimate reality. Nothing else. You know. Now, when we talk about
"paramāṁ gatāḥ". What is the "paramāṁ gatāḥ"? Krishna will, you know, you know,
more elaborately talk about the supreme abode in this chapter only. A little
later. In 8.20, 21, 22, He will talk about it. And He will do from, do it from
15.7, also. You know. From 15.6, also. So, we know, "paramāṁ gatāḥ" is the
supreme abode of Krishna. It is Krishnaloka. Goloka Vrindavan. Which is
described in the Brahma Samhita. So, here, the point is that, what, those who
worship Krishna, they do not have to come back to this world. They will, "na",
"punar janma". They will come back to Him. And they will attain the supreme
destination. Now, Krishna, what is their supreme destination? He has not
mentioned it here. But we can correlate it with what Krishna has talked about
earlier. You know. Krishna has said in, you know, 4.9. That those who understand
the transcendental nature of these activities, what happens?

        janma karma ca me divyam
        evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ
        tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma
        naiti mām eti so ’rjuna

So, those who understand Him in truth, you know, you know, they come back to
Him. So, and, now, here, Krishna is telling, those who worship Me. "mām upetya".
They attain the supreme destination. So, what is the supreme destination?
Supreme destination is going back to Krishna. They inf..., that can be inferred
from that way. So, now, here, onwards, Krishna will contrast between the
temporary, material world and the eternal spiritual world. You know. The
destination. You know. How, and, which ca..., one can get by worshiping Him. And
the destination that one can get by not worshiping Him. That means this, this
analysis is meant to serve as an impetus for fixing the mind on Krishna. If we
fix the mind on Krishna, we get a wonderful result. If we do not fix the mind on
Krishna, then what happens? We have to stay on in the miserable material world.
So, the temporariness of this material world is talked about in the next
section. In this section, onwards. So, Krishna continues the theme hereof. You
know. The eternality of the gain when we fix the mind on Him.

        ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ
        punar āvartino ’rjuna
        mām upetya tu kaunteya
        punar janma na vidyate

So, "ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ". So, you know, you know, from the topmost
planetary system down to the lowermost. "ā-brahma-bhuvanāl". So, right up to the
planet of Brahmaji, one may go. "lokāḥ". What will happen? "punar āvartino
’rjuna". "punar āvartino". One will come back again. But "mām upetya tu
kaunteya". "mām upetya". If one worships Krishna, then what happens? You know.
Then, "punar janma na vidyate". So, Krishna is giving two paths. And two
destinations. So, the path of, you know, any oth..., any other paths. And now
f..., in the material world, the highest destination is the, you know,
destination of Brahma. Krishna is saying, even if one does whatever activi...,
what, whatever best activities are possible. Apart from bhakti. Apart from
fixing the mind on Him. The best result we can get is going to Brahmaji's abode.
And even that is temporary. You know. If that is temporary. Therefore, that will
not give us an eternal result. But only worshiping Krishna will give us the
eternal result. So, now, the question may come up. That some people consider
Brahma's abode to be eternal. So, is it eternal? No, it is not. It is actually
temporary. Because the, you know, abode of Brahma is also within the material
world. It is in fact within one of the universes. So, it is, life-span of the
universe is same as the life-span of Brahmaji. So, when Brahmaji dies. At that
time, his abode dies. And the universe is also destroyed. So, you know, you
know, you know, Prabhupada quotes in the purport that by "pañcāgni-vidyā", one
can attain Brahmaloka. But because Brahmaloka is temporary. One cannot stay
there for long time. So, then, now, Prabhupada quotes interestingly Sridhar
Swami from hi..., in his comm..., commentary on the Bhagavad Gita. What does
Prabhupada quote? So:

        brahmaṇā saha te sarve
        samprāpte pratisañcare
        parasyānte kṛtātmānaḥ
        praviśanti paraṁ padam

So, "brahma". "brahmaṇā saha te sarve". Brahmaji along with his associates.
"sarve". "samprāpte pratisañcare". Those who are engaged, you know, "parasyānte
kṛtātmānaḥ". "parasyānte kṛtātmānaḥ". Those who are, "parasyā" is the Absolute
Truth. "ānte kṛtātmānaḥ". Those who are engaged in His service. "praviśanti
paraṁ padam". They attain the supreme abode. The ultimate destination. So, here,
He is making the point that, you know, you know, that in some cases, if the
Brahma is a pure devotee. And his associates have, by the association of
Brahmaji, become pure. Pure enough to go back to the spiritual world. Then, at
the time of the destruction of the universe, then they need not have to come
back. They can continue on, you know, they can, whatever devotional service they
have been practicing. Brahmaloka. At the des..., at the end of destruction, at
the end of the destruction of the universe, they continue with that by being
transferred to the spiritual world. They continue practicing devotional service.
So, this can happen. But this does not necessarily have to happen all the time.
The point here is that even Brahma's abode, if one is practicing Krishna
Consciousness constantly, then this will happen. Now, we may wonder, doesn't
Brahmaji, you know, doesn't Brahmaji and his associates practice Krishna
Consciousness? Yes, they do. But Brahmaji and b..., in general, the heavenly
planets are not primarily places of bhakti. They are places of punya. So, punya
and bhakti are not the same. In Svarga, those who do punya, attain Svarga. And
there, also, the svargavasis do yajna. And they live righteous lives. So, you
know, by that righteous living, m..., they are overall in accord with the
ex..., with what is expected of the hea..., con..., you know, of the heavenly
residents. But that righteous living is not bhakti. You know. Indra is watching
the apsaras dancing. And he is enjoying that. Now, that is not bhakti-yoga. You
know. That is bhoga. But that bhoga is not considered sinful. Because he has
done punya. And after doing punya in the earth, he has now attained the, those
things as enjoyment. You know. It is rightful enjoyment. So, therefore,
actually, what he is getting there is the result of his past punya. So,
generally, the yo..., you know, residents of heaven does not perform punya.
Sorry. They perform punya. They do not perform bhakti. And certainly, not
unalloyed bhakti. You know. It is like, there is too much enjoyment available
over there to do unalloyed bhakti. You know. Suppose, in the, suppose, we are
doing jappa in the morning. And we are told, you know, ri..., you know, make me
fest..., and feast is brought right in front of us. There is pulava. Pakora.
Puris. Paratha. Paneer sabji. You know. Big feast is there. And we are told,
now, chant your 16 rounds. And you are unroll is there. You cannot take your
eyes of the plate. You have to keep looking at the plate. And you have to chant
attentively. You know. How attentive can we be while in chanting? We will be
attentive. But not in chanting. We will be attentive about the, what is there in
the, what, what is there in the prasadam. And when we can take it. So,
therefore, this will not help us actually too much in our, you know, so, it is,
difficult. You know. When there is too much pleasure available to fix the mind
on Krishna. And that is why in the heavenly planets, they may not do "papa". But
the, for them, to do shuddha-bhakti is difficult. So, in the cav..., Sridhar
Swami's poi..., comment, point is here that if they do tu..., shuddha-bhakti,
then will get elevated from there. So, if one has to anyway practice, you know,
serious pure devotional service. They run out practicing on earth itself. And
then, go back to the spiritual world. By get mess..., mixed up. And go to Sv...,
Brahmaloka. And there, practice serious pure devotional service. And then, go
back. At least directly go back from here itself. That is the thrust of the
message of the Gita. You know. You know. So, now, we may wonder, how, how is
Brahma's abode destroyed? You know. So, then, Krishna will describe that. How
even Brahma's abode is temporary.

        sahasra-yuga-paryantam
        ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ
        rātriṁ yuga-sahasrāntāṁ
        te ’ho-rātra-vido janāḥ

So, "sahasra-yuga-paryantam". That actually there are "sahasra-yuga"s. So,
Brahmaji lives for a thousand years. Now, the word "yuga" can be used for
various terms. You know. Yuga is basically a large unit of time. You know. We
have, w..., vyasa, we have multiple uses of the word. Kali Yuga we have. So, it
is one Yuga. You know. It is a unit of time. Kali yuga has a different time
duration. And then, you know, "Dvapara Yuga" has a different time duration. So,
Yuga basically refers to a unit of time. How much unit of time? That will vary.
So, here, the word "Yuga" is used, not for Kali Yuga. Or Dvapara Yuga. Or Treta
Yuga. It is used for, you know, denoting, you know, you know, the overall
lifetime of Brahmaji. So, it is said that:

        sahasra-yuga-paryantam
        ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ

So, for a thousand divya-yugas. You know. You know. That is cycles of, you know,
the four yogas. That is the day of Brahma. And after that, there is the night of
Brahma. So, the day and the night of Brahma are "sahasra-yuga-paryantam". And
then, "rātriṁ yuga-sahasrāntāṁ". Then, after that, you know, the "rātriṁ" is
also "yuga-sahasrāntāṁ". For a thousand years. And "te ’ho-rātra-vido janāḥ".
This is also, this is the "rātriṁ". "vido janāḥ". So, whether wise people
understand this. So, that mean, the point is, there is a cycle in Brahmaji's,
you know, life, also. That he i..., i..., there is, led, you know, day which is
for very, very long. And night which is for very, very long. But ultimately, it
is temporary. And that is what the point, bu..., Prabhupada makes over here. You
know.

"These “hundred years”"

That is referring to Brahmaji's life. So, Prabhupada puts it in double quotes.
Because the years are different from our years.

"These “hundred years” by earth calculations total to 311 trillion and 40
billion earth years."

So:

"By these calculations the life of Brahmā seems fantastic and interminable, but
from the viewpoint of eternity it is as brief as a lightning ﬂash. In the Causal
Ocean there are innumerable Brahmās rising and disappearing like bubbles in the
Atlantic. Brahmā and his creation are all part of the material universe, and
therefore they are in constant ﬂux."

So, you know, you know, somethin..., somebody who lives for trillions of years,
it is very different for conceiving that as a bubble in the ocean. But
Prabhupada compares it, bubble in the Atlantic. You know. Bubble is last for a
few moments. You know. One just, somewhere some wave comes along. Some terminus
comes along. The bubble bursts. So, actually, you know, once we conceive
eternity. Once, we understand what is eternity. It is going to last forever. And
ever. And ever. Then, in com..., in comparison with eternity, everything else
appears insignificant. So, that is why for us, from the relative perspective,
Brahma's life may seem phenomenal. But from the perspect of eternity, it is just
as brief as, Prabhupada gives two metaphors. One is a lightning flash. And as
the life-span of a bubble. Both temporary. Then, in the next verse, He says
that, you know, continues this theme. What happens when, you know, the day of
Brahma ends?

        avyaktād vyaktayaḥ sarvāḥ
        prabhavanty ahar-āgame
        rātry-āgame pralīyante
        tatraivāvyakta-saṁjñake

So, "avyaktād vyaktayaḥ sarvāḥ". That actually, from the unmanifest, you know,
"sarvāḥ". All living entities "vyaktayaḥ". And "prabhavanty ahar-āgame".
"ahar-āgame" is, you know, at the start of the day. And then, "rātry-āgame
pralīyante". That when the night comes, "pralīyante". Destroyed.
"tatraivāvyakta-saṁjñake". You know. This is referring to the cycle of cosmic
manifestation and unmanifestation. So, you know, we have in physics the law of
the conservation of energy. So, matter is considered to be indestructible. It
may be convertible from one form to another. It may be inconvertible into an
energy. But convertibility, you know, is not the same as destructibility. You
know. So, you know, this principle is accepted even in, n..., n..., the Vedic
scriptures. So, su..., the whole, you know, you know, substance of matter, that
is eternal. That is indestructible. But actually, you know, you know, what we
are attracted to in the material world is not the substance. We are attracted to
the forms. You know. You know. Suppose, you know, you know, that in some
traditions. When a person dies, that person's body is actually put on a tower on
top. And then, birds come and eat it. And that is the way they actually consider
that the body can be, you know, utilised as food by others. And the body can,
you know, you know, be, is give. That is the tradition which they have. Now, in
that case, what happens is, say, a bird has eaten, bird eats the, you know,
body. And then, the bird comes along. And, you know, the bird discharges its
refuse. And the bird fall..., the refuse falls down. And you tell somebody. You
know. This is actually, this is actually your girlfriend. It is what? You know.
So, the person, somebody says, girlfriend or boyfriend had died. And then, the
body is wasted. And the body gets converted into stool. So, we will rebel. We
upend. And repelled at that refuse of the bird. But we are attracted and
captivated by the form of the opposite sex. Why is that? Because our attraction
is to the form. It is not just to the substance. Substance may be the same. But
we are attracted in the material world to the form. And that is why it is,
material world, when we become attached to the form, we suffer. So, Krishna is
telling over here, the form is eternal. But the form becomes manifest and
unmani..., sorry. The substance is eternal. But from the substance, form is
sometimes manifest. Sometimes unmanifest. So, at the beginning of Brahma's day,
the form becomes manifested. At the end of Brahma's day, the form becomes
unmanifested. In this way, there is the cycle which goes on and on, and on. And
this is, goes on for an entire lifetime of Brahma. Now, Krishna will continue
this discussion. The emphasise of this discussion is that actually everything is
temporary.

        bhūta-grāmaḥ sa evāyaṁ
        bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate
        rātry-āgame ’vaśaḥ pārtha
        prabhavaty ahar-āgame

So, "bhūta-grāmaḥ sa evāyaṁ". That, actually, "bhūta-grāmaḥ". The whole
aggregate of all living beings. "bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate". Again and again.
"bhūtvā". "bhūtvā" means they come into being. They take birth. And "pralīyate".
They are destroyed. "rātry-āgame ’vaśaḥ pārtha". So, "rātry-āgame". When night
comes. "’vaśaḥ". So, the "’vaśaḥ" means helplessly. The "pralīyate", the
destruction happens. You know. Helplessly. And then, "prabhavaty". Again, at the
time of, you know, manifestation. The manifestation happens at "ahar-āgame". At
the time of day. So, the point here is, you know, to highlight how we are not
in control. You know. If we study the history of the world. You know. Even from
the perspective of whatever. Modern science known in the last 1000-2000 years.
We will see that, you know, when nature discharges its wrath, at that time, such
devastation can happen. An entire civilisation, can you imagine, is wiped out
completely. Because of, say, one river just turning its course. You know.
Sarasvati river. It is supposed to have gone from the Saras..., from the
Rajasthan area. When the Sarasvati river, you know, just, you know, turned
course. Then, Sarasvati river dried out. And eventually, the whole greenland
became a wasteland. It became a desert. So, one ca..., calamity can just, when
n..., nature unleashes its force. You know. That which is a, you know, it is a
flourishing city, like Pompeii. One earthquake. And it, the whole thing can just
be destroyed permanently. One moment. You know. Everything is gone. So,
actually, we often feel that we have a lot of control in the world. I can do
he..., I can go here. I can do this. I can achieve that. And, you know, we have
this illusion of control. But then, as compared to the walking up nature, we are
"avaśaḥ". We are "avaśaḥ". We are helpless. You know. Our body is so fragile.
That you know, when we, we are walking along the road. And one boom. One vehicle
comes. And hits us from behind. One blow. That can prove to be fatal. Or inside
the body, from somewhere, one bug can come inside. One germ and that can destroy
us. So, one bug. One blow can fell us individually. And similarly, you know, one
slap of material nature can fell, can destroy an entire city. Or entire
civilisation, also. So, these are what is within our experience. And our
experience is so limited. That we see that sometimes some cunami. So..., or some
hurricanes. Some cyclones. Something like that comes up. And that causes so
much devastation. You know. Within our limited experience, also, we can see the
frightening fury and power of nature. You know. But, you know, here, Krishna is
talking about at the universe. You know. You know. The, at universal, cosmic
timescales. And He is telling that, actually, just the creation, we just brought
into creation when, you know, the day of brahma comes. And we are annihilated.
We means not our body. But our m..., material existence. The living entities
are created. And living entities are, you know, living entity, the aggregate of
the living entities.

        bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate

So, the arena for action, it is, we are helpless. Sometimes, we just cash
through there. And, you know, sometimes, we are just drawn out of the arena. So,
we are, when we understand this helpless situation of ours, then we are, we want
to seek something eternal. Something lasting. Something that will not let us
down. Therefore, the important point here is to recognise that in this world,
there is everything else which is temporary. And it is only Krishna who is the
eternal reality. Apart from Him, everything else is temporary. "prabhavaty
ahar-āgame". So, here, let us, you know, d..., discuss the Brahmaji's lifetime a
little bit more. You know. So, Brahmaji's lifetime, Prabhupada explains in the
purport that, yah, so, Prabhupada explains that, you know:

"During the daytime of Brahmā they can exhibit their activities on higher and
lower planets within this material world, but at the coming of Brahmā’s night
they are all annihilated."

So, here, the point is, there are higher and lower planets. But, you know, you
know, ultimately, everything here is temporary. So, within our temporary
life-span, the disparity of higher and lower may seem very significant. You
know. Somebody is wealthy. Somebody is traveling in a car. And I am traveling in
a sim..., in a local itself. That person is traveling in a plane. I am traveling
in a train. You know. The disparity may seem huge. That person lives in, you
know, lives in, you know, villa. I have to live in a condo. So, this may seem a
huge difference. But when we understand it is temporary. Then, we do not get so
worked up by it. You know. Because we understand that, ultimately, o..., whe...,
what is eternal destination, that we get, that is, reward is going to really
matter. So, again, we see in this purport, Prabhupada is quoting the Hare
Krishna maha mantra full. So, the emphasis is remember Krishna. Only by
remembering Krishna can we attain Him. So, now, you know, let us look at the,
you know, now, Krishna, after describing this material world, its temporary
nature. Now, He start describing the spiritual world.

        paras tasmāt tu bhāvo ’nyo
        ’vyakto ’vyaktāt sanātanaḥ
        yaḥ sa sarveṣu bhūteṣu
        naśyatsu na vinaśyati

So, "paras tasmāt". You know. So, the, theref..., "tasmāt", the, "paras". There
is a transcendental nature. "tu bhāvo ’nyo". "bhāvo". "bhāvaḥ" is nature.
"anyaḥ". There is another nature that is there. "’vyakto ’vyaktāt sanātanaḥ".
That there is unmanifest. And manifest. You know. "sanātanaḥ". So, "yaḥ sa
sarveṣu bhūteṣu". Even this world, there is much that exists. "sarveṣu bhūteṣu
naśyatsu". When everything in this world is destroyed. That "na vinaśyati". That
stays as it is. So, Krishna is reassuring us that although even Brahma's abode
is destructible. But that does not mean that all of existence is destructible.
There is "paras tasmāt tu bhāvo". There is another nature which is not
destroyed. And Krishna is actually, you know, referring to it, you know, to in
an "anyaḥ". Very categorically. It is different. So, in this world, there is
"vyaktaḥ". "avyaktaḥ". There is manifest. And unmanifest nature. But there are,
both are temporary. And there is another nature which is eternal. See, e...,
actually, this, only the spiritual that is eternal. In this world, peo..., many
people mistake the mental to be the spiritual. And they think, what is inside is
spiritual. But no. Krishna is telling, so, the mental may be unmanifest to us.
But although it is unmanifest, that is not spiritual. The mental is also
material. So, like that, in the material world, some things are manifest. Some
things are unmanifest. But neither of them is eternal. What is ultimately
eternal is that which is spiritual. "naśyatsu na vinaśyati". That, such a
nature. And that is the eternal nature. When all in this world is destroyed. So:

"Kṛṣṇa’s superior energy is completely opposite in quality to material nature."

Completely opposite in quality. What does completely opposite mean? Actually,
you know, in science, they have the conception of, and, and of antimatter. And
Prabhupada use this con..., notion of antimatter to present spirit. And he wrote
a book called "Easy Journey to Other Planets". In which, he said, actually, the
actual antimatter is described in the Bhagavad Gita. And that is spirit. And
scientists have the conception of antimatter as, as something which, when matter
and ma..., antimatter come together, both will be destroyed. But Prabhupada said
that this is, this antimatter is not, not really anti. You know. It is not
adequately anti. For antimatter to be truly anti. It has to be, as Prabhupada
says, completely opposed to matter. So, it is not that when matter, antimatter
come together, both will be destroyed. If antimatter is truly anti of matter,
then it is properly, should be that, matter is destructible. Antimatter should
be indestructible. So, matter generally drags us down. Spirit lifts, spirit
itself is, you know, lifts up. And lifts up, spirit lifts other things up.
Matter is the unconscious. Spirit is conscious. You know. You know. So, there
is, there is a radical difference between the two. And that und..., that
understanding is poi..., highlihted by the point now. That matter, may be
manifest or unmanifest. But "paras tasmāt, "bhāvo ’nyo". That there is another
power which is beyond the two. Now, Krishna will describe for the first time in
the Bhagavad Gita a little bit more about this, this abode. What is that?

        avyakto ’kṣara ity uktas
        tam āhuḥ paramāṁ gatim
        yaṁ prāpya na nivartante
        tad dhāma paramaṁ mama
        
So, here, Krishna, clearly, now, completes the link. He says that "paramaṁ
mama". "tad dhāma paramaṁ mama". This is My supreme abode. So, repeatedly,
Krishna has talked about that person will attain the ultimate, the supreme
destination. But what is that supreme destination? He makes it clearer. So, in
8.15, He has said that those who worship Him, you know, you know, that "saṁsiddhiṁ
paramāṁ gatāḥ". They will attain the "paramāṁ". "paramāṁ gatāḥ". Supreme
destina..., "tad dhāma paramaṁ mama". So, Krishna is using almost the similar
word. "paramāṁ". "paramaṁ". And He is saying that is My abode. And what is the
characteristic of this abode? You know. So, He, what He mentions is, "yaṁ prāpya
na nivartante". If you attain this, you will not come back. So, that is also
similar to, you know, what Krishna has talked.

        yad gatvā na nivartante

You know. Krishna has talked about that many times. Once, you go there, you will
not come back. So, He has talked about it in se..., several places. But here, in
this chapter itself, in 15 and 16, He has talked about it. So, you know, "tad
dhāma paramaṁ mama". But once one goes there, one does not come back. Beyond
that, here, also, He is talking about further characteristics. "avyakto ’kṣara
ity uktas". Now, somebody may say that, what is happening over here? "avyaktaḥ".
And "akṣaraḥ". So, we have to understand here that words can have different
meanings at different poi..., context. So, in the previous verse, you know, the
word "avyaktaḥ" referred to material. But unmanifest. So, actually, subtle
matter is unmanifest to us. And spirit is also unmanifest to us. So, now, in the
previous verse, Krishna has said, what I am talking about is "’vyakto ’vyaktāt
sanātanaḥ". It is, what I am talking about, is actually beyond the manifest and
unmanifest matter. But now, He is using the same word, b..., "avyaktaḥ".
"avyaktaḥ" is using to refer to the spirit itself. So, we have to understand
that "avyaktaḥ" does not always mean the same thing. So, subtle matter is
"avyaktaḥ". And spirit is also "avyaktaḥ". So, in the previous, you know, you
know, verse. 8.20. Krishna is not necessarily referring to subtle matter. Yes.
He is referring to when all of matter is, be..., all material existence is
withdrawn. Then, it exists as the, you know, "mahat-tattva". These are un...,
the inactive "mahat-tattva". So, the, n..., in, in, not in balance. Not, you
know, it is in, it is in equilibrium. It is completely frozen. Silent.
"pradhana", it is called. So, the nomenclature may vary. At some places. But in
general. You know. So, Krish..., that, that is also "avyaktaḥ". And here, also,
the spiritual world is "avyaktaḥ". But they are two different things. Both are
used, you know, both have the characteristic of being "avyaktaḥ". Not being
manifest to us and s..., perception. But one is material. The other is
transcendental. And "akṣaraḥ". "avyaktaḥ ’kṣara ity uktas". "akṣaraḥ" means that
it is infallible. "akṣaraḥ". So:

        akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ
        svabhāvo ’dhyātmam ucyate

Krishna has used the word "akṣaraḥ" right at the start of this chapter itself.
You know. To describe the Brahma in 8.3. You know. The first line on, answer
to Arjuna's seventh question. In 8.1 and 2. It is "akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ". So,
"akṣaraṁ". So, "brahma" is "akṣaraṁ". It is not f..., it is not destructible. It
is not fallible. So, here, He is saying it is unmanifest. And it is infallible.
So, fallibility here refers to the fallacy of the fallibility in terms of
destructibility. So, it is indestructible. "akṣaraṁ". So, here, Krishna is
referring that a..., that abode is "avyakto ’kṣara ity uktas". It is known to be
"avyaktaḥ" and "akṣaraḥ". And "tam āhuḥ paramāṁ gatim". Now, in case, somebody
has any doubt that, ok, the "paramāṁ gatim" and, you know, Krishna's "param
dhāma" are different. This verse clearly resolves that. There is no destination
higher than Krishna's abode. The same verse is using the word. The same verse is
using the word. "paramāṁ gatim". Here, we see, uses the word. "paramāṁ gatim".
The supreme destination. And in same verse, He is using the word. "dhāma paramaṁ
mama". So, in this way, what He is saying is very very clear here. "tad dhāma
paramaṁ mama". So, the same line says, this is supreme destination. And this is
My supreme abode. My transcendental abode. So, the point is that, Krishna's
abode is the supreme destination. There is no destination higher than this
sup..., Lord's abode. And Prabhupada quotes from the "Brahma-saṁhitā". Famous
verse is described in Krishna's beauty. So, that abode is described briefly
here. And it is described much more in the "Brahma-saṁhitā". So, now, Krishna
will describe how one can attain that abode.

        puruṣaḥ sa paraḥ pārtha
        bhaktyā labhyas tv ananyayā
        yasyāntaḥ-sthāni bhūtāni
        yena sarvam idaṁ tatam

So, here, He makes it clear. You know. "puruṣaḥ sa paraḥ pārtha". That, that
"puruṣaḥ" is "paraḥ", is supreme. There is no one greater than Him. And how is
that "puruṣaḥ" att..., attained? "bhaktyā labhyas tv ananyayā". They are
attained by "ananyayā", "bhaktyā". And what is the characteristic of that
"puruṣaḥ"? "yasyāntaḥ-sthāni bhūtāni". So, "yasyāntaḥ". All of material
existence is situated within Him. And "yena sarvam idaṁ tatam". That He is
inside everything. So, this is very st..., beautiful statement. That everything
is inside Him. And He is inside everything. So, how is that possible? He is
inside everything. And everything is inside Him. That is possible when we
understand the hea..., His inconceivable nature. You know. He can manifest
Himself in multiple forms. One simple way to understand it is that as
Mahavishnu, everything is inside Him. And as "Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu", as the
Paramatma, He is inside everything. That is of course one way of looking at it.
But there are other ways, also, of looking at Him. "yasyāntaḥ-sthāni bhūtāni".
That His Brahman effulgence is a, all-pervading. So, you know, everything is
situated in Brahman. And actually, you know, the Lord exists everywhere. You
know, so, in that sense, you know, He, this verse is referring, not to the
Brahman. It is clearly referring to "puruṣaḥ sa paraḥ pārtha". It is referring
to the Supreme Person. "puruṣaḥ sa paraḥ pārtha". So, this is, the Lord is
inside everything. He is, you know, ev..., Lord is inside everything. And, you
know, everything is inside Him. But, you know, when we have devotion inside us
for Him. Then, we attain His eternal destination. Attain His supreme abode. We
attain that Supreme Person. So, attaining Krishna and attaining His abode are
the same thing. You know. When we love Krishna, naturally, we return back to
Him. To His abode. So, Krishna, how does one attain? Krishna makes it very
clear. The word is "bhaktyā". "bhaktyā labhyas tv ananyayā". It is by bhakti
alone that we can attain Him. You know. No..., not by any other process. You know.
You know. So, Prabhupada quotes here from the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad". So, "Eko
vaśī sarva-gaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ". "Eko vaśī". That, actually, the Lord who stays at one
place. But "sarva-gaḥ", He is all-pervading. "kṛṣṇaḥ". He goes everywhere. You
know. His, He goes to diferent places for performing pastimes. But He also pervades
His influence everywhere through His energies. And through His all-pervading
manifestations. So, the point is that, actually, this is the wonderful abode of
the Supreme Lord and is the wonderful Supreme Lord who resides in that abode.
So, in this section, from verses 15 to 22, what has happened? We, there is m...,
contrast between the process of, you know, betwee..., that, there has been
emphasis on fixing the mind on Krishna. That happened in 14. And how does one
get the impetus to fix the mind on Krishna? By contemplating how everything else
is temporary. And fixing the mind on anything else will ultimately only end in
misery. Therefore, let us fix the mind on Krishna. And their connection, if the
description of the temporary nature of even Brahma's abode is described,
temporary nature of all of material existence is described. And then, the
eternal, eternal spiritual abode of Krishna. Which is life supreme destination.
"paramāṁ gatāḥ". And paramaṁ", "dhāmaṁ". That is described. So, we will discuss
in our next class that, you know, you know, that, successive section. Where
Krishna says a devotee should focus on remembering Him. And not worry about
various other methods by which one can attain that supreme destination. That we
will discuss in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
