Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RlKfXS_pXyA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=RlKfXS_pXyA&redir_token=XjHTQLzWatKmtgoAQ-83AYCJC2t8MTU0ODQ4ODg3M0AxNTQ4NDAyNDcz&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_103_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_09_Text_31_to_34_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. So, we are discussing
the last few verses of the Ninth Chapter. And then, we will come and sweep the
Tit..., with the Tenth Chapter. So, the Ninth Chapter, the last section is
talking about how bhakti-yoga can elevate anyone. No matter how fallen that
person may be. So, we discussed the verse "api cet su-durācāro". And then, we
discussed about how this verse can have different kinds of explanations. There
is a liberal commentary. And there is a conservative commentary. So, what do I
m..., mean by liberal, conservative? The conservative commentary, you know,
emphasises the point that the devotees, actually, do not justify any sinful
activity in the name of devotion. That should not be done. Srila Prabhupada also
emphasises that in the purport. And in contrast, the liberal commentary
mentions, you know, highlights the love of Krishna. And that Krishna keeps
loving, you know, you know, those who are trying to come to Him. Irrespective of
whatever misdemeanor happens from them exactly. You know. From them. So, do,
Krishna's love is evident in this verses. And the last part of this verse is
that:

        kaunteya pratijānīhi
        na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

So, here, so, we concluded yest..., in the previous class, by discussing
Bhaktivinoda Thakur's explanation of how this refers to the gopis. Now,
"kaunteya pratijānīhi". Krishna is telling Arjuna, you declare. Why should you
declare? You know. You know. "pratijānīhi" means actually to declare. Not just
to..., to thr..., tell. But to proclaim. To announce. Visvanatha Chakravarti
Thakura explains that the word "pratijānīhi" indicates Krishna's mood that
Arjuna should go out in a public square. With the drums and bugles. And just as
when an announcer sent by the king has to make announcements. Goes with, you
know, loud instruments which attract people's attention. And people come
publicly an announcement is made. Which is kind, which is authoritative. And
authorised. So, like that, Krishna is telling Arjuna, go and announce
"pratijānīhi" publicly. What? "na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati". That My devotee shall
never perish. My devotee shall never perish. Now, you know, this is an endearing
expla..., you know, a revelation of Krishna's heart. So, Visvanatha Chakravarti
Thakura do..., you know, gives a, you know, a set of inner conversations that
happened between Krishna and Arjuna. The way the thoughts are going. Krishna,
you know, so, Arjuna, when heearing the previous verse:

        api cet su-durācāro
        bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

You know.

        sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ
        samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

So, He says, so, Krishna is telling that My devotee should be always considered
saintly. You know. Krishna, Ar..., then Arjuna, Arj..., Ar..., then, when
Krishna speaks this. And Arjuna says, but how can it be considered, so, how can
a devotee be considered saintly? That devotee is doing "su-durācāraḥ". Terribly
bad activities. Then, Krishna says that, actually, that devotee is, you know, he
will soon become religious. "kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā". You know. Soon, that
devotee will become "dharmātmā". He will become religious. And then, all the
agitations of the mind which are making that person restless, you know, they
will go away. And what will happen is, you know, "kṣipraṁ", "śaśvac-chāntiṁ
nigacchati". So, "chāntiṁ nigacchati". The real peace is not just external. The
real peace is internal. You know. We do need some peaceful situation externally,
also, at some level. There is war going on. Then, there is anxiety. But
actually, the lasting peace is not external. It is internal. When there are
people, when our heart is in harmony with God. When we are not resenting and,
you know, reject..., rejecting God's guidance and love. Then, we, we can come to
harmony with God. And that brings lasting peace. "śaśvac-chāntiṁ nigacchati".
So, now, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura says that at this point, Arjuna, so, ok,
that devotee becomes religious, that is good. Then, that person can be accepted
as saintly. But what if that devotee does not become religious. Krishna says
that still, "kaunteya pratijānīhi". Oh, Arjuna, declare "na me bhaktaḥ
praṇaśyati". That My devotee will never perish. What this means is that the
devotee will always be eager and ready to serve Krishna. And, you know, Krishna
will always be eager and ready to protect that devotee. That is a normal
reciprocation of love. Now, if the devotee falls away, and does some sinful
activities. Krishna says, even then, the devotee will not perish. So, here, if
we look at the whole context, Krishna is talking about the spiritual
advancement. And the spiritual protection of a devotee. So, when, you know, the
devotee engages in "su-durācāraḥ". Naturally, that is a fall. So, when there is
a fall, you know, you know, what happens is, it is, you know, very
heart-breaking. Not just for, you know, the devotee. You know. Devotees who are
meant doing that particular. Or guiding. Or helping. Or, you know, caring for
that devotee. But in general for everyone. Especially if that devotee is a, you
know, well-known devotee. When somebody falls, that is the, that is a very, it
is, causes a great sadness. So, it causes not only sadness to all, you know,
ever..., devotee community. But actually, it also causes great distress to the
Lord. At one level, we can say, the Lord is "ānanda-mayo ’bhyāsāt". The Lord is
always happy. And nothing can cause distress to Him. That is true. You know. He
is always, it is not that because a devotee falls off from the path of, you
know, you know, bhakti-yoga in the material world, Krishna has stopped
performing rasa-lila with the gopis in the spiritual world. You know. He says, I
am in bad mood now. No. That will not happen to Krishna. Because Krishna is
available for the love, that the gopis are happe..., offering..., offering over
there. We have to understand that God means God can do multiple things at the
same time. And He can be available to reciprocate with different devotees in
different ways. You know. So, therefore, He is reciprocating with the gopis. By
being fully available for them. For performing pastimes in the spiritual world.
At the same time, He is also available as the Supersoul in the heart of every
living being. And even those sadhakas who are falling away from the path of
devotion, He is there for them. If they just turn to Him. So, you know, you
know, when Krishna says, My devotee will never perish. What does it mean? It
does not mean that the devotee may not fall down. In fact, Krishna said,
already, the possibility is acknowledged. "su-durācāraḥ". There can be a
grievous fall, also, which can happen. But the emphasis of Krishna's p..., you
know, statement is that, you know, that fall is only temporary. It is not et...,
eternal. So, there will be, there may be a, you know, you know, you know, you
know, there may be a slip or a fall. But there is no fatality. See, slip means,
while walking along, there is small slip. So, he just slips. And fall means, one
actually, you know, hits the ground. But fatality means, one dies. So, there,
there can be accidents in spiritual path. There can be slips. And there can be
falls. But on the spiritual path, there are no fatalities in the sense that the
soul is eternal. And whatever credits one has acquired on the spiritual path,
they are also going to be there forever with the person. So, now, we ma..., we
do see that some devotees fall away. And when they fall away, they fall to, you
know, you know, terribly sinful activities sometimes. So, then, how do we
understand that? That they have fallen to such sinful activities?

So, actually, the point to understand is that the soul always has free will. And
the soul can choose either to serve Krishna. Or can choose to go away from
Krishna. And this choice is there for the soul throughout the spiritual journey.
In fact, when we, you know, go back to the spiritual world, that choice is still
there. But because by that time, we have experienced thoroughly. Repeatedly.
Both the misery of defying Krishna. And the joy of loving Krishna. At that time,
we will not make the wrong choice. But in the material world, we are always
vulnerable. We are prone to make the wrong choice. And that is why we need to be
guarded. And the mind, you know, and the world, the mind externally, and the
wor..., mind internally and the world externally are there to tempt us away
from Krishna. Therefore, we have to be cautious. If somebody is not cautious,
that person gets seduced and, you know, deluded by, you know, you know, maya.
You know. You know. That person goes away from Krishna. And how fall will the
person, you know, how far may the person fall? That may, will depend on how much
the person is attached, you know, to sense gra..., you know, gratification. And
how much that person has developed attachment to Krishna. So, the attachment to
Krishna will never go away. But it can get covered away temp..., covered up
temporarily. And that person will have to revive that afterwards. Now, that
revival is not the same as what we, as sadhakas, are doing. As sadhakas, we are
practicing spiritual life. And we are trying to revive what has been obscured
for many, many lifeteimes. But when a person falls away that the Krishna
Conscious impressions are there in the recent memory. And that is why when the
impetus comes, the devotee will come rapid..., you know, rapidly back to this
previous level of Krishna Consciousness. So, Krishna never forsakes a devotee.
And especially, some devotee who is advanced on the spiritual path, Krishna will
arrange in circumstances in such a way that the devotee will be provided all
possible impetuses for making the right choices. All possible impetuses for, all
possible circumstances. All possible situations. All possible arrangements,
Krishna will make. So that the devotee can come. "kaunteya pratijānīhi". This is
Krishna's assurance. "na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati". "na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati".
That My devotee will never perish. So, therefore, what is important for us to
recnogise is that, as devotees, we have to stay steady on the spiritual path. If
we fall away, Krishna will take care of us. But that does not mean that we have
to fall away. That does not mean that we have to, you know, you know, you know,
think that even if I fall away, Krishna will take care. No. That is Krishna's
love. That He is saying that, even if we fall, even if a devotee, even if My
devotee falls away, I will take care. But what is our love for Krishna? Our love
is that we do not fall away. You know. We stay close to Krishna's lotus feet.
So, now, there is a difference between falling down. And falling away. You know.
Falling down means we are moving forward towards to Krishna. And some of these
are lapse. And we fall down. We do something wrong. But falling away means we go
away from Krishna. You know. There is the whole material world. Below that,
there is "Garbhodakaśāyī Vishnu". Below that, there is "Mahavishnu". So, even
if we fall down, down, at the bottom, there is Maha..., "Garbhodakaśāyī Vishnu"
and "Mahavishnu" take care of us. So, ultimately, Krishna is everywhere. You
know. You know. So, even when we fall, where are we falling? Actually, we are
falling, you know, you know, when we fall, we should fall to Krishna's shelter.
Krishna. I am sorry this happened. Please forgive me. Please rectify me.

So, you know, we may fall down always. We may fall, you know, down. That means
from our standards, wherever we are, we fall down. But wherever we go, Krishna
is there. And Krishna is there to catch us if we let Him catch us. So, and
Krishna will gradually lift us up, also. So, we may fall down because of the
temptations, externally. Because of the conditionings externally. Of course, we
fall down because we misuse our free will, ultimately. But even if we fall down,
that means, there is a lapse in our st..., devotional standards. We do not have
to fall away. That means we do not have to go away from Krishna. Actually,
ultimately, we can never go away from Krishna. Because Krishna is in our heart.
But in terms of our practice, we should not go away from Krishna. That means we
should not, l...,  give up the practice of Krishna Consciousness. Even if
whatever be the lapses that are happening, we should continue practicing Krishna
Consciousness. Of course, if certain major lapses have happened, then the
devotee may not be able to do the same specific services that th..., that they
have been doing earlier. If the person has some serious, you know, moral lapse.
Then, that person may not be, you know, in the best situation to act as a
teacher. Or as a guide. Or as a men..., as a leader. That is, that sort of
readjustment can and should be done. When it is required. But, you know, you
know, going away from a leadership position in Krishna's service, does not mean
necessarily that one has to go away from Krishna. You know. In fact, going away
from the leadership position, position, position, may enable us to take shelter
of Krishna better. Because then, you know, there will be no material mo...,
motive for us to take shelter of Krishna. Yes. I will get all this respect in
the devotee community. That is why I am doing, you know, bhakti. No. I am doing
bhakti because I want to love and serve Krishna. I know that is the best thing
for to, you know, way to do. And that is the best way I can ultimately benefit
anyone. So, even if we fall down, we do not have to fall away. And this verse
is, should not make us complacent. That ultimately, a devotee never perishes.
So, I will never perish. No matter whatever I do. No. What this verse should do
is, it should make us feel that, actually, whatever happiness, Krishna is
going to love Me. So, if Krishna is ready to go so much out of the way. Krishna
is giving so much guarantee. Krishna is expressing His love for me in so many
ways. Then, why should I ever go away from Krishna? Why should I ever leave
Krishna's lotus feet? So, in general, whenever the scriptures give guarantee
that, you know, even if some sinful activity happens, still, the devotee will be
protected. The devotee's attitude is that Krishna, this expresses Krishna's
love. It is, Krishna's love is so great. When Krishna's love is so great. Why
should I leave that love and go away? Actually, you know, you know, we see this
in the Ajamil pastime, also. Ajamil had committed grievous sinful activities.
But at the end of it, when Ajamil's pastime is told, how he was delivered, you
know, by the vishnudutas. Then, what is Sukadeva Gosvami's conclusion? And what
is Prabhupada's explanation over there, also? He says, you know, if Ajamil
chanted once, unconsciously, and still, he was alurred. Then, it should not be
that devotees start thinking, oh, I also chant one rou..., unconsciously. And
I will demand. Why don't the vishnudatas come to receive, rescue me? No. But
Prabhupada's mood is that if we practice Krishna Consciousness. If we chant the
holy name attentively throughout our life. And with the consciously knowing that
we are addressing Krishna, then why will Krishna not come? Why will the Lord not
come for us? He will definitely come. So, when we see the magnitude of Krishna's
mercy and love. You know. As is expressed through certain scriptural statements.
Or demonstrated through certain scriptural incidents. That should reassure us of
His love. And that should inspire us to commit ourselves to the process of
loving Him. Not that we demand the same kind of love for us, also. That is not
the mood of love. The mood of love is that, actually, the Lord is so loving. The
Lord does so much for reclaiming the devotees. And the Lord is so loving. Let me
reciprocate love with the Lord. See, we want to relish the Lord's love. We do
not want to demand the Lord's love. Or, you know, you know, ask that the Lord,
you know, you know, repeat what He has, what extraordinary demonstration of
mercy He has done for others for us. That is not the mood of love. Their mood of
love is that we want to please the beloved. So, that means, what the pastime,
like Ajamil, or these verses demonstrate is that even when the Lord is
displeased, certainly, if somebody is "su-durācāraḥ", the Lord is displeased.
But even when the Lord is displeased, the Lord does not stop loving that person.
So great is the Lord's love that even the greate..., even grievous misdemeanors
on the part of His devotees, they are, they do not, you know, drive away the
Lord's love. They do not dry away or drive away the Lord's love. You know. You
know. So, this is such a, this is the greatness of the Lord's love. But if we
want to love Krishna. The nature of His love is that we want to please Krishna.
So, therefore, the plea..., you know, when we want to please Krishna, we will
naturally avoid those activities which will displease Him. So, as devotee..., as
sadhakas, we do not demand those extraordinary demonstration of m..., m...,
mercy. But rather, those extraordinary demonstrations of mercy, you know, inspire
us more and more to do the activities that will please Krishna. And to, you
know, stay away from, and give up the activities that will displease Him. But,
if somehow by some conditioning. Or something. Because of some sit...,
situation. Or whatever. If somehow, we do some activities that will displease
Him, that also should not make us give up Krishna's, should, we should never
think that Krishna has become so angry with me that He will never give me mercy.

Now, we want to please Krishna. And certainly, there are certain things which
can displease Krishna. So, we want to give them up. But if we do them, still, we
should come, con..., continue love Krishna. That means, Krishna, only you can
purify me. Please help me. You know. You know. So, when a child falls on the
ground. How does the child get up? By taking shelter of the same ground.
Similarly, when we fall, we do not fall, we do not go away from Krishna. We take
shelter of the same Krishna. You know. Whose instructions we have been unable to
follow. And beg Him for strength to following the in..., fo..., following the
instructions. So, you know, "kaunteya pratijānīhi". Krishna, it is, declare,
declare that My devotee will never perish. And there are many extraordinary
demonstrations of this. That be, some devotees fell away from Krishna's lotus
feet. Prabhupada disciples. They fell away. You know. But in, when, in the final
days, they dramatically came back. And gave up all attachments. You know. Went
to Vrindavan. Or Mathura. Vrindavan or Mayapur. Stayed in the association of
devotees. And left their body in extraordinary ways. So, all this is indicative
of how Krishna's love is there. And even if that does not happen for everyone,
Krishna is there in their heart. So, Krishna would like them to never leave Him.
Even if they leave Him, Krishna would like them to come back in this life itself
as early as possible. If not as early as possible, then at least before the,
they renew the body. If that also does not happen, Krishna is there with them.
Whichev..., wherever they go in the next body. And Krishna will try to get them
back to His lotus feet over there, also. So, the devotee will never perish. That
means Krishna will never give up the love of the devo..., His love for the
devotees. And Krishna will ensure that they come back as soon as possible. Back
to His lotus feet. So, when Krishna is saying, my devotee will never perish.
This is not the same as the soul being indestructible. That Krishna has already
taught in the Second Chapter. But here, Krishna is talking about, you know, the
devotee is not perishing Me. It is the devotee's, you know, devotional
advancement. That will never perish. It may get covered temporarily. But it will
be recovered soon. And, you know, manifested again by the merciful arrangement
of the Lord. So, now, here, Krishna has described how, if, or while, so, so,
there can be two kinds of problems or faults. There can be incidental faults.
And there can be inherent faults. Incidental faults means those faults which
arise because of some incidents. So, some person does some wrong activity. So,
that is an incident. And that incident contaminates that person. So, incidental
fault. You know. So, You know. "api cet su-durācāro". The 30th verse mentions
such incidental faults. Those faults which occur incidentally in the sense that,
through some incidents, they occur. But the devotee is not inherently having any
deficiencies. Inherently, the devotee is sincere. And the devotee wants to
serve. "ananya-bhāk". But a..., in the va..., from the varnashram perspective,
there are those with, now, Krishna will say that, even if somebody has inherent
faults, still, even they can be elevated if they practice devotional service
diligently. So, what do we mean by inherent faults? Actually, within the
varnashram culture, you know, the higher varanas are considered more suitable
for the practice of bhakti. And the lower varanas are considered less suitable
for the prac..., not for the practice of bhakti. The, sorry, the higher varanas
are considered to be more suitable for practice of dharma. And lower varanas are
considered less suitable for the practice of dharma. You know. So, Krishna
acknowledges this point. But then, He says that, bhakti does not recognise such
discrimination. That is the next verse. So, here, Krishna is telling that even
if those who have inherent faults, you know, from the, you know, from the, you
know, conventional varnashram perspective, even they can be elevated by the
power devotion.

        māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya
        ye ’pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ
        striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās
        te ’pi yānti parāṁ gatim

So, "māṁ hi pārtha". Those who certainly, those who take shelter of me. You
know. "vyapāśritya". "āśritya" is, "āśri...", it comes from "āśra", certain.
Or, or "āśra" means shelter. So, those who take shelter of Me. You know. "ye ’pi
syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ". That even if they have been born. They have had sinful
births. They borned with some sinful contaminations. "pāpa-yonayaḥ". "yonayaḥ"
is womb. They borned sinfully. "striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās". So, He gives three
examples of "pāpa-yonayaḥ". Women. The "vaiśyās". The mercantile community. And
the general ass..., laborers. "śūdrās". "te ’pi yānti parāṁ gatim". Even they
can attain the supreme destination. So, actually, this verse is a, is
demonstrating the Lord's mercy. But for many people, this verse seems to, you
know, demonstrate how the Bhagavad Gita is discriminatory. You know. It
considers women to be sinful. It consider lower class to be sinful. You may
say, what is this? Are women sinful? What does it actually mean? You know. We
have to understand things from a proper cultural context. So, ultimately,
anybody, any soul who gets a human body, is extremely fortunate. The human form,
manava rupa is actually very rare. And whether it is a male form. Or a female
form. Both forms have the capacity for spiritual realisation. So, because both
have the fo..., capacity for spiritual realisation, both are very fortunate:

        su-labhaṁ su-durlabhaṁ

"su-durlabhaṁ". It is very difficult to get a human form. If we consider. It is
very rare in the sense that we consider the large number of species with, you
know, ha..., the large number of members within every specy. Then, number of
souls in human form are very rare. So, first and foremost, we have to recognise
that any person. Any soul who has got a human form is extremely fortunate. You
know. Now, within the human form, also, based on the suitability for the
practice of spiritual realisation. There are, you know, you know, gradations.
So, you know, within the varan..., varana, varana, varnashram system. There are
higher varanas. And lower varanas. So, why are the classifications given like
that? Actually, it is not based on birth. It is based on qualities. So,
brahmanas are rea..., ready to live lives which are more focused on brahman.
Which are involving, you know, simplicity. Austerity. Spirituality. You know.
Purity. You know. Maturity. In terms of, you know, sense control. And proper
behavior. And, you know, balance. So, because they are ready to do all these.
They are, they are considered brahmanas. So, brahmana is not by birth. It is by
quality. And these attributes are more suitable for spiritual realisation. On
the other hand, those who are not ready to regulate themselves much, they are
considered "śūdrās". Because not by birth again. By their unwillingness. And
their inability in terms of their choices to harmonise with this spiritual
principle. The principle that will help them to make spiritual advancement
to..., rapidly. So, of course, they are also given arrangement by which they can
be slowly eleva..., elevated. But still, the point remains that, it may take
time for them to get elevated. So, here, the important principle is that this
is the, you know, traditional varanashram system. Where varanashram involves
gradually, dharma, artha, kama. And ultimately, it moves towards, that person
towards moksha. When the person takes sannyasa. That person is aspiring for
moksha. So, within this varanashram framework, you know, the lower cast are
generally considered less qualified for spiritual advancement. The higher cast
are considered more qualified. So, when that, that is the case, you know, for,
for karma and jnana. But that is not the case for bhakti. So, karma-kanda and
jnana-kanda. Karma-kanda generally dharma, artha, kama. And jnana-kanda focuses
on moksha. But in bhakti, actually, bhakti is it largely the, based on the
relationship of love. And the soul, whether is in his "śūdrā" body. Or a b..., a
brahmana body. The soul is the same. And the heart can offer love for anyone,
you know, from whichever body one might be in. And one can make spiritual
advancement. So, bhakti is all-encompassing. In terms of the capacity to elevate
everyone. Anyone and everyone. Now, the point of, you know, women, the simple
point, here, is that the male body is more suitable for sfel...,
self-realisation than s..., female body. While males are more analytical. They
are likely doing more philosophical. And in the female body, the bodily
identification is much greater than in the male body. You know. Generally
speaking. There can, of cou..., of course, be exceptions. But, you know, in
general, that is how it works out. We have discussed this earlier with respect
to the first chapter. The statements about, you know, st...:

        strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya

In 1.30, seven thirty, thir..., thirty-eight purport. So, here, you know, as
compared to a male body, a female body is considered to be, you know, you know,
having less spiritual credits. You know. In terms of, you know, when the person
has done more pu..., when, when the soul does punny..., proper punnya. Then, the
soul gets a, you know, you know, male body. So that, for example, when the soul
is having less material attachment. When soul has, the, lot of material
attachment, especially, attachment to female, then the soul who is in male body
may get a female body afterwards. And the soul who has, m..., having more
punnya. For example, you know, a soul is more, you know, you know, spiritually
inclined. You know. More philo..., more, th..., you know, interested in
self-realisation. Then, the soul is provided a body that is more suitable for
self-realisation. So, the point here is that we all have different starting
points in life. And denying that is simply making ourselves blind. See, the male
body and the female body are different. The starting points are different. And
that is simply a fact of life. That does not necessarily mea..., imply
discrimination. It is simply, you know, acknowledgement of reality. But the
process of bhakti is so powerful that once we start off, the starting points
do not matter. That is the beauty and the glory of bhakti. That once we start
off, the starting points do not matter so much. That is what Krishna is
emphasising over here. That yes, if a person, if a soul has got a female body.
The, if a soul has got a "śūdrā" body or a "vaiśyā" body, that means that
starting point is a little, is quite far away from a philosophical
understanding. And self-realisation. You know. But, you know, the process of
bhakti is so f..., powerful. So potent. So fast. That the starting point does
not matter. So, here, Krishna's emphasis is not on, on, you know, supporting any
discrimination. It is on teaching a process that will end discrimination. That
is the process of bhakti. So, the starting points do not matter once we start
off. That is what Krishna is telling. Yes. And according to conventional
varnashram. "striyaḥ". "śūdrāḥ. "vaiśyāḥ". They do not have the philosophical
inclination. And the, you know, general disposition for, you know, for
self-realisation. In terms of analysis. And, you know, introspection. But
Prabhupada has also talked about elsewhere how women are like, are more
devotionally minded. They are more faithful. And they can take to worship and
devotion more easily. So, that is also true. And that is also accepted. You
know. The path of bhakti channelises our emotions. And uses them in Krishna's
service. And women are more emotional. So, if they can just direct that
emotionally towards Krishna, then they can become, you know, then they, it is
easier for them to bec..., sp..., more, make spiritual advancement. Prabhupada
writes in the, one of the purports, book, in Kunti's prayers that, in general,
women come for religious programmes more than men. This indicates that they are
more devotionally inclined, also. So, the overall emphasis of this verse is
that, the, even if somehow, some..., one, someone has some inherent faults. So
that, you know, because of some kind of karma. One has got an unfavorable
starting point. In terms of, you know, certain kinds of births. But even then,
the process of bhakti is so powerful that it can elevate. And that is the glory
of bhakti. Now, after describing this, Krishna will describe in the next verse,
you know, that, you know, you know, there will be, you know, you know, then
Krishna will encourage Arjuna saying that, ok, if they can be elevated, then why
cannot you?

        kiṁ punar brāhmaṇāḥ puṇyā
        bhaktā rājarṣayas tathā
        anityam asukhaṁ lokam
        imaṁ prāpya bhajasva mām

So, He is saying, even if those who are, if, if a, if even those who are lowborn
can be elevated, then "kiṁ punar". Then, you know, how much more is it likely
for you? For those who are, you know, born, you know, the, who, those who are
having favorable starting points. What are the favorable sta..., starting
points? "brāhmaṇas". Those who are born in "brāhmaṇical" families. "bhaktā
rājarṣayas tathā". So, Prabhupada translate that the devotees and the saintly
kings. So, "puṇyā". So, those who are, you know, their "bhaktā rājarṣayas
tathā"s that they can get elevated all the more. So, what is the mood over here?
The mood over here is that, you know, if, say, if there is some coaching class.
You know. Somebody who has, say, there is ten-standard. And there is
twelve-standard. That is the way the system is in India. So, somebody who was,
you know, you know, got very poor marks in ten-standard. Suddenly, that, that
person joins the coaching classes. And then, becomes among the top rankers
in twelfth class. Then, you know, then, if that coaching class is going to say
that, see, we can elevate students who are, you know, you know, bottom rankers,
also, to top rankers. When somebody is at, a top ranker in tenth class. Then,
for that person, the prospects are even more. Even brighter. That person can
take advantage. And become elevated even more easily. And more ra..., rapidly.
So, same way, Krishna is saying:

        kiṁ punar brāhmaṇāḥ puṇyā
        bhaktā rājarṣayas tathā

So, if even those who are "pāpa-yonayaḥ" can be elevated. Then, those who are
not "pāpa-yonayaḥ". Those who are, we could, could use the word "pāp...",
"punnya-yonayaḥ". What more, how much more is it likely for them? Krishna is
telling Arjuna, you fall in this category. You are a "rājarṣ". So, Krishna is
indirectly, but empathetically, telling, you know, Arjuna that practice bhakti.
And that should become even more clear in the next verse. But in this verse
itself, the second part is:

        anityam asukhaṁ lokam
        imaṁ prāpya bhajasva mām

So, "anityam asukhaṁ lokam". Krishna is again repeating the same point which He
has repeated in 8.15. And again, it is just an incidental reference. Incidental
passing mention. 8.15 used the word "duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam". And here, the same
point, "duḥkhālayam" is "asukhaṁ". And "aśāśvatam" is "anityam". So, Krishna has
repeated the same point over here. But again, like in 8.15. 8.15 was:

        mām upetya punar janma
        duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam
        nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ
        saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

So, there, also, Krishna is saying that those who worship Me will not come back
to "duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam". You know. But will attain the perfect, you know,
abo..., the supreme destination. So, same way, Krishna is telling here that, you
know, you know, now, that all of us have come to the material world, better get
out of this material world. And return back to Krishna. And, you know, and, you
know, worship Me. And then, if even they can get cur..., elevated, then you can
surely get elevated. So, again, the "anityam asukhaṁ lokam" is not the stress.
It is just an assumed fact which is just a given passing reference. So, "anityam
asukhaṁ lokam". Now, when the, we say this world is a place of misery, we have
to understand that point carefully. What does it mean? Some people feel because
this world is a place of misery. So, we have to, you know, we have to let
ourselves always be miserable. No. That is not the point of the verse. You know.
We, it is not that if a, you know, if a child is crying. The mother says, oh,
yes, this world is a place of misery. The child is getting realisation. Let it
cry. That would be monstrously insensitive. Actually speaking, when we say this
world is a place of misery, the point is that we should not, you know, let all
our energies be consumed in just trying to make this a comfortable place. But
while we are here, we need some basic level of comforts. And we have our duties
which are given. Which are made to arrange for that comfort. You know. The
mother cares for the children. The husband cares for the wife and the child. The
citizens, the king cares for the citizens. And all these arrangements for making
some basic order. And when the far, the citizens come to "Pṛthu" Maharaja in the
Fourth Canto. And they say, you know, the digestive fire is burning our stomach.
Please arrange for some food. So, "Pṛthu" Maharaja does not say, oh, good. Good.
You are getting realisation. This world is "duḥkhālayam". No. He, as a king, the
king has a duty. And he, he makes assertive arrangements to take care of them.
You know. So, similarly, you know, the point that we are "du...", this world
is "duḥkhālayam", does not mean that we have to, you know, you know, we have to
passively accept all misery. But rather, what it means is that we do not, you
know, let our, all our efforts be consumed by the efforts to remove misery at
the material level in this world. Because that cannot be removed. The example to
understand this is the example of a hospital. In a hospital, actually speaking,
the misery, you know, is there. And there is a process to become free from that
misery. So, the, what the patient needs, need to do is follow that process. And
they follow that process, gradually, they will get cured. Similarly, you know,
when Krishna says, this world is "anityam asukhaṁ lokam". He also gives the
process to become free from that misery. And, and to the extent we follow that
process, we will gradually become free from misery. And not only this, this
freedom from misery at the spiritual level. Actually, if we follow Krishna's
instruction, even at material level, also, things will be better. You know. The
more we live in harmony with Krishna, even at material level, the miseries will
be less. "janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair" is there for everyone. But "adhyātmika",
"adhibhautika", "adhidaivika", "kleśa"s, they can increase or decrease depending
on the way we choose to act. So, if people in general are humble, tolerant,
sensitive. Then, the "adhibhautika kleśa" can be decreased substantially. So,
like that, it applies to all other "kleśa"s, also. So, Krishna is telling:

        imaṁ prāpya bhajasva mām

Now, that you are here, what should you do? "bhajasva mām". Practice devotional
service. So, it is like a patient who is admitted to a hospital. And that
patient is having doubts. Will I be cured or not? Then, you tell that, actually,
see those people. Their disease was far greater than yours. They also got cured.
And, actually, your disease is much lesser. You surely will be cured. Therefore,
now, just take the medicine. Now, that you are in the hospital, now, take the
medicine. So:

        anityam asukhaṁ lokam
        imaṁ prāpya bhajasva mām

Therefore, worship Me. Serve Me. And you will become cur..., healed spiritually.
You will return back to Me, ultimately. So, now, Prabhupada explains in his
purport how, that, you know, in this world, ultimately, you know, nobody is
happy. So, he says, we should not, you know, unnecessarily overemphasise the
classifications.

"In this material world there are classiﬁcations of people, but, after all, this
world is not a happy place for anyone."

And Prabhupada says:

"It is clearly stated here, anityam asukhaṁ lokam:"

So, in, in this world, if we focus our vision too much on the material level,
then, you know, we, we will forget the generic fact that this world is a place
of misery for everyone. See, if we, our vision is too focused on material level,
we see, oh, I am so poor. That person is wealthy. I have a very poor memory. My
intelligence is less. That person's intelligence is more. That person's memory
is better. You know. Oh, I have, I do not look, I am not so good-looking. That
person is so good-looking. You know. And these differences, they consume our
mind so much that we forget the greater reality that actually, whether I am
good-looking. Or not so good-looking. Ultimately, the body is temporary. You
know. The body is not going to look good when I am going to grow old. And die.
And, you know, it is going to look terrible as we grow old. And ultimately, when
the die is going to come. Decay. And stink, also. So, it is temporary. So, if we
forget the temporiness of this world. And we forget the misery. "anityam" and
"asukhaṁ" aspect. Then, we unduly overemphasise the differences. That, oh, you
know, so, so, my whole aspiration becomes, I am poor. That person is wealthy. I
want to become like that. Ah, no. It is like some people are, different people
are traveling in a train. Somebody is in a first class, say, two-tier AC.
Somebody is in a second class. Somebody is in a third class where it is all
crowded. So, now, certainly, there is a difference. That this is, this is more,
I am more, I am comfortable. This is com..., more comfortable. But if somebody
thinks that, oh, I want to get into the first class. Ok. Somebody wants to get
in the first class. That is not wrong. But to get in the first class, somebody
gets out of the train. And then, the train goes away. Then, what is the use?
See, the most important point when a person is in a train that the train should
move towards the destination. And w..., as long as the train is moving towards
the destination, if one can be in a comfortable situation, well and good. But
ultimately, the train journey is not lifelong. The train journey is temporary.
You know. And therefore, because the train journey is temporary. So, it does not
matter whether one is in less comfortable or more comfortable situation. You
know. As long as the train is moving forward. You know. So, you know, similarly,
there are classifications. There are less comfortable. There are more, from the
material point of view, there are, certain situations are less comfortable.
Certain situations are more comfortable. But our primary purpose should be that,
you know, you know, we make sure that the train, our train is moving forward in
the right direction. And wh..., while m..., the train is moving forward in the
right direction. If we can make our situation within the train comfortable, that
is fine. But if for the sake of making the situation more comfortable, we leave
the train. Then, we are ruining our prospects. So, you know, the, the emphasis
of this verse is, "bhajasva mām". Ok. Whatever be the material situation,
practice devotional service. We shall be, we will become purified. We will
become liberated, eventually. So, this is how bhakti counters even our inherent
disqualifications. That means even if somebody, now, actually, from the
spiritual point of view, whatever the bodily attributes are, they are not
inherent. But from the bodily point of view, they are inherent. So, per say,
certain people have certain karmic tendencies. Certain people have, you know,
certain limitations because of the kind of psychophysical nature that they have
acquired from birth. So, do, do we say that, you know, you know, a brahmana, a
person should not be designated as a brahmana by birth? That is true. But the
fact is that all of us have certain propensities according to cert..., as, you
know, which belong to different varanas from birth. It is that, what that means
is that our varana is born, determined largely by our birth. But it is not
necessarily that we belong to that varana of our birth. Now, what does it mean?
It, our varana is largely determined by our birth means that, you know, for, by
our birth, you know, by, we have a certain psychophysical nature. That may be,
could, brahmanical. You know. You know. Ksatriya. Vaisya. Shudra. You know. So,
that may be, you know, and that is there. We cannot deny that. But the point is
it is not that, you know, just because somebody is born in a shudra family, that
person necessarily has a shudra varana. So, what, wha..., the point which I am
making is, our birth is significant. It is, we can say even it is consequential.
By birth, we get a certain nature. And it is for us to acknowledge that nature.
And to make sure that we act in harmony with that nature while we are ackn..,
engaging ourselves materially. And also practice spiritually so that we can
transcend the nature, ultimately. You know. But it is not for society to label
that because a person is born in a particular bo..., you know, you know, family,
therefore, that person must have that varana. Somebody is born in shudra
family, that person must have a shudra varana. That kind of labeling is wrong.
That leads to discrimination. But, you know, the point is it is a true that all
of us have certain svabhava. Certain nature that we can get from, we get from
birth. And that is simply a fact of nature. So, the more we understand it, the
more we can live our material life in a way that is harmonious with our nature.
And then, we can be productive. We will become comfortable internally. And we
will become competent externally. If somebody has a vaisya nature. And that
person is told to act like a brahmana. That somebody has a bu..., you know,
business propensity. And that person is given a job as a teacher in a college.
In a school. That person will be miserable. You know. Per..., so, per..., if the
per..., so, the, on the other hand, that person is allowed to do a business.
Then, that person will be comfortable internally. Mentally, he will be
comfortable. Yes. This. I am competent externally. I will be good at it. You
know. Person is a vaisya. If s..., told to teach. That person will not be very
good at it, you know, externally. And will not feel good about it, also,
internally. So, therefore, you know, the fact that all of us have a svabhava.
Our varana being largely determined by birth. That is true.

By birth means, from birth itself, we get a certain kind of body. Which have
certain kind of inclinations. But that does not mean that the varana, that the,
you know, you know, that the family in which we are born, that we have been
born, that determines our varana. So, Krishna is telling that, whatever be our
starting points. Ultimately, this world is a place of misery for everyone. So,
let us practice devotional service. Become purified. And m..., we can get out of
this miserable material world. "anityam asukhaṁ lokam". So, we will become
liberated. Now, you know, Kri..., "bhajasva mām". This is elaborated in the
next verse of the Gita. This is the last verse of this chapter.

        man-manā bhava mad-bhakto
        mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

So, "man-manā". That, think of. "bhava mad-bhakto". Become My devotee. You know.
How does one become My devotee? "mad-yājī". Worship Me. "māṁ namaskuru". Offer
obeisances to Me. "mā...". And if you, if you do this, "mām evaiṣyasi". You will
come back to Me. How? "yuktvaivam". "yuktvā". "yuktvā". "evam". By being
engaged. By being observed thus. "ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ". Your heart and soul
will be "mat-parāyaṇaḥ". Devoted to Me. So, let us, you know, take this verse
one point by point. The first thing Krishna is telling. "man-manā". "man-manā"
means fix your mind on Me. So, now, you know, you know, different people can fix
their mind on Krishna in different, you know, different ways. You know. Some
people may stoo..., fix the mind on Krishna as a, as an object of theoretical
study. Somebody might do a PhD in, you know, the position of Krishna in the
Mahabharata. And then, all verses by Krishna is there. And whether Krishna is
considered to be a king. Or what. What. What. But the person may not have any,
you know, devotion or transformation. So, Krishna is telling, think of Me in a
way that, you know, "bhava mad-bhakto". So, think of Me, and then offer your
heart to Me. So, let you fi..., you fix the mind on Me in such a way that your
fixation, fixing the mind on Me becomes the means by which I can enter into your
heart. "bhava mad-bhakto" means that, actually, devote yourself to Me. So, we
may fix our mind on things without actually, you know, developing an attraction
for them. That sort of thinking is cold. Clinical thinking. Krishna does not
want that kind of thinking. Krishna wants, you know, gentle, transformational
thinking. Cold, clinical means like if somebody is analysing, you know, some,
you know, laboratory. Somebody is analysing amoe..., amoeba. So, completely
concentrating. What is this amoeba? What are its characteristics? We put it a
specific in laboratory. And study it. But the person does not develop any
affection for that. You know. Maybe, thinking about it. But not that kind of
thinking. "man-manā bhava mad-bhakto". Become My devotee. So, actually, if you
think of Krishna, you know, in a way, in an open-hearted way. Then, Krishna will
enter into our heart. Krishna is such an attractive conception of God. That just
by thinking of Him, you know, open-heartedly, Krishna will enter into our heart.
And that is the direction of thought Krishna is telling. And then, we can help this
process of "bhava mad-bhakto" by doing activities that promote devotional
service. That promote the feeling of devotion. What is that? "mad-yājī māṁ
namaskuru". That worship Me. "mad-yājī". So, Prabhupada translates that, you
know, o..., o..., you know, offer obeisances to Me. And "māṁ namaskuru".
Worship. So, "mad-yājī" is worship Me. And offer obeisances to Me is, you know,
you know, "māṁ namaskuru". So, these are activities, which help in the, you
know, development of devotion. So, when we go and offer obeisances to the Lord.
When we do aarti of the Lord. When we offer our worship. By this the, by, these
are activities which foster the feeling of devotion. So, overall, A and B, what
are they telling? They are telling become My devotee. Become devoted to Me. So,
"bhajasva mām". Which is told in, you know, 33D is elaborated on in, you know,
34A and B. So, there are four components here. What is that? "man-manā".
"man-manā" is think of Me. So, that is actually considering, that is, you know,
Krishna is telling, offer the subtle body to Me. Jou..., many times, Krishna,
you know, the subtle body is referred to in one, by one word. That is the mind.
So, "man-manā". Offer the mind to Me. And then, the, you know, "bhava
mad-bhakto". That is offer your heart to Me. The heart is a seat of emotions.
And all emotions, ultimately, they come from the soul. So, there, Krishna is
telling, at a spiritual level. So, what you do? Offer the soul. "bhava
mad-bhakto". That means offer the soul to me. And then, also, "mad-yājī māṁ
namaskuru". This talks about the physical level. At the physical level, you
know, offer obeisances with the body. Do aarti with your hands. You know. Like
that. Engage the body also in My service. And then, if one does this, what will
happen? "mām evaiṣyasi". Krishna says, you will sur..., come to Me. Guarantees.
"mām evaiṣyasi". How will that happen? "yuktvā". "evam". You will be "yuktvā".
You will be engaged. If you offer our body. Our mind. And our heart. Our soul to
Krishna. Then, "yuktvā". You will be absorbed in Krishna. These are three
facultie..., three levels of our existence. Krishna is recommending that we
offer all three levels to Him. Then, naturally, we will be "yuktvā". We will be,
it, for Prabhupada con..., translates here, not just as engaged. But, you know,
completely absorbed in Me. And then, "yuktvā". How will it happen? "ātmānaṁ
mat-parāyaṇaḥ". Your "ātmā" will become fully devoted to Me. So, the "ātmā". The
consciousness. The, the soul. The consciousness. That is Kri..., you know,
primarily acting at the physical and mental levels. And of course, at the, you
know, the emotions. How they are going. Where our heart is going. So, if we
offer all these three to Krishna, then naturally, our, s..., our heart, the
"ātmā" itself will become devoted to Krishna. And by thus such devotion to
Krishna, we will return back to Krishna. "ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ". So, this
concluding verse of the Ninth Chapter is called by the acharyas as the essence
of the essence of the essence of the essence. What does that mean? The essence
in among all the Vedic literature, the Bhagavad Gita is the essence.

        sarvopanishado gavo dogdha gopalanandana:
        parthovatsa: sudheerbhoktha dugdham gitamrutam mahat

So, it is said that among all the Upanishads, the, you know, you know, you know,
we have discussed that the, you know, Gita is li..., like the milk of the cow.
You know. The cow is the Upanishads. So, the Bhagavad Gita is the essence of all
the Vedic literature. Now, in the Bhagavad Gita, the middle six chapters are the
essence. Because they focus on bhakti. Just like if there is sandwich. In the
sandwich, there is an upper part. And a lower part. So, normally, we, we do not
use the word bread sandwich. Bread is understood in the sandwich. We say cheese
sandwich. Vegetable sandwich. So, the essence of a sandwich is considered to be
the central part. So, like that, the, you know, first six chapters and the last
six chapters are like the bread of Bhagavad Gita. And, or of the Gita sandwich.
And the essential, you know, you know, element, substance that gives taste to
the Bhagavad Gita is the middle six chapters. Seven to Twelve. They are the
bhakti. So, Bhagavad Gita is like a bhakti sandwich. And, you know, so, these
middle six chapters are the essence of the Bhagavad Gita. And then, within those
six chapters, the, Krishna Himself calls this chapter as a "rāja-guhyaṁ". "The
Most Conﬁdential Knowledge". So, this is the essence. And within this Ninth
Chapter, this last verse. Where it calls for devotion. And guarantees
liberation. Guarantees, you know, the supreme liberation. It calls for pure
devotion. And guarantees supreme liberation. You know. Then, that is the essence
further. That is why it is the, the essence of the Ninth Chapter. Which is the
essence of the bhakti section. Then, which is the essence of the Bhagavad Gita.
Which is the essence of the Vedic literature. So, it is the essence of the
essence of the essence of the essence of the Vedic literature. Like that. So,
you know, that is a very important verse. Prabhupada would quote it quite
frequently. Generally speaking, when people quote Bhagavad Gita, they quote
other verses like:

        karmaṇy evādhikāras te

Or that kind of verses. But if we see, the flow of Gita, we will see that this
verse is very emphatic over here. Very emphatic. And actually, if we see the
whole tenor of the Bhagavad Gita. The tenor means the direction of thought. And
the mood that is being developed. All along, the emphasis is on the person
Krishna. And devotion to that personal Absolute. And it is in such a place.
Where if we look at all the previous verses. You know. Where is any impersonal
conception talked about in a positive light? 9.11 and 12, Krishna has condemned
it. "avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā". And "moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo". All the verses are very
personal. Very intimate. Very sweet. Very devotional. Very heart-warming.
Heart-tren..., trendng. Heart-transforming. So, in such a section, you know,
there is a, there is a famous mayavadi. You know. Famous or infamous mayavadi
commentator. Who says that, actually, we are not to think of Krishna. We have to
think of the unborn within Krishna. So, we can understand, now, when we look at
the flow of the Bhagavad Gita. Why Prabhupada is so upset? Why Prabhupada is so
angry about it? Actually, mayavadis can have their philosophy if they want. You
know. They can have their philosophy. If they want to believe that they will
merge with God. Or they will become God. That is up to their business. But to
impose their philosophy on the Gita. That is violence to the Gita. And to
actually impose that philosophy right in the heart of the bhakti section. Where
the whole direction of thought is so loving and devotional. You know. To impose
that is like, is like raping the Gita. Literally speaking. It is such brutal
violence to the mood and the message of the Gita. So, it is natural that, you
know, Prabhupada would f..., Prabhupada felt angry about it. So, it is not
intolerance. It is not that, you know, nowadays, people say that you should be
tolerant. You should not criticise other teache..., other people who have other
believes. No. It is not a matter of intolerance. It is a matter, it is a, simply
a matter of, you know, fidelity. It is a matter of, you know, common sense. It
is a matter of, what the ma..., of, m..., original message is. You know. The
whole Bhagavad Gita's flow, if we see, at least in this chapter. You know. It is
going, it is going so straightly devotional. Krishna is telling, I will elevate
My devotee. My devotee will never perish. The path of dev..., if you take
shelter of Me. Even the most low..., lowborn will be, get elevated. So, you
know, where has Krishna talked about anything unborn beyond Him? Actually,
Krishna does not talk about that anyhere in the Gita. But especially in this
chapter, the mood is so intentionally devotional. Therefore, to impose a message
like that in this, you know, on the Gita. And especially on this section of the
Gita. And in such an intimately devotional verse. That is really, you know,
brutal violence. It is rape of the Gita. And naturally, you know, those who are
faithful, pseu..., teach, pseudo sen..., teachings of the Gita, they will
opposite it. You know. It is not that we have to go and, you know, you know, you
know, we have to become physical. Or anything like that. But we have to be
vigorous in ensuring that people understand the true message of the Gita. And
others do not misrepresent it. So, actually, before Srila Prabhupada went to
America. You know. There were many commentators who, you know, many spiritual
teachers who went to America. And they all presented the Bhagavad Gita from an
impersonalist perspective. And it is very interesting that, you know, you know,
whenever western scholars have studied the Bhagavad Gita, they have generally
said that the Bhagavad Gita is a devotional book. And whenever Indian scholars
have studied the Bhagavad Gita, Indians, you know, they have all come to the
conclusion it is an impersonalist book. So, why is it that? It is not that
western scholars are more personally inclined than impersonalists. You know.
Actually, the western scholars were not so biased by the prevailing atmosphere
of impersonalism within the Vedic culture. Within India. Not Vedic culture.
Within India as it was in modern times. So, in the modern times, because
imper..., we have discussed earlier how impersonalism became very popular in
the, you know, in the, in India, in the Pre independence. And the
Postindependence times. So, you know, w..., you know, because of this moo...,
because of the influence of that. And because of the past tradition of
"Śaṅkarācārya" being very respected. And "Śaṅkarācārya" have been given an
impersonalist commentary. So, most Indian thinkers think that, you know, the
Vedic thought is impersonal. But Bhaktivinoda Thakur. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura. Srila Prabhupada. In the modern times. And even many prominent
acharyas, Vaishnava acharya. Rāmānujācārya. Madhvācārya. They have countered
this notion vigorously. Rigorously. Vigorously means that they have actually,
you know, travelled. Written lot of book. And, you know, given talks. Had
debates. So, we, they have been vigorous. And while they have been vigorous.
They have also been rigorous. Rigorous means it is not just sentiment.
You know. Systematic analysis of scripture has been given. This verse. You say
that this means this. But, oh, look at this. This. This. Look at the context.
And you will see that, actually, it cannot mean that. So, their, so, there is a
tradition of vigorous. And rigorous, you know, defense, of the, you know,
personalist message of the Bhagavad Gita. And Srila Prabhupada is carrying on.

And all of us, also, as the followers of Srila Prabhupada, as the devotees of
Krishna, we internalise this message ourselves. And then, we share that message
with others. So, in this chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, Kri..., let us look at
the, quickly, at the overview of the chapter. So that we will know what the
thought flow has been. And how Krishna has in multiple, multifarious ways,
glorified the path of bhakti. So, you know, you know, you know, the whole
Bhagavad Gita was building up towards the message of bhakti. So, the first three
verses of this chapter talk about how this knowledge is so conidential. And this
knowledge can remove one from all misery. And those who do not have faith in
f..., continue in material existence. So, the focus is, this is most
confidential knowledge. And that confidential knowledge is ultimately meant to
help, you know, that knowledge is about Krishna and bhakti. And it is mean...,
meant to inspire us to develop bhakti. So, that is the emphasis of that p...,
section. One to Three. Then, Four to Ten is, you know, to explain what is
bhakti. It, we expl..., it is, explains what is Bhagavan. So, Krishna's
inconceivable relationship with the material world is told. His extraordinary
position as the, you know, you know, you know, creator, maintainer, destroyer,
who at the same time stays detached. That is described. Then, 11 to 19 describes
how different people understand Krishna in different ways. So, 11 to 12 is the
impersonalist. 13 to 14 is the kevala bhaktas. And 15 to 13, 15, 15, it
describes three kinds of worshippers. Ahangrahopasana, pratikopasana, visvarupa,
vishvarupa-upasana, upasakas. 16 to 19 describes the vishavarupa-upasakas
further. Then, 20 to 28 contains very beautiful, you know, verses which are,
which are inviting and arresting in their co..., in their emphasis on devotion.
You know. "ananyāś cintayanto māṁ" is 9.22. Then, "patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ"
is 9.26. So, these verses were to indicate that, actually, bhakti will offer us
eternal results. Demigod worship will offer us temporary results. Bhakti is very
easy to perform. Demigod worship is difficult to perform. And the demigod
worshippers are also worshipping Krishna. But indirectly they are doing. So,
better worship Krishna directly. After describing that, 29 to 34 describe that,
you know, last section describes that, kevala bhakti elevates even the most
fallen. Even people who have fallen away from the spiritual path, you know, are
uncon..., are disqualified because of incidental actions. Or inherent
dispositions. Both ways, they can be elevated. So, incidental actions. We
discussed 30-31. How Krishna says, you know, that, "na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati".
Even if they do "su-durācāraḥ", they will not perish. So, no matter what
incidental, you know, problems happen, devotees stay determined in the service
of Krishna. That is how we should stay. And then, even if we have some inherent
disqualification. Still, that also, Krishna says, bhakti is so powerful. It will
elevate us. And therefore, you know, practice bhakti. "bhajasva mām". And
"man-manā bhava mad-bhakto". So, it is a very direct call. In fact, if we look
at the whole Bhagavad Gita till now, this verse is giving the most direct call
for the practice of bhakti. In the previous chapter, it ended, Eighth Chapter
ended with that, therefore, practice yoga. But what yoga to practice? That has
been very conclusively established in this chapter as bhakti-yoga. So, now,
Krishna will, in his own ecstasy, go forward and describe further about Himself
and bhakti in the next chapter. That we will discuss in our next class. 

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
