Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gjYwwrBIw7k
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=gjYwwrBIw7k&redir_token=O5cq1FBBJa_o4BVBDXAMYG5moHp8MTU0ODQ4OTQ0NEAxNTQ4NDAzMDQ0&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_117_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_12_Text_13_to_20_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are in the last part of the Twelfth Chapter. The Twelfth Chapter had three
sections. First was how the impersonal conception is subordinate to the personal
conception. Or rather, worship of the personal concept, personal, you know,
Absolute Truth is higher. Is preferable to worship of the impersonal aspect of
the Absolute Truth. Then, the second section was, within the multiple, within,
once we understood bhakti is the best way, then, you know, then the various
levels at which bhakti can be practiced. And now, from thirt..., you know, 13th
to 20th. So, 1 to 6 was the first section. You know. You know. 1 to 7, actually.
And then, 8 to 12 was the second section. Now, 13 to 20 is the section, you
know, that, you know, which are the qualities that endear one to Krishna. So,
that mean..., you know, first is, generally, whenever we do any activity, there,
when..., whenever is, there is any path, there are three aspects to it. First
is, one's, you know, mentality. One's conceptions. Then, there is the activity.
And then, there is the quality. So, as per as mentality or conception is
concerned, Krishna tells very clearly that the per..., you know, once you will
consider the personal conception to be the highest. Recognise that. Then, the,
in terms of activities, various levels, at which, one can practice spiritual
life has been discussed. When verses 8 to 12. Especially, not just spiritual
life in general. But, you know, devotional service. Bhakti yoga at the various
levels at which it can be practiced. And then, now, from 13 onwards, the various
qualities that endear one to Krishna will be discussed. So, so, 12.13-14 are
given as a single verse.

        adveṣṭā sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        maitraḥ karuṇa eva ca
        nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ
        sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ kṣamī

        santuṣṭaḥ satataṁ yogī
        yatātmā dṛḍha-niścayaḥ
        mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
        yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ

So, several of these verses will end with a chorus like "yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me
priyaḥ". "sa me priyaḥ" will be, or "priyaman". So, the word "priyaḥ" will be
common in most of the verses that will follow in this section. And the, these
are the, what, a devotee who renders devotional service, you know, while
cultivating. Or while possessing qualities like this is dear to Me. You know.
Now, Krishna has earlier said that, you know, you know, you know, you know, He
continues to care for and protect, you know, value. You know. Even the sinful.
In Ninth Chapter, in 30th and 31st verses, Krishna has explained how He values
everyone. But then, in the next verse, after that, explaining in 30th verse how
He values everyone, He says that "api cet su-durācāro". So, even the, who are
terribly sinful. Krishna considers even them to be, you know, "sādhuḥ". "sādhur
eva sa mantavyaḥ". To be saintly. You know. Then, then He says that, they will
all be per..., I will protect them. And Arjuna, you declare it.

        kaunteya pratijānīhi
        na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

So, He says, I, I declare that they will be protected. So, we could say that,
this is also an expression of Krishna's love. Yes. Definitely. But love also has
many levels. You know. A mother will love her baby. But mother may not trust the
baby. You know. The mother loves the baby. And that is why if the baby gets a
knife. And, you know, you know, her hands. Then, the mother will want to, you
know, take the knife away from the baby girl. Why? Because that, you know, girl
does not at, n..., baby girl does not right now have the understanding of how to
use the knife properly. So, love can be of multiple levels. But the same,
suppose, that same baby girl grows as to become a, you know, responsible. And
intelligent daughter. Then, she can take the knife. And she can do excellent
cooking in the kitchen. So, what that means is, that time, the mother has got
not only love. But trust. So, love can be of multiple levels. So, now, Kri...,
you know, you know, the, when Krishna speaks that even those who are sinful, I
protect them. And I ensure they will be protected. Arjuna, you declare that they
will be protected. Oh, oh, My devotees will never perish. So, that is an
expression of His love. Bu..., you know, now, He certainly loves all living
beings. And He loves even the sinful. But then, there are, as we have discussed
earlier, Krishna is, you know, not partial. But He is reciprocal. So, naturally,
those devotees who reciprocate with Him more and more. Attract His attention
more anad more. They love Him. You know. They, you know, carve a greater and
greater place in Krishna's heart themselves because of their devotion. So, now,
in this section, Krishna will describe how, when devotee, so, anybody who is
practicing devotional service, that person is dear to Krishna. At the same time,
d..., if devotees also have virtuous qualities, then that endears them to
Krishna all the more. So, in this section, Krishna is telling us that, you know,
it is not that, we should just, we should just assume that we cannot whitewash
ourselves just because we are devotees. You know. The idea of whitewashing is,
you know, you know, putting, you know, making somebody a completely blame free.
You know. This person is very good. There is no fault on the si..., on the side
of this person. This person is perfectly, a perfect virtuous person. That is
called whitewashing. Now, we cannot whitewash any..., you know, we should not
let devotional service become our whitewash. You know. Actually, devotional
service has the potency to tru..., truly whitewash us. Now, whitewash, not in
the sense of giving us a, you know, you know, an external appearance of a, you
know, a whiteness. Now, generally, the white, color white often signifies
purity. So, the, you know, whitewash should, is, you know, that bhakti can give
us a, not just in..., external. It is also internal. It is not just external
that a devotee become, should, you know, look, you know, clean and pure. But
internally, also, the devotee should have clean and pure desires. And bhakti
will truly, you know, internally whitewash us. But that is a process. And we
have to let the process act on us. You know. All of us are a works in progress.
You know. Now, without the connection of Krishna, then our progress may take
many, many lifetimes. And in-between, befo..., with, there might also be
regress. So, we might be works in regress, also. A work in progress refers to
something that is right now going on. You know.

If something is being cooked in the kitchen. At that time, it, before it is
being cooked. Say, delicius puris are going to be made. But when they are in the
stage of ata, they do not, or even if the ata is made by, you know, is, you
know, made in to, you know, dough. And it is being rolled. At that time, it does
not water, generally, water the mouth of anyone. Why? Because at that stage, it
is a process. It is a work in progress. So, like that, all of us are right now
in work, are works in progress. But, you know, now, if, if, who, how do we, you
know, how do we progress? You know. You know. It is Krishna who is working on
us. And to the extent we cooperate with Krishna. To that extent, we, you know,
progress farther and farther to..., further and further towards perfection.
Faster and faster towards perfection. You know. But the same time, it is we who
are works in progress. And it is we who have to actually the represent...,
responsibility of progressing. Nobody else can take that responsibility for us.
And, you know, that means that we should not, we should actually let Krishna
purify us. And elevate us. And ultimately, liberate us. And that involves also
de..., now, this has not been that the devotee has to necessarily strive for
qualities independent of bhakti. There is that famous verse.

    yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā
    sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ
    harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā
    manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ
 
So, this is the verse which Prabhupada would often quote to show how actually,
you know, a devotee has all the good qualities that a, that even the devatas
have got. You know. And on the other hand, what good qualities can non-devotees
have? Because they are always on the mental platform. And they will be driven
away. Dragged away by their uncontrolled mind. So, now, if here, we see that,
you know, it is said that a devotee has all the good qualities of the devatas.
Now, do the devatas really have good qualities? We see Indra tries to, this, you
know, to secude the wife of "Gautama Maharishi". "Ahalya". Or even Brahmaji runs
after his daughter. So, do the devatas really have good qualities? Actually
speaking, those are only occ..., you know, very, very rare, you know, misdeeds
in the part of these devatas. And because they are the, so rare, so that is why
they are talked about in the Vedic literature. So, the idea for, about talking
about them is that, you know, the primary purpose is not, you know, that these
are such great personalities. That, you know, you know, improper behavior from
them is so extraordinary. So unlike, extraordinary not in a positive sense. But
in a negative sense. So unlikely. So improbable. So uncharacteristic. That when
it happens, it becomes no to adi. You know. He, if a three months old baby
cries. You know. All three months old babies cry. So, that is, you know, normal.
And, you know, that will not come in the news. Even a three months old baby
cries. Nobody is going to make that in the newspaper headline. But if, you know,
a 30 years old man, you know, because he has lost a bet, or something like that,
starts crying. You know. That becomes unusual. So, when the, when we say the
devatas, if they do some wrong deed, we should not think that they are only
always doing wrong deeds. They are normally, are very, you know, you know, they
are very, they are virtuous in their behavior. They are dharmic. And, you know,
the point of talking about the misdeeds of the devatas is to, you know,
illustrate how the power of illusion is so great that even such great
personalities can be overcome by its power. So, but in general, devatas have
good qualities. Now, if we look at the section in the "Bhāgavatam" where this
verse comes.

    yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā

These, it, the section primarily talk glorifying the process of bhakti. So, you
know, the, the verse emphasis is that actually, you know, bhakti will engender
good qualities. Whereas abhaktas, you know, you know, you know, non-devotees may
temporarily have some positive qualities. But those qualities will not stay.
Because they do not have any sustainable foundation for those qualities. See, a
house may look very magnificent. But if it has no foundation, it will just
tumble whenever there is a storm. Similarly, the good qualities that people
have. If they do not have a devotional foundation. Then, their qualities are
based on, their, you know, you know, cultivation and dedication to those
qualities is based on, you know, some con..., conceptions. Some worldly
conceptions. Oh, this is good for me. And this is good for others. This is how I
should behave. And those are, you know, noteworthy. Those are noteworthy in one
sense. But then, they are not sustainable. If circumstances change, then their
ideas of morality may also change. So, that is why, you know, the emphasis of
this verse is not that automatically, a devotee has good qualities. The, you
know, verse is that, bhakti is the means for sustainable development of good
qualities. Because bhakti will change our self-conception. And bhakti will, you
know, help us understand how truly, how good qualities are actually enate, enate
nature. And being parts and parcels of Krishna. And behaving according to those
good qualities is the best way for us to make steady spiritual advancement. And
to actually do good for ourselves as well as for others. Because when we act
with virtues, then we allow Krishna to act through us. When we are not acting
virtuously, then we block Krishna from acting for acting to us, for us. And when
we do not allow Krishna to act through us, then the result is that we suffer.
And others suffer. So, we act according to our own ideas. And we make a mess of
our lives. So, now, let us look at this, this background. So, the point of these
verses is not that, this bhakti can help us to develop qualities automatically.
But that does not mean that we should let bhak..., you know, imagine that bhakti
has already whitewashed us. You know. We should also strive to develop the good
qualities. But how do we strive? Within the realm of devotional service, while
practicing devotional service, we try to exhibit these good qualities as much as
possible. So, "adveṣṭā sarva-bhūtānāṁ". So, "sarva-bhūtānāṁ". All living beings.
"adveṣṭā". Such a person is non-envious. Non-envious friend of all living
beings. "adveṣṭā sarva-bhūtānāṁ". So, you know, you know, such a person is, you
know, non-envious. And then, not only non-envious. "maitraḥ karuṇa eva ca".
"maitraḥ karuṇa" means a compassionate friend. So, that means there are two
things. Generally, in this world, when we find that somebody is, you know,
su..., very successful, prosperous, often, envy comes in our heart. Why is this
person so good? You know. Somebody may have a better car than us. A better, you
know, house than us. A better job than us. And then, we start feeling envious of
such a person. But devotee understands that actually, no asset in this world can
bring true happin..., true happiness. And that is why whatever materialistic
people have, that is not going to be the source of their happiness. See, our
happiness does not depend on what we have. Our happiness depends on what we do
with we have. Our depends on not on what we have. But on what we do with what we
have.

So, a person may have a lot of wealth. But if that person uses that for
drinking. Then, that person is actually poisoning one's own body. And then,
ruining one's own future. But that person uses that wealth for some constructive
activity. Then, that wealth can be a source of happiness. So, you know, you
know, bhakti helps us to understand what is the best, you know, way to use our
wealth. And that is how bhakti can become the source of, you know, bhakti can
enable us to engage wealth in Krishna's service. And thereby, experience a
richer, deeper connection with Krishna which is the ultimate basis of all
lasting happiness. Of the best happiness in life. So, again, you know, the point
here is that, bec..., a devotee does, does, does not, you know, have the
illusion that anything material can make me happy. Ok. That person may have
better car than me. But the car is just a tool for going from one place to
another. It is, car is not going to make me happy. The, so, that way, a devotee
is not disturbed. You know. You know. You know. The, because others have
something better than him, because and, that devotee. So, that is why this
"adveṣṭā sarva-bhūtānāṁ". So, at the material level, there is envy. A devotee
has no envy towards others. But that is not alone. That, that, so, non-negative,
in and of itself is not positive. That would just mean that devotee is not
envious. But a devotee's vision towards others is also beyond that. It is
positive. "maitraḥ karuṇa eva ca". How "maitraḥ karuṇa eva ca"? Because a
devotee understands, you know, you know, that everyone is a part of the same
one family of the Supreme Lord. We are all children. And we are all related in
Krishna's family. And that is why "maitraḥ karuṇa". One, it is a well-wishing
friend of all living beings. And then:

        nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ
        sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ kṣamī

You know. So, Krishna has talked about, you know, "nirmamaḥ" and "nirahaṅkāraḥ"
several times. The first time he talked about, it was in 2.71. 2.70 was
"āpūryamāṇam". And 2.71 was, you know, you know, you know, you know:

        āpūryamāṇam acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ
        samudram āpaḥ praviśanti yadvat
        tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarve
        sa śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī

        vihāya kāmān yaḥ sarvān
        pumāṁś carati niḥspṛhaḥ
        nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ
        sa śāntim adhigacchati

So, in 2.70 and 71, Krishna is talking about giving up material desires. And
there, He says in 2.71, "nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ". You know. That to give up the
conception of, you know, "mamaḥ". This is mine. And "ahaṅkāraḥ". That this body
and whatever conn..., this recognition that are connected with the body, that,
that, I am that. To let those bodily designations become our self-definition is
illusion. And to give that up is the process of, you know, liberation from
illusion. So, "nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ". That devotee also has the tendency to
possess. But, you know, you know, a devotee understands that the ultimate
possession is Krishna. As "Bhaktivinoda Thakur" says in a famou..., in the song,
Vaishnava song, "Atma Nivedana Tuwa Pade". He says:

        āmi to’ tomāra,  tumi to’ āmāra,
        ki kāja apara dhane

So, my dear Lord, I am Yours. You are mine. What other wealth do I want? So,
this is how a devotee, you know, he becomes free from that possessive mentality.
Because devotee understands that I have got the supreme possession of Krishna. So:

        nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ
        sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ kṣamī

So, we have discussed earlier how a devotee becomes equipoised. It is, suppose,
I have five crore rupees in one hand. And then, I have five rupees in another
hand. Or maybe, fifty paise in another hand. So, now, if that fi.., if that,
say, five rupee coin is all that I have. If I do not have these five crore
rupees. I have only five rupees. And then, if I see that coin falling away.
Then, I will become agitated. No. No. That coin. I want to get it. And if
somebody comes and steals it. Also, I will get agitated. I will get worked up.
That I have to figh..., preserve this coin. And also, you know, you know, if
somebody gives me five rupees more. Or one more five rupee coin, I will become
excited. Oh, I have got, got five more, five, you know, five rupees more. So,
generally, if the five rupees is all that we have, then we will get very worked
up if somebody takes it away. And we will get excited if somebody gives it more,
also. But if I have five crore rupees in one hand. And then, I have five rupees
in another hand. You know. Then, that five rupees, even if I lose it, it will
not make much difference to me. In fact, if that five rupee is, if I am going
along. And I see some beggar. I might just to..., you know, toss those five
rupees. And when the five rupee coin spins away. And beggar pauses. And takes
it. We can, we will say "take it". Why? Because when we compare that we have
something of greater value. If I have five crore, then with five rupee is
insigificant. But if I do not have the five crore. Then, five rupees is all that
I have. And that becomes super significant for me. So, like that, you know, the
five rupees is the, is the material pleasures. The material possessions.
Material positions that we have. And the five crore is our spiritual wealth. Our
devotional connection with Krishna. So, to the extent we do not have a strong
devotional connection. To that extent, material ups and downs shake us. Shake
us. You know. Success will, you know, make us jubilant. And, you know, you know,
failure will make us despondent. So, these sort of dualities will not affect us,
to the extent will, our vision is fixed on Krishna. And we have a strong
relationship with Krishna. And the, you know, regular experience, the
fulfillment that comes with the strong connection with Krishna. So, that is how
"sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ kṣamī". You know. A devotee understands that everything
material is temporary. And from the point of the view the soul's eternal
happiness, the pleasures and pains of this world are temporary. Therefore,
"sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ". That they are, one, one can be equipoisod in happiness and
distress. "kṣamī". As Prabhupada translates "kṣamī", you know, you know, you
know, you know, as forgiving. The word "kṣamī" is related with the word "kṣama".
So, even if somebody offends a devotee. Devotee, offense, what, no big deal
about it. I do not know. Do not have to get, get worked up over to be, I will
discuss this about, this, a little bit more, later. Then, "santuṣṭaḥ satataṁ
yogī". Because a devotee delights in one's internal connection with Krishna,
that is why devotee does not water too much about worldly things. "santuṣṭaḥ
satataṁ yogī". You know. It is, devotee is yogi. Why? Yogi is one who strives
for a connection through yoga. So, a devotee is striving for a connection with
Krishna through bhakti yoga. And then, "santuṣṭaḥ satataṁ". That devotee is
always satisfied. Because devotee understands that, ultimately, the relationship
with Krishna is, the service to Krishna is all that I need. I do not need
anything else. 

And these brings the life's supreme satisfaction. Therefore, I have, now that I
have this, I do not have to worry bout anything else. Then, "yatātmā
dṛḍha-niścayaḥ". "yatātmā". "yata-ātmā". Self-control. Strongly determined.
"dṛḍha-niścayaḥ". You know. You know. You know. You know. Now, if we might, now,
we should not imagine, when we, you know, reach such exalted qualities of a
devotee. That all this comes easily. And naturally. You know. Sometimes, people
have the idea that, you know, we see some very advanced, saintly devotees. They
are very, you know, you know, they are very humble. Very tolerant. Very, you
know, be, you know, you know, gentle. Gently, gentle-mannered. And we may
wonder. When we see such exalted dev..., such devotees with advanced qualities
that, oh, they are at such a high level. I can never attain that level.
Therefore, you know, let me, let me just stay where I am. So, we sometimes think
that, you know, at the qualities of advanced devotees are just something other
bobba..., are their congenital assets. You know. Or something that they have got
from birth. Actually, even, even most material skills are not congenital assets.
You know. Even somebody is a phenomenal tennis player. A phenomenal, you know,
you know, you know, cricket player. You know. Even they often have to practice.
Then, they develop those good qualit..., you know, their virtue. Somebody may be
excellent spin bowler. An expert bowler. Somebody, you know, but then, that, it
is not that the person was born with wingers. You know. Ha..., that is not that
the person came out of the mother's womb with a ball. And that person started
swi..., swinging everything inside. Throwing in legs swing balls. Even if the
person may have a little bit talents. Actually, even to express material talents
requires work. So, same way, a devotee should understand that even if some, the
other devotees seem to be very tolerant. Very advanced. And we think, oh, I do
not have these qualities. These devotees must have done lot of advancement in
their previous life. Well, it may be. But that does not mean that was struggle
free. See, when they went through it, they had to struggle. So, as, similarly,
we have to struggle for it. You know. If we think, oh, the, I cannot behave like
those advanced devotees. Because they have done so much bhakti from previous
life. So, what do I do then? Then, I just keep on my lackadaisical practice.
And what will happen is, who knows? Maybe, in my previous life, also, I said the
same thing. In the previous life, when I saw some advanced devotees. I thought.
Oh, they also practiced bhakti in their previous life. I cannot be like them.
You know. That is why I thought. And I lost that chance at that time. And, you
know, I did not do serious adva..., spiritual advancement. And this life, I am
saying the same thing. Oh, these devotees are so advanced. So, what may happen
next life, also? I may say the same thing. Then, how, where will we get
inspiration from? We have to understand that if anybody has become an advanced
devotee, you know, that person has become advanced by the practice of
spirituality. By the practice of devotion. And by the struggle against the
anarthas. Of course, there may be a few exceptional nitya-siddha devotees. You
know. Who are eternally connected. And eternally, who are, you know, who are,
who descend from the spiritual world. But we should not assume that everybody is
nitya-siddha. Actually, you know, the advanced devotees, we should assume that
they also have gone through the struggle. You know. This, we do not say in terms
of seeing them materially. But in terms of recognising that, we should not
you know, you know, you know, we should not escape, expect that, str...,
anytime, there will be no struggle for us.

        yatātmā dṛḍha-niścayaḥ

Developing good qualities requires hard work. And a devotee should be ready to
do that hard work. And then, Krishna says "mayy arpita-mano-buddhir". "mayy
arpita-mano-buddhir". That those who work like this, they, you know, and offer
their mind and intelligence to Me, they are the topmost of all devotees. "yo
mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ". So, let us look at the purport of Srila Prabhupada.
So, Prabhupada explains, you know, how is a devotee "kṣamī"? You know. How, how
is a devotee, sorry, "adveṣṭā sarva-bhūtānāṁ"? Because a devotee understand that
ultimately, it is my own karma. That is coming through me. This person is acting
as my enemy due to my own past misdeeds. So, it is better to suffer than to
protest. You know. You know. So, this was a famous verse Pra..., you know, which
Prabhupada would often quote. This is a famous verse. Prabhupada often quotes.
"tat te ’nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo". That it is my, it is Brahmaji's prayer. Now,
now, Prabhupada explains. So:

"All these qualifications enable him to fix his mind and intelligence entirely
on the Supreme Lord."

So, Prabhupada talks about these qualities as having a causal nat..., chain. And
he says, to the extent one is "adveṣṭā". And "sukhaḥ". "duḥkha". "kṣamī". And
like that. "yatātmā dṛḍha-niścayaḥ". So, that extent, will be, one will be able
to do "mayy arpita-mano-buddhir". So, and then, one who does like this, such a
person is a very dear to Krishna. So, now, let us look at the next verse:

        yasmān nodvijate loko
        lokān nodvijate ca yaḥ
        harṣāmarṣa-bhayodvegair
        mukto yaḥ sa ca me priyaḥ

"yasmān". "nodvijate loko". By whom, people are not disturbed. You know. You
know. "lokān nodvijate ca yaḥ". And who is not disturbed by people.
"harṣāmarṣa-bhayodvegair". "harṣā" is happiness. "amarṣa" is distress. "bhaya"
is fear. And "udvegaiḥ" is anxiety. So, who, these are the, you know, forces
that may, and these, they agit..., these are the emotions that may agitate the
mind. These are representative of the various emotions. There is excitement.
There is, you know, you know, dejection. There is, you know, fear. And then,
there is anxiety. So, all these are representative of the gamut of the anxie...,
emotions of the, mind can go through. And a devotee does not allow such a mind
to come between himself and Krishna. You know. Between oneself and Krishna. So,
"mukto yaḥ sa ca me priyaḥ". "mukto". Person who is "muktaḥ". Who is free from
"harṣāmarṣa-bhayodvegair". Such a person is very dear to Krishna. Such a person
is very dear to Krishna. So, now, we may wonder, you know, you know, how is it
that a devotee does not agitate anyone or is not agitated by anyone? You know.
Act..., actually, we may say that, you know, we pre..., share Krishna
Consciousness with others, people get agitated. You know. Because, you know,
they are living life styles which are, and they are having con..., entertaining
conceptions which are contradicting the conceptions of Krishna. And when we
present the prin..., conception, the principles and practices of Krishna
Consciousness, people get agitated. So, is it that actually we are, you know,
agitating people? And if we are agitating people through our outreach, then is
it that we are not actually doing outreach properly? Not exactly. The point here
is to recognise that, you know, we have to have a proper intention. And the
proper execution. So, the proper knowledge is required. So that we, we can
evaluate whether our ins..., intention was correct or not. And then, even if our
intention is correct, then we have to be able to execute properly. Just like, if
there is a good doctor. A competent surgency. So, now, if there are, you know,
that competent surgeon knows how to do surgery. And then, does it competently.
Then, superficially, it may appear if the surgeon has cut off the stomach of a
person. And that may even cause pain. Sometimes, more pain what then, than
what the person may have been suffering for before the surgery. But then, that
is not the, ultimately the goal. The goal of the person, goal of the surgeon,
using the surgical knife, is not to kill. It is to heal. But as a part of
healing, some cutting may have to be done. So, that way, "yasmān nodvijate
loko". So, a devotee has no intention of disturbing anyone. A devotee simply
wants to practice devotional service, you know, himself. And a devotee wants to
encourage others to practice devotional service. But the way this can be done
best is by, you know, you know, allowing oneself to be purely and strongly
connected with Krishna. And making oneself as a puppet in the hands of Krishna.
As Srila Prabhupada said in his "Markine Bhagavata-Dharma" song. You know.

        kāṣṭhera puttali jathā nācāo se-mate

"nācāo". "nācāo". "nācāo". So, you know, it is that, Lord is praying, Prabhupada
is praying to the Lord that, my dear Lord, like a wooden puppet, make me dance.
Make me dance. Make me dance. So, actually speaking, the important point is
that the devotee, because he is acting for the, on behalf of the supreme doctor.
A compounder may not know exactly the intricacies of every patience's case
history. History. The case background. The detailed investigation of the
parents. And other such technical details. But if the patient comes to know.
Sorry. If the compounder, of the, either, if the nurse, or the person treating
in a hosp..., person taking care in the hospital comes to know. What all are the
precautions that to be, to be taken by take, treating a particular person. And
that the person learns from the doctor. Chief doctor. Then, that person will be
able to care for the other person quite well. You know. Much better than what
to be able, he would be otherwise. Same way, "yasmān nodvijate loko". Because a
devotee is working on behalf of Krishna. Who is the supreme doctor. And that is,
his devotee is acting as assisting doctor. So, what the devotee is asking is
that, my dear Lord, please raise me as an instrument. And that sense, the
devotee is not consi..., not considered to be enemy. And then:

        yasmān nodvijate loko
        lokān nodvijate ca yaḥ

So, we had a "lokān nodvijate". How can a devotee not be disturbed by others?
That is because a devotee understands that, actually, everything that I possess,
you know, ultimately belongs to Krishna. And other people also belong to
Krishna. And even their assets, assets belong to Krishna. So, therefore, you
know, you know, you know, you know, when people act according to the three
modes, they are infatuated by their conceptions. Their assets. And, you know,
such things. At that time, a devotee, you know, recognising that these people
are just puppets of, for, according the modes. Does not allow oneself to get
disturbed. You know. You know. That is how "lokān nodvijate ca yaḥ". Now, Srila
Prabhupada, sometimes, if there are construction delays. Or such things.
Prabhupada would strongly work. S..., send letters. Highlighting the problems.
So, but, so, Prabhupada did not flinch. From telling the specifics. What was
right. And what was wrong. Both. And that is a part of the healthy feedback. So,
how, take, how did the process of bhakti works is that, when we try to serve
Krishna, Krishna enables us. He guides us from within. And He uses us as an
instrument. So, when we try to, when we get little experience of how Krishna can
use us. Then, we feel more inspired to dedicate ourselves more and more. When we
dedicate ourselves more and more, and more. Then, Krishna uses us more and more.
And like that, you know, our process of devotion can become more and more
valuable to the, you know, you know, process of devotional service can br...,
engender more and more qualities in our hearts. And free us more and more from
the agitations of this world. So, "lokān nodvijate ca yaḥ". So, let us look at
the next verse.

        anapekṣaḥ śucir dakṣa
        udāsīno gata-vyathaḥ
        sarvārambha-parityāgī
        yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ

So, "anapekṣaḥ". "anapekṣaḥ". "pekṣaḥ " is, you know, partiality. Or "pek...",
you know, group. "anapekṣaḥ" is one who does not take any, you know, sides.
"śucir dakṣa". You know. "śucir" is clean. "dakṣa" is expert. "udāsīno
gata-vyathaḥ". "udāsīnaḥ". A devotee is not attached to anything material.
"gata-vyathaḥ". The lamentation, devotee has given up. "sarvārambha-parityāgī".
That one who gives us the endeavor for sense gratification. "yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa
me priyaḥ". Such a person is very dear to Me. So:

        anapekṣaḥ śucir dakṣa
        udāsīno gata-vyathaḥ

So, "anapekṣaḥ śucir dakṣa". You know. You know. So, this all describing the
various qualities of a devotee. The various qualities of a devotee are
"anapekṣaḥ śucir dakṣa". So, how do a dev..., Pra..., now, Prabhupada would
often tell that devotee should not, you know, devotees do not have to take part
in, you know, theopolitics. That often takes place in metropolitan countries.
So, theopolitics refers to the complex network of, or nexus between, you know,
religion and politics. So, theopolitics, you know, is something which happe...,
which leads to a lot of, you know, you know, people, you know, you know, taking
off on their own projects. And grab, putting them on. And their own pursuit of
power and position. And the jock..., the jockey for power and position. And
then, they claim that we are doing this in the name of God. So, devotees,
"anapekṣaḥ". So, a devotee does not take such sides. Devotee does not want
political alignments with others. A devotee simply wants to serve Krishna.
"śucir". So, "śuc...", some of the qualities we have discussed earlier. So, we
will not go too much into discussing them now. "śucir dakṣa". You know. "śucir"
is cleanliness. Prabhupada explains external and internal cleanliness. External
is by bathing. Internal is by cultivating pure thought, thoughts. You know.
"dakṣa" is what? You know. "indriya". devotee tries to excel in the branch of
service to Krishna that has been acco..., allocated to that particular devotee.
So, that is "dakṣa". We see Srila Prabhupada was "dakṣa" in so many things. He
had such a vast knowledge of, such a vast variety of subjects. In the early days
of our movement, it is said that the devotees fell that Prabhu..., when
Prabhupada started cooking. This is Swamiji's knowledge of cooking recipes is as
vast as his knowledge of sanskrit verse was. Prabhupada was a discovery. That
coo..., his cooking for them. Similarly, whatever a devotee does, it is
ultimately for the good of everyone. You know. And, you know, the devotee is
expert. You know, with, not, not that a devotee will be necessarily be expert.
Mat..., in materially. In all skills. The ultimate expertise is that the devotee
has a sincere desire to serve Krishna. And Krishna reciprocates with that
desi..., sincerity. And gives an answer which, you know, may well help a devotee
to find out what Krishna has wanted, you know, that person to do. And
"sarvā...", so, now, "sarvārambha-parityāgī". A devotee gives up all selfish
endeavor. So, ultimately, in spiritual life, spiritual advancement is journey
from selfishness to supreme selflessness. Supreme selflessness is absorption in
Kri..., pure service to Krishna. So, you know, this is the journey which
everyone has to take. And "sarvārambha-parityāgī" contributes to that journey.
So, now, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada explains
in the purport, you know, that:

"A devotee never takes the part of a particular party; therefore he is
carefree."

So, Prabhupada translates "anapekṣaḥ" as carefree. Why carefree? Because the
devotee does not have unnecessary cares. Let us go to the next verse.

        yo na hṛṣyati na dveṣṭi
        na śocati na kāṅkṣati
        śubhāśubha-parityāgī
        bhaktimān yaḥ sa me priyaḥ

So, "yo na hṛṣyati na dveṣṭi". One who does not delight. Nor does one that
person resent. "hṛṣyati na dveṣṭi". "na śocati na kāṅkṣati". So, one does not
hanker or one does not lament. "śubhāśubha-parityāgī". A not only does a devotee
not hanker or lament, a devotee also gives up conceptions of auspicious and
inauspicious. Ultimately, one, one un..., when one understands that, the un...,
you know, one when understands that actually, you know, you know, there is
nothing auspicious in this world. Because everything in this world is temporary.
And as everything in this world is temporary. So, the "śubha". And "aśubha" are
ultimately, both undesireable. Their undesirability is just a matter of degree.
You know. You know. Something which we consider desirable. They are temporarily
desirable. But afterwards, they will become undesirable, also. And some things
which we do not consider undesirable, they are just higher up on the
undesirability continuum. But all of these are on the same, all these activities
are on the undesirability continuum. Undesirability continuum. And Krishna
enables His devotee to stay, you know, transcendental to the, both these
conceptions of good and bad. "śubhāśubha-parityāgī". So that this is good. This
is bad. You know. We just occupy so much mental energy. Whatever has happened,
you know, we can always find an opportunity to serve Krishna. Even in that
situation. And that is what we should focus on. So, Prabhupada explains further,
you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, so:

"Nothing is an impediment in the discharge of his devotional service."

So, it is the most important thing for a devotee. For that, a devotee is very,
for that, a devotee becomes very dear to Krishna. And the devotee is, you know,
ready to, you know, sacrifice everything for Krishna's sake.

        samaḥ śatrau ca mitre ca
        tathā mānāpamānayoḥ
        śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu
        samaḥ saṅga-vivarjitaḥ

        tulya-nindā-stutir maunī
        santuṣṭo yena kenacit
        aniketaḥ sthira-matir
        bhaktimān me priyo naraḥ

You know. You know. "samaḥ śatrau ca mitre ca". "tathā mānāpamānayoḥ". So, now,
here, Krishna is continuing the point of view of equipoised attitude. So, now,
here, we have wondered whether Krishna is actually talking most qualities from
the point of view of neutrality. Not from the point of view of a devotional
passion. Not from the point of view of a spiritual friend. We are taking this
off from a wrong perspective. Because off the, inadequate understanding of how
the spiritual culture that is timeless is to be applied practically in current
times. That is a challenge. And a devotee recognising that spiritual happiness
is eternal. So, whatever be the changes happening at the material level
externally, let them not affect my spiritual, you know, practices. My spiritual
advancement. Let me just focus on the steady practice of devotional service.
"tathā mānāpamānayoḥ". So, all these equality, inequalities, we just keep, you
know, understand that they are just part of qualities. They are just part of day
to day conduct. "śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu". So, all these dua..., duality, what
happens? "samaḥ saṅga-vivarjitaḥ". "saṅga-vivarjitaḥ". You know. Actually,
"saṅga-vivarjitaḥ". "saṅga" means attachment. "vivarjitaḥ" means to give up. So,
all material attachment and material connections, material corr...,
relationships, a devotee gives them up. You know. You know. Then, "aniketaḥ
sthira-matir". Then, it is further described. So, a, "san...", you know,
"santuṣṭo yena kenacit". You know. So, "santuṣṭaḥ satataṁ yogī" was already
there earlier. Now, "santuṣṭo yena kenacit" has again come. The idea is that a
devotee is satisfied with whatever situation. Because the devotee is not in that
situation. The devotee is situated in one's connection with Krishna. And that
connection with Krishna is the basis of, you know, supreme fulfillment. But
here, "aniketaḥ sthira-matir". This is a very beautiful concept which Krishna
has talked about in this section. "aniketaḥ sthira-matir". A devotee's body may
not have a fixed residence. "aniketaḥ". "niketaḥ" is house. "niketaḥ" is a
house. "aniketaḥ" is one who does not have any house. So, a devotee may be a
traveling preacher. Or something like that. And him, say, that devotee does not
have any house. But at that point, a devotee already has an inner house. Just by
virtue of being a devotee. And that inner house is "aniketaḥ sthira-matir". That
inner house is, you know, the, one's connection with Krishna. One's inner
remembrance of Krishna. And it says, "bhakt...", "bhaktimān me priyo naraḥ".
Such a person who has special attraction for me, "bhaktimān". "me priyo naraḥ".
"me priyo naraḥ", such a person, among all devotees is most dear to Me. Now,
after describing this, Krishna goes to the last verse of this chapter. So,
wherein He will describe. He will summarise basically. You know. You know. You
know. You know. You know.

        ye tu dharmāmṛtam idaṁ
        yathoktaṁ paryupāsate
        śraddadhānā mat-paramā
        bhaktās te ’tīva me priyāḥ

"ye tu dharmāmṛtam idaṁ". You know. You know. You know. You know. "idaṁ" is
this. "dharmāmṛtam" is the nectar of religion. "yathoktaṁ paryupāsate". That as
I have spoken, so one hears. And understands. "yathoktaṁ paryupāsate". Worships.
"śraddadhānā mat-paramā". "bhaktās te ’tīva me priyāḥ". Such a per..., devotee
is most dear to Me. "’tīva me priyāḥ". So, until now, the word "atīva". "atīva"
means very specially. Excee..., exceedingly. You know. You know. You know. More,
the, more comparatively, much greater since. "bhaktās te ’tīva me priyāḥ".
Actually, "priyāḥ". That devotee is most dear to Me. Very greatly dear to Me.
You know. So, what is this referring to? You know. You know. Now, "śraddadhānā
mat-paramā". Krishna has talked about "śradda", earlier in the same chapter, in
12.8. You know. Sorry. Not at 12.8. 12.2. Krishna had said. You know. 12.1 was
Arjuna's question. And twelwe.

        mayy āveśya mano ye māṁ
        nitya-yuktā upāsate
        śraddhayā parayopetās
        te me yukta-tamā matāḥ

So, in the first verse of this chapter, Krishna has talked about "śraddhayā".
And "parayopetās". Transcendental faith. And here in the last verse of this
chapter, also, Krishna talks about "śraddadhānā". So, in a sense, a devotee's,
you know, the, the flow of thought that Krishna has started from 12.2. In a
symmetric sense, He comes back to the same, to similar point in twelwe point,
in, in the next, you know, at end of the same chapter. So, what, the point which
I have mentioned, the first verse, you know, "śraddadhānā". So, "śradda", so,
that faith. You know. Krishna is saying you have to have faith.

        śraddadhānā mat-paramā
        bhaktās te ’tīva me priyāḥ

That means such a devotee is most dear to Me. So, what is, what is it that makes
such a devotee dear? Actually, there are many things which are possible. The way
a devotee speaks. The way a devotee is very, you know, expert with words. The
way devotee comes with, you know, catch lines. The way, a devotee, you know,
develops something called a personal charisma. You know. Then, at all these
situations, that person may start thinking, oh, all these are the reasons for
actually becoming, are all of these reasons for becoming a, you know, when a
devotee understand that these are all processes. Sorry. That all these, you
know:

        ye tu dharmāmṛtam idaṁ
        yathoktaṁ paryupāsate

"dharmāmṛtam". The nectar of religion. When un..., now, this is the means by
which I can become purified. Elevated. Liberated. So, "yathoktaṁ paryupāsate".
As one has heard, one starts pra..., you know, worshipping them. "śradd...", you
know, there is a chant. "śraddadhānā mat-paramā". Understanding Me to be the
supreme goal. Such a person is very dear to Me. So, now, different acharyas have
explained this "atīva" in different ways. You know. You know. Some acharya say
that actually, this refers to that one who under..., accepts the principle of
devotional service. And starts practicing with faith. So, faith is the greatest
quality. All the other qualities engender one to Krishna. But faith engenders
one to Krishna the most. But beyond that, a devotee also wants to make sure that
actually, the path of spiritual life is, you know, not just as we said earlier,
a whitewash. One has to sincerely and seriously practice spiritual life. And to
the extent, one is ready to practice that spiritual life. To that extent, one
makes steady spiritual advancement. So, therefore, under..., recognising this
fundamental point, a devotee focuses on the practice of pure devotional service.
And one who has that faith in the potency of devotional service. Such a person
is very dear to Me. The Lord says. "bhaktās te ’tīva me priyāḥ". "’tīva me
priyāḥ". Such a person is very dear to Me. So, Prabhupada writes in the purport
that, you know:

"One need not bother about materials to keep body and soul together, because by
the grace of the Lord everything is carried out automatically."

How is everything carried out automatically? That means, you know, you know, you
know, you know, there are some companies. Which provide some per..., so, also.
They might provide some accommodation. They might provide transformation. They
might provide medical assurance..., medical insurance. So, even in the material
world, there are, you know, companies which provide, or government, institutions
which provide some additional benefits. So, when a person, say, when, you know,
when the person is working in such a place. The person is not excessively
worried about other things. If I am working in an institute which is going to
care of my health claim. Medical part. You know. Other parts. Then, I do not
have to bother too much about everything else. Because if I just do my work
properly, then my doing my work properly implies that, you know, other needs
will be taken care of. Or for example, if I have bought a plane. You know. If I
have paid the money. And if I have, then I do not have to bother, you know, and
check the fuel meter when the pilot is driving the plane. Taking off, oh, do you
have enough fuel or not? No. If I just get into the plane, actually, the other
things about the plane will be taken care of. Why? Because that is the way
things work. You know. I do not have to bother about, you know, whether the, you
know, you know, now, whether that particular need is for me to fulfill. Because
no, I have done something else. And through that, that need is taken care of.
So, all that I have to do is to make sure that I get what I, that I do my part.
I just take a ticket properly. In a, you know, proper, respected airlines. Then,
oth..., the other things will be taken care of. Similarly, for a devotee, a
devotee understands that if I just serve Krishna. And other things will
automatically be taken care of. And in this way, a devotee stays whole-heartedly
fixed in the devotional service of Krishna. Even if one does not have much good
qualities now does not matter. Even if one has many bad qualities. Still, that
does not matter. We can practice devotional service. And we can aspire for these
ele..., elevated qualities. And by the steady practice, we will develop these
qualities. And we will also become dear to Krishna. So, in this way, you know,
you know, you know, if we again l..., try to look at symmetries. The Chapters
Seven to Twelwe, are the bhakti section. And now, the bhakti section is ending.
So, bhakti section stated with, 7.1 was "mayy āsakta-manāḥ". And 12.20 is
end..., ending with "yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ". You know. So, what does this
indicate? This change indicate? It essentially indicates that, "bhak...", sorry,
not "yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ". It ends with "bhaktās te ’tīva me priyāḥ".
Very dear to Me. "bhaktās te ’tīva me priyāḥ". So, what has happened? Krishna
has, whateve supr..., the highest level of bhakti. He has said that in order to
constantly fix the mind on Me. So, that was said earlier in the Sixth Chapter.
Sixth Chapter. And also that the yogi may go through the variou..., through,
p..., the various stages of yoga. And ultimately come to elevated stage. But the
most elevated yogi is one who fixes the mind on Krishna. And the alternative to
practice that, to attain, attain that same perfection of fixing the mind on
Krishna, is through bhakti yoga. And that was a linea..., delineated in Chapter
Seven to Twelwe. And from next chapter onwards, Krishna will talk about jnana
yoga. And how jnana yoga is connected with bhakti yoga. Or rather, how jnana
yoga culminates in bhakti yoga. So, let us look at a quick overview of the
middle Six Chapters to understand what is happening.

In the Seventh Chapter, Krishna basically, is, Seventh Chapter is called as the
"Knowledge of the Absolute". In which, Krishna introduces how, us to how He
pervades material world. And how ultimtely, different people are, some are
surrendering to Him directly. Some indirectly. Some who deride Him. And some
approach Him inquisitively. You know. You know. So, He describes these various
categ..., various of people. He is saying. Seventh Chapter, you know, provides
us the intellectual foundation for leading a life of devotion. By telling about
Krishna's eminence. By telling about Krishna's transcendence. By telling abut
Krishna's superior pos..., Krishna's, you know, the superior position of bhakti
yoga over all other processes. In one consolidated place. Then, after that, from
that, you know, Six..., the Eighth Chapter, Kri..., Sixth Chapter, Krishna has
talked about ashtanga yoga. So, Eighth Chapter com..., compares ashtanga yoga
and bhakti yoga. And establishes how bhakti yoga is preferably. Because it is
easier. "su-labhaḥ". And then, Krishna also says in that same chapter, one does
not have to worry about other things. Whether one is dying at the right time. Or
not. No. A devotee will make, the Lord will make sure that for a devotee,
everything will work out right. And then, after that, you know, you know, in the
Ninth Chapter, Krishna has focused on "The Most Confidential Knowledge". That is
the knowledge of, you know, pure devotional service. Which works in various
ways. And which, you know, which that, various glories of the processes, pure
devotional service are described. First, Krishna's position is described. Then,
the various kinds of people. The mayavadis. The ananya bhaktas. And then, the
three kinds of jnana yogis. You know. The jnana yajna performers are described.
"ekatvena pṛthaktvena bahudhā". Then, how a devotional service elevates one
beyond one's inherent faults. And one's incidental faults. And how devotional
service is very easy to compare, you know, perform as compared to demigod
worship. And how devotional service gives eternal results. All these are
discussed in the Ninth Chapter. The Tenth Chapter talks about "Vibhuti Yoga".
Where, before that, Krishna talks about how it is rare to know Him. Then, He
describes how He can know Him through, we know Him through the process of bhakti
yoga. Which attracts His mercy. And the Chatur Shloki Bhagavad Gita comes up.
So, A..., Krish..., the, after that, Arjuna is fir..., first time speaking not
in a questioning mood. But in a, you know, in an acknowledging mood. After one
has learnt something viable. You know. Actually, Arjuna speaks that, you know, I
had fears about this matter. But Arjuna is able to transcend through the
darshan. Which he gets in the Eleventh Chapter. That ultimately, all enemies are
going to be destroyed. So, Arj..., Krishna is told by Arjuna that whatever you
want to see. And whatever you may not express right now. But you may want to see
in the future. I will show it you. So, as if a magic, you know, Krishna is able
to see, you know, Krishna shows Him the "Virata rupa". So, the Tenth Chapter
talks about how Krishna pervades nature. After Arjuna accepts Krishna's glories.
Then, to help materially minded people think of Krishna, Krishna organises the,
Krishna outlines "Vibhuti Yoga" at, in front of Arjuna. And then, after
that, you know, you know, at the behest of Arjuna. Then, Eleventh Chapter is
again at the behest of Arjuna. Krishna speaks the, you know, you know, speaks
the, you know, reveals the "Virata rupa". And then, there is a discussion. And
offering of prayers and obeisances to the "Virata rupa". So, at the Krishna's
request, the "Virata rupa" disappears. "sahasra-bāho bhava viśva-mūrte".
Then, becomes the "Vishnu murti". The four-handed form. And then, returns back
to His two-handed form. And there, also, the conclusion is bhakti is the best way.
And the Twelwe Chapter, you know, the, all, among the common conception is, does
bhakti lead to jnana? Or jnana lead to bhakti? So, at such a, you know, at this
point, you know, Krishna says that actually, doing worship, you know, practicing
bhakti is far better than practicing jnana.

You know. In, that means, for, you know, worshipping the Personal Absolute Truth
is far preferable to worshipping the impersonal conception. Because it is so
much more difficult. And so less productive than the Krishna's incredible
mer..., mercy, ex..., extreme ordinary compassion in nature in offering, you
know, people multiple levels of bhakti to practice. That is discussed from 12.8
to 12. And then, in this section, today, we discussed about how there are
various qualities. If we develop those qualities, then that endears us to
Krishna. You know. So, in this way, the bhakti chapter, bhakti section ends. And
the next chapter will be again, so, beginning with Arjuna's question. So, this
is the fourth chapter, in which the main discussion has begun with Arjuna's
question. Tenth Chapter was, you know, one such chapter. Then, Eleventh Chapter
was another chapter. And Twelfth Chapter was another chapter. And in this way,
the glory of bhakti yoga is being, you know, established. And Arjuna will begin
with another question in 13th Chapter, also. And then, Krishna will start
talking about jnana yoga. And how jnana ultimately cu..., you know, leads to
bhakti. That we will discuss in our future class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
