Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fquJGQkMAU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_099_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_09_Text_11_to_14_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=0fquJGQkMAU&redir_token=UprVZvbe6oGb2dUNH4GpPjRRIbd8MTU0ODQ4ODc1MEAxNTQ4NDAyMzUw

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the heart of the bhakti section. Ninth Chapter. The Most Conﬁdential
Knowledge. Krishna has talked about His supreme position with respect to the
material world in 9.10. And now, we will be talking about how different people
understand Krishna in different ways. Let us have a quick overview of the
chapter before we move ahead. So, first was developing kevala bhakti by
knowledge of Krishna. You know. Then, Krishna's inconceivable relationship with
the material world what, what we discussed about. Now, those who understand
Krishna in various ways. So, because Krishna's relationship is inconceivable, it
is not easy to understand. And that is why different people understand it
differently. So, 11 to 12 will talk about the impersonalists who mistake, you
know, Krishna's body to be material. 13 to 14 will talk about the kevala
bhaktas. And then, you know, 15, you know will talk about three types of people.
"ahangrahopasana"s. "pratikopasanas". "vishvarupa-upasana"s. And 16 to 19 will
elaborate on the "vishvarupa-upasana"s. Let us discuss them one by one. So, we
will move to verse 11.

        avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā
        mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam
        paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto
        mama bhūta-maheśvaram

So, here, Krishna is describing "avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā". The foolish people, you
know, cannot understand Me. They de..., Prabhupada translates "avajānanti" as
deride. So, they deride Me. What do they deride? "mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam". See, 
that, actually, He has descended by human form. So, here, the implication of
"mānuṣīṁ tanum" is, that they have descended in a form that is just like ours.
So, that means, they say that, actually, Krishna's form just like our form. It
is a human form. It is a material form. And they do not understand "paraṁ bhāvam
ajānanto". They do not understand the "paraṁ bhāvam". The transcendental nature.
What is the transcendental nature? "mama bhūta-maheśvaram". That I am the Lord
of all living bei..., of the, all of existence. "bhūta" is everything that is,
"bhūta" is generic for existence. "maheśvaram". So, you know, the word "maheś"
is sometimes used to refer to Lord Shiva. But actually, it is generic name.
"eśa" is controller. "maheśa" is the great controller. So, "maheśvaram" is the
great controller. So, Krishna is telling over here, "mama bhūta-maheśvaram". He
is the great controller of all of existence. So, this is the very important
verse. Which, if we look at the context, the previous verse was saying,
"mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ". It is under My "adhyakṣeṇa". So, "prakṛtiḥ" is
working. And see, Krishna can use the same thing over here. "mama
bhūta-maheśvaram". I am the "īśvaraḥ" of all of existence. Now, the words here
have specific and significant meanings. Let us look at them one by one. You
know. "avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā". So, let us look at "avajānanti". Hmm. Hmm. So,
"avajān". So, there are three phase of approaching this. So, "jānanti". "ajānanti".
And "avajānanti". So, when there is "jānanti". When we know Krishna properly,
then that knowledge of proper, you know, of Krishna, leads to liberation. This
was talked in the famous verse:

        janma karma ca me divyam
        evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ
        tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma
        naiti mām eti so ’rjuna

They will come back to Me. That is supreme liberation. So, that is "jānanti".
So, knowledge will, leads to liberation. Then, the opposite of "jānanti" would
be "ajānanti". Those who do not know about Krishna. That is ignorance. Now, in
one sense, ignorance about Krishna is bad. But actually, it is, in many ways,
you know, you know, worse than ignorance can be wrong understanding.
Misunderstanding. So, you know, you know, to know, "jāna". "jānanti" is to
know. "ajānanti" is to not know. "avajānanti" is to know the opposite of what is
right. So, we see that when Srila Prabhupada was sharing Krishna Consciousness
in India. Most people thought we already know Krishna. And, you know, either
they had a, you know, a conception of Krishna as just some cultural, historical
figure. Maybe, He gave some message. But that is not very relevant to, in our
modern progressive times. Or there are impersonalists who say, yes, Krishna is
the sym..., you know, Krishna is the symbol of the Absol..., He is, of the
Absolute Truth. Krishna is, you know, we have to go beyond Krishna to the unborn
within Krishna. So, this was "avajānanti". So, "ajānanti". And "avajānanti". So
b..., so, when Srila Prabhupada went to the west. There, people were "ajānanti".
They knew nothing about Krishna. And we saw that, they took up Krishna
Consciousness much more easily. So, both are obstacles. Ignorance. And
misunderstanding. But often, misunderstanding can be a greater obstacle.
Especially, in terms of conceptual barriers that it creates. Because when there
is misunderstanding, I think, I already know. And first, I have to erase the
mental slate. And then, write fresh on it. Which requires more effort. So, of
course, you know, India, the advantage is, the conceptually, there is
misunderstanding. But culturally, there was agreement. You know. People, you
know, know about Krishna. People know about deity worship. People know about
Krishna's pastimes. And if they want to devote themselves to Krishna, it is
relatively easier for them. So, in the west, you know, conceptually, also, it
was difficult. But because they did no have any preconceptions. Misconceptions.
So, they accepted what Prabhupada taught. For them, culturally, it was
difficult. Because, you know, their culture was so radically, you know, tamasic
at that time. So, "avajānanti". Now, what happens when there is "avajānanti"?
You know. Misunderstanding. That that leads to continued material existence. And
then, there is increased bondage. So, because of the misunderstanding, we can
commit offenses. And those offenses can lead to suffering. So, what is this
verse saying? Prabhupada's purport is quite elaborate to this verse. "mānuṣīṁ
tanum āśritam". "mānuṣīṁ tanum". One who take shelter of the human body. You
know. That idea that actually the Absolute Truth has come in a mortal, material
human body. They, people do not understand. "paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto". So,
actually, here, Kri..., here, Krishna has used two words here. Krishna has used
the word "ajānanto". And "avajānanti". Both He has used. So, what is the
significance of that? He says that, actually, they misunderstand Me. "avajānanti
māṁ". And "ajānanto". "paraṁ bhāvam". And they do not know the transcendental
nature. What is that transcendental natu..., nature? That, actually, God can be
a person. You know. The Absolute Truth can have a form. And still be, you know,
unlimited. How is it possible? That is the inconceivable power of God. That He
can have a, He can have a form that fits on the lap of mother Yashoda. But when
He opens the mouth, within that, the whole universe is seen. So, it is "paraṁ
bhāvam ajānanto". They do not know My transcendental nature.

So, the problem of the impersonalists is that they extrapolate from their
limited material experience. And they think matter means miserab..., matter
means limitation. Matter means imperfection. Matter means, you know,
entanglement. And they extrapolate that that must apply to everything. Now, this
is true. You know. For everything material. But they equate material
with form. They think that the form causes entanglement. The form causes
bondage. The form is limited. Therefore, everything with form must be limited.
So, everything with matter is limited. That is true. But everything with form
does not have to necessarily be limited. Because spirit has the potential to be
unlimited. So, now, Prabhupada, hmm, you know, correlates immediately from the
"Brahma-saṁhitā" in the purport. This is that:

        īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

So, here, the word used is "maheśvaram". So, Prabhupada tw..., twice, He quotes
this. "īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ" is here. And again in the next line. "īśvaraḥ
paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ". And then, again, third time, Prabhupada is quoting the same
verse. Here, "sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha". "sac-cid-ānanda" was quoted here, also.
So, the emphasis is on, you know, you know, establishes that Krishna has a form.
And Prabhupada even quotes from the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad".

        Sac-cid-ānanda-rūpāya kṛṣṇāya

So, Krishna has a form which is "sac-cid-ānanda". "rūpāya". It is a very
explicite word. Very little doubt about it. And then, again, this is 1.1. Right
in the beginning. The invocation of the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad" say this. And
then "Tam ekaṁ govindam". "Sac-cid-ānanda-vigraham". This was 1.35 in the
"Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad". So, You are "Tam ekaṁ govindam". You are the one. You
know. There is no, there is no, no one like you. And you are having
"Sac-cid-ānanda-vigraham". You are having transcendental form. Now, the
"Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad", as we have discussed earlier briefly is, you know, you
know, you know, you know,  one of the, you know, Upanishads, in the 108
Upanishads. And it glo..., it glorifies Lord "Gopāla". And it establishes His
divinity. And His supremacy. Now, you know, beyond that, let us look at what
other pro..., other things Prabhupada says. Now, Prabhupada gives us a word
symbol over here. Which may seem a little disturbing for some people.

"They do not know that Kṛṣṇa’s body is a symbol of complete knowledge and bliss,
that He is the proprietor of everything that be and that He can award liberation
to anyone."

So, what do you mean by, how is Krishna's body a symbol? You know. We say
Krishna's body is the, the ultimate reality. So, what do we mean that He is
symbol of complete knowledge and bliss? So, basically, what it means is
"sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha". Krishna's body is non-different, you know, fr..., from
Him. And "sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha". So, He is, the sym..., the word symbol is
used in the sense that the impersonalists have a conception that knowledge and
bliss has to be impersonal. But, you know, you know, actually, knowledge and
bliss are, you know, manifested in a concentrated personal form. It is just
like, you know, we may have, on a cake, some cream coating. The cream, normally,
is, like a defused. Now, when the cr..., cream is defused. It is spread all over
the, you know, top of the cake. Now, we can take it out. And we can actually
make a, you know, you know, figure. You know. Maybe, we can make a mouse. We can
make a rabbit. We can make a dog. We can make an elephant. Some shell's bird
that is there. We can make a form which is just like that form, only. You know.
Of the child's forms. So, then, we can, we can make a child with the cream. Now,
actually, normally, cream is defused. But here, you know, when we talk about
the, you know, you know, toy that is made with a cream. All of it is cream, only.
So, like that, Krish..., the Absolute Truth is defused everywhere as the
Brahman. All-pervading Brahman. But that Absolute Truth is concentrated in the
form which is entirely "sac-cid-ānanda". So, in that sense, the Absolute Truth
is b..., manifested in a personal form. And, so, what the impersonalists think
of as, oh, the, as I, you know, bliss and knowledge has to be all-pervading. It
has to be diffused. Well, it can be diffused. It can be concentrated, also. So,
Krishna's body is just like a po..., po..., a toy made of crea..., with, it is
fully cream, only. So, like that, Krishna's body is fully transcendental. It is
fully "sac-cid-ānanda". So, that is the, you know, transcend..., so, Prabhupada,
this is Prabhupada's explaination of "paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto". And then,
Prabhupada quo..., quotes from the Bhagavatam now. Hmm. He quotes this verse.
From the, you know, inquiries of "Śaunaka" rsi:

        kṛtavān kila karmāṇi
        saha rāmeṇa keśavaḥ
        ati-martyāni bhagavān
        gūḍhaḥ kapaṭa-māṇuṣaḥ

So, "kṛtavān kila karmāṇi". "kila karmāṇi". Perform any amazing activities. And,
"saha rāmeṇa keśavaḥ". So, "rāma" refers here to Balarāma ji. And "keśavaḥ" is
Lord Krishna. So, w..., along with the Balarāma ji, "keśavaḥ" performed many
pastimes. And "ati-martyāni bhagavān". So, "bhagavān". This is the Supreme Lord.
He is all-attractive supreme person. "ati-martyāni". He is beyond, He is
actually situated beyond the situation o..., of the "martyāni". Of those who
have time for death. Or all living beings. But how did He perform His
activities? "gūḍhaḥ kapaṭa-māṇuṣaḥ". So, "gūḍhaḥ". You know. You know. It is
confidential. It is secret. "kapaṭa-māṇuṣaḥ". It appeared as if He was, you
know, He was actually concealing. He was deluding. He was b..., bewildering.
This is 1.1.20. And then, Prabhupada quotes, also, from the "Bhāgavatam":

        babhūva prākṛtaḥ śiśuḥ

So, "babhūva" means became. "prākṛtaḥ śiśuḥ". So, that Absolute Truth who had
manifested as V..., the four-handed Vishnu in the, you know, you know, prison
chamber of Devakī and Vasudeva. There, what did they do? That Absolute Truth,
"babhūva prākṛtaḥ śiśuḥ", became "prākṛtaḥ śiśuḥ". Became a, you know, you know,
a child. As He seemed to be just like an ordinary tender child. And then, you
know, when, in the Eleventh Chapter, also, we will see that the, what does that,
this Abs..., this same Krishna who is the charioteer of Arjuna do? He will
become:

        tenaiva rūpeṇa catur-bhujena

He manifests the "chaturbhuja" form. We will discuss this in, when we come to
the, you know, you know, Eleventh Chapter. And here, also, then, He first, see,
manifested the "chaturbhuja rupa", manifested the "virata rupa". 
Manifested the "charat vitra ruja rupa". And then, after that, what happened?
"mānuṣaṁ rūpam". He manifested human-like form. So, now, what exactly is the
objection if you say Krishna Himself used the, you know, the word, actually, you
know, again assumed His original human-like form? So, "mānuṣaṁ rūpam". If the
word is used "mānuṣaṁ rūpam". You know. So, what is the problem? See, the
problem here is not the word "mānuṣaṁ". It is "mānuṣaṁ".

        avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā
        mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

So, "āśritam". So, the idea is that when we take shelter of something. That
something is different from us. So, if it is raining, I may find it rai..., take
shelter of the tree. You know. If I am poverty-stricken. I may take per...,
shelter of wealthy person. So, generally, that which gives shelter. And that
which takes shelter. The two are different. So, the idea here is that the
Absolute Truth is impersonal. And Absolute Truth has taken shelter of a material
form. Of a m..., m..., o..., of a human-like material form. That is the notion
of the impersonalists. But here, Krishna is telling, or, you know, the Bhagavad
Gita is telling that, actually, you know, this is the form which He eternally
has. He does not have to take shelter of this form. So, He is, so, the, all the
quotes that have been quoted, as, quoted to point out that this form is not
something which He has taken ashraya of. This form is eternally, you know, the
form that He has. "sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha". "kṛṣṇāya". "rūpāya".
"Sac-cid-ānanda-rūpāya". This is what we quote, like, looked at from the
"Brahma-saṁhitā" and the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad". And, you know, you know, now,
Prabhupada, you know, goes into a "Bhāgavatam" reference. Which seems to support
impersonalism. And He counters the "Māyāvādī" intepretation of that. This
3.29.21 from the Kapila section:

        Ahaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu bhūtātmāvasthitaḥ sadā

So, "Ahaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu". You know. I am situated in all living entities.
"sarveṣu bhūteṣu". "bhūteṣu". "bhūtātmāvasthitaḥ sadā". I am situated in all
living beings. When he says this, you know, so, Prabhupada says that, we look at
the explanation of this even by Chakravarti Padi. And Jiva Goswami. And he gives
explanations that, actually, you know, the Lord is present as the living entity.
You know. The Lord is present with the living entity as the Supersoul. And the
se..., term Supersoul, is internally present, manifest externally as the
"arcā-vigra". And, you know, you know, the point is, you know, what is the
context of this verse? When it is said that, actually, the Lord is situated in
all, all, the heart of all living beings? You know. One should respect all
people, also. One should not think that, oh, I just worship the te..., deity in
the temple. That is the kanistha platform. I will not care for devotees. You
know. I had to. I, We said, definitely have to worship the deity in the temple.
But along with that, I also need to respect the devotees. And because, not just
the devotees, all living beings. Because the Lord is present in the heart of all
living beings. The context of this verse is not to say that, the Absolute Truth
is impersonal. Diffused in the heart of all living beings. No. There is a
person. And when that person's presence becomes accessible to us as the deity.
But that does not mean that we stay unconscious to that person's presence
everywhere else. The Supreme Person is present in, also, the heart of all living
beings. And that Absolute Truth should also be worshipped over there. You know.
You know. You know. So, Prabhupada, "avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā". He takes it in two
ways here. One is that, they deride the personal form of the Lord. And second is
that they deride the, you know, the form of the deity. Which is also an object
of worship. Now, Krishna next will describe, those who do this "avajā...",
kind of "avajānanti". Those who deride Him, what happens to them. That He
describes in the next verse.

        moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo
        mogha-jñānā vicetasaḥ
        rākṣasīm āsurīṁ caiva
        prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ

So, "moghāśā". So, here, Krishna, the word "yog...", "moghā". "moghā" means
waste. Krishna has used the word "moghā" earlier in 3.16 in the Bhagavad Gita
where He has said.

        aghāyur indriyārāmo
        moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati

He says those who do not participate in cycle of "yajña", they live sinfully.

        aghāyur indriyārāmo

They live for sense gratification. They live sinfully and: 

        moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati

They live in vain. "moghaṁ". So, in this way, actually, it is very unfortunate.
The way they live. So, Krishna is using the word, say, "moghaṁ". "moghaṁ" is a
waste. Useless. Failure. So, you know, Prabhupada uses the word to word
translation here. Baffled. And they are frustrated. Deluded. Defeated. You know.
So, "moghāśā". You know. So, Krishna is saying three things over here. The
"āśāḥ". "karmāṇaḥ". And "jñānāḥ". All three of them become "mogha". So, how does
this happen? "moghāśā". So, "āśāḥ" here refers to, actually, their hopes. What
kind of hopes they may have? You know. They may be doing the path of karma. And
they may be deciding to make advancement on that path. They may be frustrated in
that. And they may be working, you know, whole, may, they may be, strive with
the path of "jñānāḥ". And hoping for advancement of that. But in both cases,
they will be, bewi..., deluded. And bewildered. Why? Because of "vicetasaḥ".
"vicetasaḥ" means their consciousness is misdirected. Where is it directed?
Misdirected means, it is directed away from Krishna towards the things of
thi..., you know, towards the, "śā mogha", imaginary conception of some higher
truth beyond Krishna. So, Krishna is right in front of them. But instead of
looking at Krishna, they turn away. And try to see something beyond Krishna.
This is "vicetasaḥ". And Krishna is quite strong in the, you know, condemnation
of this mentality. Where he says, you know, what happens to such people?

        rākṣasīm āsurīṁ caiva
        prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ

So, you know, "prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ". The "mohinīṁ", "prakṛtiṁ". The, the
deluding nature which is "rākṣasīm". And "āsurīṁ". Which is demoniac. They take
shelter of that. That means, they already have misconceptions. And because of
entertaining their misconceptions, whatever they practice, they do not get
success in that. On the contrary, they also go deeper into illusion. You know.
They fall deeper. Great..., you know, they fall into worse suffering. Worse
entanglement. And what is the entanglement? It is not just karmic bondage. It is
actually, they fall into deeper illusion. See, the bondage can come to us in two
ways. One is that, we just have to take birth again. And we have to exhaust the
bad karma that we have done. But other is that we get ba..., you know, we get
sinful desires. We get delu..., we will become deluded, you know, by the deluge
of desires. Deluges of flood. So, deluded by deluge of desires. One after
another. After another. You know. This kind of desires come. Then, the soul
becomes helpless. Soul just gets flood, caught away. And carried away by the
misconceptions. And the misdirected desires which result from those
misconceptions. So, He is saying, Krishna is saying that what kind of bondage
they suffer? That they actually take shelter of the, that "prakṛtiṁ", which is,
you know, "rākṣasīm" and "āsurīṁ". Which is basically demoniac. So, Prabhupada
translates "rākṣasīm" as demoniac. "āsurīṁ" as atheistic. So, basically, the,
both ways, it is antitheistic. Antidevotional. Antispiritual. So, because of
this misunderstanding of Krishna, they all suffer. So, now, this verse is
clearly referring to the mayavadis. Later on, in the Twelveth Chapter, we will
see, Arjuna asks a question. And response to that, Krishna says that, yes,
those who worship the impersonal, they will attain Me. But the path is "kleśo
’dhika-taras". That He will talk about in 12.5 and 6. You know. Primarily, 12.5,
He talks about. Then, Krishna contrast that in 12.6, its..., and 7 with the
path of bhakti. Wherein, He says that, "cirāt pārtha". "bhavāmi na cirāt
pārtha". Not very long time. Soon, they will come back to Me. So, essentially,
the point is that Krishna contrasts these two paths there. The personal path.
And the impersonal path. But that impersonal path is not offensive to the
Absolute Truth. That impersonal path is brahmavada. And it is just attraction to
the Absolute Truth. You know. Impersonal manifestation. But here, it is not just
attraction to the Absolute Truth. And impersonal manifestation. Along with that,
there is a derision. There is a minimisation and offense towards the personal
aspect of the Absolute Truth. And that leads to very detrimental results. The
people go deeper and deeper into illusion. And they suffer thereof. You know.
You know. You know. So, Prabhupada, now, quotes a very strong verses here.

        yo vetti bhautikaṁ dehaṁ
        kṛṣṇasya paramātmanaḥ
        sa sarvasmād bahiṣ-kāryaḥ
        śrauta-smārta-vidhānataḥ
        mukhaṁ tasyāvalokyāpi
        sa-celaṁ snānam ācaret

So, you know, what is it saying? "yo vetti bhautikaṁ dehaṁ". It is very simple,
actually. You know. So, "bhautikaṁ dehaṁ". The material body. "bhautikaṁ" is
material. "kṛṣṇasya paramātmanaḥ". So, that Kri..., you know, Krishna, who is
the Paramatma. Who is the supreme soul. One who think, "yo vetti". Those people
who think that, "bhautikaṁ dehaṁ". Their body is material. Then, "sarva". You
know. "sa sarvasmād bahiṣ-kāryaḥ". "bahiṣ-kāryaḥ" means boycott. You know.
Boycott means to not allow. To drive away. So, "sa sarvasmād bahiṣ-kāryaḥ". Such
a person should be boycotted. Should be exiled. Should be driven away from
"śrauta-smārta-vidhānataḥ". That, from all activi..., rituals and activities
of the "śruti" and the "smṛti". And then, "mukhaṁ tasyāvalokyāpi". So, that
person should not be allowed to participate in religious rituals. But even by
chance, we see such a person. Then, what should one do? "sa-celaṁ snānam
ācaret". So, one has to bathe in the Ganges to purify oneself. You know. You
know, So, now, what is, you know, is, basically lik..., like string, you know,
that person has, has some conception of the Absolute Truth. That person may be
spi..., you know, so, is that person's conception happens to be different from
the conception that, you know, the devotees have? Is it that this person is so
dangerous? That the person should be boycotted. And the per..., one has to take
bath. See, we have to understand the principle over here. See, material world is
like a diseased place. It is a hospital. And we want, come here to be cured. And
different people have different infections. You know. Some person might
externally look very healthy. But internally might ha..., have a deadly
infection. And if, you know, another person comes in contact with that person,
that person might get a deadly infection. And that infection might be crippling.
And killing. You know. So, if fatal. So, then, what is it? Now, the ordinary
person cannot understand there is an infection. But a doctor understands, oh,
this person got infection. So, many times, what is done is, when that person is
having infection, that person is quarantined. Quarantined means just stored to
live in a separate room. And whenever that person is given food. Or anything,    
also. Very carefully, it is given. So that, no, no chance of any infection
getting passed from here to there. So, req..., quarantined is required s..., not
so that, not that because that person is to be hated. Or derided. But becau...,
the point is that the person's disease should not spread to others. So, just as
there can be physical diseases. That are materially invisible. That are, that
are not visible to our eyes. But those with eyes of knowledge can see. And they
will warn us to protect ourselves. And then, they may even impose certain things
which are extreme. You know. When sometimes, some patients have TV. So, what
happens is, actually, if they cough, also, the germs can come out. So, actually,
even when they talk, they are told to put a mask around their face. And then,
put a ma..., put a mask around their face. And then, they talk. So, at one time,
I had got severe TB. So, when devotee came to meet me. Have you become a "jayan
sadhana"? He said. You know. You covered your mouth. So, he did not know that I
had got TB. This TB. So, anyway, the point is that, you know, for one who does
not know, it may seem odd. It may seem extreme, also. But for one, who knows and
understands. It is, say, infection. And one has to be protected from the
infection.

So, the impersonalists, especially not the brahmavadis. But the mayavadis. They
are very seriously infected. By misconception that kills bhakti. How does it
kill bhakti? Because if bhakta and Bhagavan are one, then there is no meaning to
bhakti, ultimately. So, bhakti is choked and, you know, you know, killed by the
mayavadi misconception. And for that, you know, you know, you know, to happen
for the soul is the greatest disaster. To some extent, when a person practices
material life. You know. And gets in too much into sense gratification. That
also, you know, adversely affects the bhakti. But, you know, that adverse affect
does not m..., mask itself as spiritual. One understands that, ok, this is
spiritual. This is material. And, you know, I have given up spiritual. And I
have turned towards material. That means, that person under..., you know, if
a person gives up philo..., philosophical understanding. That person is
ma..., such a materialistic person. The diseased person. The spiritual person is
a healthy person. You know. So, there, the materialism is largely like a, you
know, infection that is visible readily. You know. To the perceptive eye at
least. One can understand, ok, this person is, you know, too caught with wealth.
Too caught up with sex. Too caught up with power. This. That. And this person is
infected by material infection. And we, we will not mistake that person to be a
spiritually advanced person. Not a spiritually healthy person, also. But when
that person is mayavadi, externally, that person may be quoting verses. May be,
you know, wearing saffron. May, you know, appear very saintly in some ways. But
then, internally, there is infection. So, we have to be careful. We have to be
careful. So, the principle here is that there is an infection there. And that
infection can come to us. And that is why we have to be cautious. Now, you know,
if we are going to interact with impersonalists, we, so, now, today, as we
discussed earlier. Most people, they have some kind of impersonal conception.
But they are not, not necessarily mayavadis. They may be under mayavadi
influence. So, we do not have to, necessarily, if somebody comes, if an old
friend, who is now, who has some impersonal conception. He comes to meet us. And
he says, "baiskritya". Drive away. No. We do not have to do like that. You know.
We have to be, this is, the principle is that there is an infection. And we have
to peop..., we have to protect ourselves of that infection. So, how we may do it
will vary according time, place, circumstance. So, no. At a cultural level, we
can be polite. You know. Prabhupada, also, when he would beat mayavadis. And at
a cultural level, he would be polite with them. Some, at one time when
Prabhupada was sick. A mayavadi, you know, sannyasi. Who was also in America.
Prabhupada had fallen sick in 1968 in America. So, mayavadi sannyasi came to
meet him. Inquire about him. He said, Prabhupada very polite. He told his
disciple so that definitely he could have a chair. And Prabhupada, when that was
linked, Prabhupada himself got up and tried to walk to the door. He said. No.
No. Swamiji. You rest, rest. That mayavadi sannyasi said. So, he was polite. And
Prabhupada, also polite. So, you know, we have to, you know, we have
philosophical differences. That does not mean that we have to abandon our
culture. In the scripture's cont..., context, also said, this means, those 
statements, we should stay, you know, we should see them as indicating of how
grave the misconception is. And how serious the disease can be. So, we have to
learn to be alert. And protect ourselves.

But at cultural level, how we deal with will vary according time, place,
circumstance. In general, we should not appear to be uncultured or uncouth. And
ultimately, we have to see that, even the impersonalists, with mayavadis are
souls. Who are ultimately leaving the shelter of Krishna. We may not of course
have the adhikar to try to give Krishna to them. They will give the mayavada to
us. So, we may not time to have, want to have any philosophical discussion
with them. We can be culturally polite. But we do not get intimate with them too
much. So, this way, one can protect oneself. So, now, after describing these two
verses, the mayavadis. So, quite a strong condemnation of mayavada. Now, Krishna
turns towards the kevala bhaktas. The pure devotees. Let us look at that. So,
with us, Krishna is giving here the two extremes. You know. What all
understanding about Krishna can be there? So, Krishna has given, first, 9.11 and
12, the best understanding. You know. The, the most dangerous understanding. You
know. Are, it is a, most dangerous misunderstanding. And then, now, Krishna will
give the most evolved understanding. The highest understanding. This is what
Krishna had done in Seventh Chapter, also. 7.14, He had said, "mama māyā
duratyayā". That I am in control of maya. Then, in 7.15, He had said, you know,
four kinds of people who do not surrender to Him. And then, 7.16, He had said
four kinds of people who do surrender to Him. So, He gave the complete spectrum
over there. Similarly, Krishna is giving the spectrum over here. Now, here,
Krishna will go deeper into each of the categories. In a, in a different way.
Where the focus will be more on Him. You know. And on the people's understanding
about Him. Earlier, the focus was, in Seventh Chapter, in the categorisation was
there. The focus was on the people's own conceptions. And their desires. It was
not their conceptions about Krishna. You know. "mūḍhā". "avajānanti māṁ m...".
No. No.

        na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ
        prapadyante narādhamāḥ
        māyayāpahṛta-jñānā
        āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

You know. These are not, you know, directly misconceptions about Krishna. They
are just misconception that they have. "mūḍhāḥ". They think that to work hard
for sense gratification is the standard of success in life. "narādhamāḥ". They
are just caught up in sensual and, you know, worldly cravings. And worldy
tidings. And they do not think of anything higher. And, you know,
"māyayāpahṛta-jñānā". They have some knowledge. But they are so proud of, they
have forgotten the ultimate purpose of knowledge. The purpose of knowledge is
spiritual. It is ultimately devotion to surrender Krishna. But they have
forgotten all that. It has been stolen away by Krishna. So, you know, "āsuraṁ
bhāvam āśritāḥ". So, there, also, it is overall a demoniac mentality. It is
anti, which is antireligious. Antispiritual. Antigod. But it is not specifically
anti-Krishna. So, it, there, in the four categories, both ways. Those who
surrender. Those who do not surrender. And those who surrender. The focus is on
the people. And what are the miscon..., misunderstandings because of which, they
do not surrender. The, what are the notion, understandings with which, they,
they surrender. Or with which they approach Krishna. And eventually, surrender.
That was talked about 7.16 to 19. But here, when Krishna is talking about the
spectrum, you know, the focus is coming more and more on Him. So that the glory
of bhakti to Him can be eventually revealed. So, here, His focus is on what is
people's conception of Him. So, when He talked about mayavadis. They have
misunderstanding about Him as "mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam". So, now, you know, He is
now talking about those who take shelter of Him. And what is their
understanding. So:

        mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha
        aivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ
        bhajanty ananya-manaso
        jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

You know. So, "mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha". So, the great souls. The "mahātmānas".
You know. "daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ". They take shelter of the "daivīṁ prakṛtim".
And "bhajanty". They worship Me. They render service to Me. Prabhupada
translates all the "bhajanty" as render service. We discussed in the purport of
6.47 how the word "bhajanty" is more appropriate translated as service. And
"bhajanty". How do they "bhajan...", "bhajanty"? "ananya-manaso".
"ananya-manaso" would mean their mind goes to other things. "ananya-manaso"
means their mind does not go to anyone else. Anything else. It is fixed in
Krishna. In worshiping Krishna. Why? "jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam". They understand
that Krishna is "bhūta", "ādim". He is the "ādim". He is the beginning of all
existence. He is the origin of all existence. "avyayam". He is imperishable. You
know. It is eternal. It is, so, this conception, "jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam" is
exactly opposite of:

        mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam
        paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

That was 9.11. So, there, they think that, actually, the Absolute Truth is
impersonal. But temporarily, the Absolute Truth has taken a human form. Where
they do not know the transcendental nature of the Absolute Truth. But here, the
"mahātmānas" know. "jñātvā". What do they know? They, that is this, they know
about Him. "māṁ". "bhūtādim avyayam". Here, Krishna is using same word.
"bhūta". There is "bhūta-maheśvaram". So, here, "bhūta", "ādim". So, "ādim". And
"avyayam" is the beginning of existence. And I am imperishable. This indicates
that Krishna is talking about Himself in eternal terms. Not just in contextual
terms. Krishna is talking about Himself as being the origin of all existence.
And also, being inexhaustible. That means Krishna is eternally, as Krishna
existing forever. And the "mahātmānas" take shelter of Him. So, "ananya-manaso".
In this context, also, means that they do not think of Brahman. They do not
think of other devatas. But they also do not think of, you know, some reality
beyond Krishna. "ananya-manaso". They fix their conc..., you know, themselves
only on Krishna. And Krishna uses the word "mahātmānas" to describe them. So, we
discussed earlier how the "mahātmānas", you know, the word was used a few
times earlier. In 7.19, Krishna used it to describe those who, after, you know,
many lifetimes, surrender to Him. "bahūnāṁ janmanām ante". And then, 8.15, also,
it was used for those who devote themselves to Krishna. They come back to the
spiritual world. And they do not, do not return to this material world.

        mām upetya punar janma
        duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam
        nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ
        saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

So, so, there, also, word "mahātmā". So, this is third u..., use of the word
"mahātmā". Now, the word "mahātmā" today is, you know, social, cultural, you
know, m..., political designation. At some, some, s..., national, f..., you
know, fighters. They were given the title "mahātmā". And Prabhupada objected to
that. Because he said that, actually, these words have certain meanings. And if
those meanings are not present, then using them that way is inappropriate. So,
now, in a conversational sense, you know, if somebody is using, you know, you
know, the word "mahātmā" to refer to a political, let us say, poltical leader.
Now, it is not that we have to do a campaign against that. If we are going for,
you know, some independence day festival. And there, we are going to give a
talk. And somebody says that, ok, so and so leader is the father of the nation.
He says. No. You should not use the word "mahātmā". No. That may not be the
forum for that. There, we may be asked to talk something about, say, the
spiritual Lord of India. Roa..., whatever. So, it is not that we have to make a,
make a campaign against this. But we also want to clarify. So, when the forum is
appropriate, we should clarify. Ok. This word has this particular meaning. And,
you know, using it in this way is appropriate. And using in this way is
inappropriate. So, you know, this sort of, we also have to understand when we
are giving a message. What is the central message that we want to give to
people. You know. If we go for a programme. Do you want people to remember,
people want to remember as this person said that you should not call this leader
as "mahātmā". Is that the message? Is that the carry home message that we want
to give to people? No. Our carry home message is that we should chant Hare
Krishna. We should, you know, m...., we should, that we should, we are not the
body. We are the soul. The soul can truly happy. When the soul serves Krishna.
And as people understand this message. They can appreciate the coherence. The
depth of this message. Then, they start, you know, becoming more and more open.
And then, when we bring in these kind of points, also, then they become more
appropriately. They become. They become acceptable to people. Because they have
already developed some level of faith. That way, so, "mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha".
Now, how the soul, how the soul, now, the soul, we know:

        keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya

        śatadhā kalpitasya ca


That the soul extremely tiny. "keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya". He is very, very tiny.
And how such sou..., tiny soul, why is such a tiny soul called as "mahātmā"?
Why is it called "mahātmā? Because, actually, the soul f..., you know, means, in
terms of size, the soul may be tiny. But the soul has grea..., linked with the
greatest soul. So, Krishna is the greatest soul. And the soul has linked with
the greatest soul. And the soul has linked with the greatest soul. That the soul
may have not become greater in size. But the soul has become great in power.
Great in influence. Not by indica..., you know, ind..., becoming independently,
you know, powerful. Or influential. But by connecting with this person who is
supremely powerful and supremely influential. So, the "aṇu-ātmā" becomes a
"mahātmā" by taking shelter of the "vibhu-ātmā". The "aṇu-ātmā" is the jiva
atma. The "vibhu-ātmā" is the Supreme Lord. "aṇu" and "vibhu" are words which
are used to contrast the position of the jiva and Bhagavan. The Chaitanya
Charitamrita also uses a similar, you know, distinctive terminology. It says,
maya, you know, the Lord is "maya adish". And the jiva is "maya adhin". So, like
that, Bhagavad Gita is, you know, the, w..., you know, the terminology can be
"aṇu". So, the jiva is "aṇu". The Lord is "vibhu". So, the "aṇu-ātmā" becomes
the "mahātmā". Where is, the, when "mah...", when the "aṇu-ātmā" takes shelter
of the "vibhu-ātmā". So, that is what the word "mahātmā" refers to. One who has
taken shelter. And "daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ". "daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ". So,
"daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ". What does that refer to? "daivīṁ prakṛtim". That
means divine nature. "āśritāḥ". Now, the word "āśritāḥ" is significant. Just one
verse before that, the word "āśritāḥ" was used for the people who are demoniac.
They are, they take shelt..., sorry, the people who are having misconception
about Krishna. They take shelter of the "rākṣasīm āsurīṁ, "pra...", caiva".
"prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ". So, same verse, "śritāḥ". And here, "āśritāḥ". So, as
contrasted with those people. So, the contrast between the two is clear. The
contrast between the two is clear. Here, it is "daivīṁ prakṛtim". So, it is,
"śritāḥ" is there. But what they are taking shelter of is quite radically
different. Here, they are taking shelter of "daivīṁ prakṛtim". So, what is this
"daivīṁ prakṛtim"? Divine nature? This actually refers to, you know, is an
indirect reference to Radharani. Radharani, the divine nature. You know. There
is material nature. And there is the spiritual nature. So, here, you know, the
spiritual nature is being referred to. You know. By "daivīṁ prakṛtim". "daivīṁ
prakṛtim" means that that nature which is intimately connected with Krishna. 
Now, what is? The "daivīṁ" can be used in various contexts. And depending on the
context, it can have different meanings. You know. So, Kri..., earlier, the word
"daivīṁ" has used, been referred to maya, also.

        daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī
        mama māyā duratyayā

So, in 7.14, Krishna has said that, "daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī". So, what is, you
know, what is the meaning over there? Actually, the emphasis over there, it,
divine. "daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī". You know. "mama māyā duratyayā". So, the
emphasis over there is, you know, you know, when Krishna is using that word.
Divine indeed is this potency. Which is made of three modes. And it is My
potency which is very difficult to scale. Very difficult to overcome. But if you
surrender to Me, you will overcome it. So, when Krishna is using the word
"daivīṁ" over there. The point of using that word is to high..., underscore that
even this energy is not independent of Me. It is My energy. It is divine in the
sense that it is acting under My will. So, it is actually, as Krishna says in
the next line. "daivīṁ" is used in 7.14A. And 7.14B, Krishna is using "mama māyā
duratyayā". He is My maya. He is my illusory, it is My. So, there, when the word
"daivī" is used. It is not used in the sense of internal. There, it is used in
the sense of that it is connected with peop..., normally, we may not s..., f...,
see this. You know. We see so many temptation of this world. And so many
agitations that happen in the mind because of those temptations. So, we may not
think of those in terms of, a divine. We may not think of this, this as, this is
the only connection with Krishna? Actually, it is taking me away from Krishna.
Yes. It is taking me away from Krishna. No doubt. But the way, I will be able to
come back to Krishna, is by, you know, you know, resisting the spirit and see.
But this th..., potency is also Krishna's potency. So, to resist this potency, I
should take shelter of Krishna. So, there, the use of the word "daivī" is
primarily to emphasise the point that if you want to overcome this potency, we
cannot do it by our own effort. We will have to take shelter of Krishna.
Whereas here, the word, when "daivīṁ" is used. "daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ". If we
look at the whole context, it is talking about exalted people. "mahātmānas".
There is no concept of, you know, the illusory energy over here. So, "daivīṁ
prakṛtim" refers to divine people. This is the internal potency of the Lord. So,
when we render devotional service, if we come out of the influence of
"mahāmāyā". And we come out of the influence of "yoga-māyā". So, "yoga-māyā" is
that which connects us with Krishna. And "mahāmāyā" is that which disconnects us
with Krishna. So, do, what do the "mahātmānas" do? They take shelter of this
"daivīṁ prakṛtim". This divine nature. So, you know, Jiva Goswami, Chakravarti
Pada, Bhaktivinoda Thakur, they analyse this, you know, you know, the concept of
smriti, Radharani. Hladini Shakti. Antaranga Shakti. Quite elaborately. So,
actually, let us give a summary understanding here. You know. You know. We are
all parts of Krishna. So, Krishna has His pleasure-giving potency. That is
called as Hladini Shakti. Now, because we are parts of Krishna, we also have our
pleasure-giving potency. But because we are "aṇu", our pleasure-giving potency
is also "aṇu". It is very tiny. Now, that is why when we try to enjoy separate
from Krishna, we can enjoy. But that enjoyment is tiny. It is so limited. It is
so, so limited. That is how it is. In contrast, because Krishna is "vibhu". His
Hladini Shakti is also "vibhu". And that is why the happiness that comes by, you
know, surrender to that Hladini Shakti, you know, is the, or rather, the
happiness that comes for Krishna through his Hladini Shakti is unlimited.

So, what is the jiva meant to do? If the jiva tries to enjoy, separate from
Krishna, jiva will get add..., basically enjoyment. But in the process, the jiva
is likely to do bad karma. And, you know, is going to get into karmic
entanglement, also. This, you know, so, so, what the jiva is meant to do is
connect with Krishna. So, the jiva enjoys, you know, by connecting with Krishna,
then the, Krishna's Hladini Shakti can give infinite happiness. And that
infinite happiness, the jiva also gets access to that. And that is how the jiva
becomes elevated. That is how the jiva becomes purified. You know. And
ultimately, liberated. So, "daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ". We take shelter of the
divine nature. Now, Prabhupada explains how the jiva-atma does not, now, the
"mahātmā" does not direct, divert any attention to anywhere else. Now, Krishna
is talking about those who take shelter of Him. So, in this verse, He has talked
about their internal characteristics. What are their conceptions? See, how do we
know about the person? We know about the person by the actions. And we cannot
know, we cannot see the conceptions. But when the person talks. And overall,
the, how the person lives. That may tell us about the conceptions. But anyway,
if you want to know about ourselves, you know, we have our inner world. That
means our thoughts. And we have our outer world. That is our actions. So, when
Krishna describe in the "mahātmā", in this verse, He is describing their inner
world. Their conceptions. So, what is their conception? Yes. You know.
"ananya-manaso". "bhajanty ananya-manaso". They are fixed in worshiping Krishna.
And they do not get deviated from that. Now, these inner characteristics are
also reflected in their outer actions. So, what are those outer actions? That
will be described in the next verse. So, in general, Prabhupada would use the
word devotional service to translate bhakti into English. So, devotional is
internal. And service is external. And then, both are together, then that is
actually authentic bhakti. You know. So, in this, in the previous verse, 9.13,
the devotional aspect is talked about. And, you know, the, you know, 9.14 talks
about the, you know, you know, the service aspect. The external aspect. So, the
external naturally grows from the internal.

        satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ
        yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ
        namasyantaś ca māṁ bhaktyā
        nitya-yuktā upāsate

So, what is described? "satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ". These are constantly glorifying
Me. "na...", "yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ". Endeavoring with determination.
"namasyantaś". They offer obeisances to "māṁ". How do they do that? "bhaktyā".
With bhakti. And "nitya-yuktā". They are constantly engaged. So, the, actually,
the "nitya" part comes twice here. It comes in the first line where it starts
itself with "satataṁ". And then, it comes in the last line with the word
"nitya". That in this way, "upāsate". They worship Me. 48:42
