Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NiuhA3qZqeo Audio:
https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_109_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_10_Text_38_to_Chapter_11_Text_04_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=NiuhA3qZqeo&event=video_description&redir_token=bfjGtnnU6agd0xEqQpu-NuBtpax8MTU0ODQ4OTIxM0AxNTQ4NDAyODEz

    prapanna parijataya totra vetraika panaye jnana mudraya krishnaya gitamrita
duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the last part of the Tenth Chapter now. We completed till verse t..., 27. So,
let us have a look, quick overview of the Tenth Chapter before we move ahead.
This no one, no, Chapter is titled as "Vibhuti Yoga". So, first, Krishna says
how it is difficult to know Him in verses 1 to 7. Then, 8 to 12, He say..., 8 to
11, He states how He can be known through bhakti. You know. That is the Chatur
Shloki Gita. Then, 13 to 18, Arjuna acknowledges Krishna's glories. And then,
asks to know about them more. Especially about how He has pervaded material
existence. You know. So, then, 19 to 42 is the concept of "Vibhuti Yoga" that is
being described. So, how to know Krishna? Through His "Vibhuti"s. So, let us
look at 10.38. We had stopped at 37 earlier.

        daṇḍo damayatām asmi nītir asmi jigīṣatām maunaṁ caivāsmi guhyānāṁ
jñānaṁ jñānavatām aham

So, "daṇḍo damayatām asmi". That, you know, "damayatām" is to, you know,
suppress. To control. To bring on the right track. So, there are many ways of
bringing people on the right track. So, the most powerful among them, in the
sense that the strongest is "daṇḍaḥ". So, you know, it is good if we could,
con..., convince people by h..., good, g..., advise. And council. And warnings.
But sometimes, the, even that does not work. And the last resort often has to be
punishment. And that is why in all cultures, all over the world, there have been
some strong, you know, means of punishment. Maybe some jails. Or some other
how..., places for punishment. And reformation. So, "daṇḍo damayatām asmi".
That, "daṇḍaḥ". These people are given, "daṇḍaḥ". That "daṇḍaḥ" is the
strongest. It is the last restort for punishing people. And Krishna says, I am
"daṇḍaḥ". So, this does not mean that Krishna wants to give "daṇḍaḥ" to
everyone. That is not the point of this verse. Here, you know, the "Vibhuti" of
Krishna has been talked about. And that which is the most powerful. The most
attractive. The most influential. Among various manifestations is being
emphasised. So, "daṇḍaḥ" is a forceful way of making a point. When especially,
when the point is not made by any other way. "nītir asmi jigīṣatām". You know.
So, among the, the "jigīṣatām". "jigīṣatām" means those who seek victory. I am
morality. "nītir asmi jigīṣatām". So, now, you know, sometimes, it is said that
in war and love, everything is fair. You know. So, there is a common western
saying in the western literature. And the idea is that, you know, actually, what
we want, once we gain, want victory. Whatever it takes, we will do to get
victory. Now, that attitude might be there. But Krishna does not recommend that
attitude. He says, yes, we want victory. But we want, but you should seek
victory by virtuous means. That is the best. And now, you know, you know, there
are, you know, it is, it is said to be there are three kinds of "nītiḥ". There
is, you know, "Brihaspati nītiḥ". There is "Shukra nītiḥ". And there is, you
know, you know, "Kanika nītiḥ". So what are these? "Brihaspati", as we know, is
the, the counsellor, the minister, priest of the devatas. So, "Brihaspati"
"nītiḥ" is choose good means. And choose good ends. So, strive for good ends by
good means. That is "Brihaspati nītiḥ". Then, there is "Shukra nītiḥ". "Shukra
nītiḥ" is that, as long as the ends are good. Then, the means do not matter. One
can use bad means, also, for good ends. And "Kanika nītiḥ" is, do not care about
ends. Do not care about goods. About means. Just try for your own, you know, own
protection. And pleasure. And power. That is all. So, "Kanika" was a brahmana
friend of "Shakuni". And when "Shakuni" was using his devious tactics against
the Pandavas, so, at that time, "Dhṛtarāṣṭra", you know, was feeling some pangs
of conscious. He says, it is not proper. We should not be doing like this.  So,
at that time, you know, you know, "Shakuni" brought "Kanika". And "Kanika" gave
some advice. He says, you know, do not worry about all these things.
Ultimately, you know, our survival, our prosperity is what is all-important. And
for that purpose, whatever is required can be taken. Now, among these three, the
"Kanika" is, you know, you know, that, that, it means, one, even the ends are
good. Neither the ends are good. Nor the means are good. But just one con...,
considers only one's self-interest. That is all. So, that is a very bad thing.
And that should be definitely avoided. Preferable always is "Brihaspati nītiḥ".
That seek good means, good ends by good means. And that is what Krishna tries to
do in the Mahabharata, also. First of all, He tries His best to avoid war. You
know. And He is ready to even accept five kingdom. Five villages. That is all
that is required. You know. He says, if that is all that you give me, that is
way, you can avoid the war. But then, Kauravas refuse that. And then, the
Kauravas start using devious tricks even in the war field. Then, Krishna also
uses, to use those f..., devious tricks. And therefore, He goes. And He goes.
And checks. You know. He uses sometimes. So, that is why some of the principle
warriors on the Kaurava side, they are killed by what seems to be a devious
means. So, that is actually the point of the, you know, B..., "Shukra nītiḥ".
So, "Shukra nītiḥ" is used because the "Shukra nītiḥ" is required at times. So,
you know, the meanings are, the end, the ends are good. So, the "Yudhiṣṭhira
Mahārāja" is Dharmaraj. And for the sake of, you know, Dharmaraj, for the sake
of bringing dharma, his victory is important. So, how that victory is to be
achieved, that may vary according to time, place, circumstance. And that is what
is talked about over here. So, you know, that is what is showing in the
Mahabharata. Sometimes, you know, some seemingly unethical means may have to be
used. If the ends are ethical. Now, this is, of course, exceptional. This is not
the standard. And especially, "satho sathyam". When the enemy is doing that,
then one may have no alternative. One may have to do that. But in general, that
is not what is recommended. So, you know, here, the focus is on, you know, the
best way would be that if we want victory, strive for victory. But by ethical
means. That means the "Brihaspati nītiḥ" is the best. And Krishna says that
those who achieve victory by virtuous means, they are the most, you know, that
they, their power represents Me. Their power is My Vibhuti. Then, after that:

        maunaṁ caivāsmi guhyānāṁ

So, "maunaṁ caivāsmi guhyānāṁ". So, "guhyā". "guhyā" means secret. So, those who
want to maintain secrets, the best way to maintain the secret is to keep silent.
You know. Many people think, you know, see, I know a secret. And I will tell
only to you. Do not tell anyone. Okay? So, when we speak like that. You know.
Many times, when people come to know a secret, their, their pleasure comes not
from knowing the secret. But from telling other that I know the secret. And
then, what happens? You know. Then, it becomes a, you know, parampara of people
who tell, do not tell this to anyone. You know. And then, what happens? They
say, this is, secret become public news. So, if you want to maintain the secret,
then "maunam caivasmi guhyanam". "maunam". Be confidential. Be con..., do not
speak only. That is the best way to maintain secrets. And then, "jñanam
jñanavatam aham". So, among the knowledge people, knowledge is the most
important virtue. So, "jñanam jñanavatam aham", you know, now, of the wise, I, I
am wisdom. So, what distinguishes the wise people is their wisdom. If a person
who is known to be very wise. And suddenly starts speaking foolishly. Then, that
person will not have so much value. So, that wisdom, that "jña...", that
attracts people to, you know, the wise. That wisdom is an opulence of Krishna.
And, you know, after describing this, Krishna moves forward. And then, He starts
giving the conclusion of the whole section. So, the last four verses are, you
know, summary sort of verses.

        yac cāpi sarva-bhūtānāṁ bījaṁ tad aham arjuna na tad asti vinā yat syān
mayā bhūtaṁ carācaram

So, "yac cāpi sarva-bhūtānāṁ". That, for all living beings, I am the "bījam".
"bījaṁ tad aham arjuna". I am the seed for all living beings. And "na tad asti
vinā yat syān". That without "mayā bhūtaṁ carācaram". Without Me, actually,
nothing can exist. So, we have discussed earlier how Krishna is the source of
everything. Krishna is the sustainer of everything. That has been discussed in
Seven Chapter. Nine Chapter again. You know. And now, Krishna is, you know,
reiterating that. So, actually speaking, you know, you know, yes, Krishna has
identified Himself with some opulences in this world. And right in the beginning
only, He has said that, I am going to you, speak "prādhānyataḥ". Only a few of
the opulences. Now, when Krishna says that, you know, you know, say, among the
equa..., among the fish, I am the shark. Now, does, that means, does that mean
only the shark come from Krishna? And others do not come from Krishna? You know.
No. Or is that Krishna car..., has some special affection for shark? And no
affection for anyone else? No. Nothing like that. What it simply means is, that,
that, that particular fish attracts attention. Because of its speed. Its power.
Its ferocity. So, you know, you know, that attention which is there. Which is
attracting people. Which is attracting peo..., you know, which is, you know,
that, that power, that opulence is a manifestation of Krishna. So, let us once
start identify, restricting Krishna to specific manifestations alone. And not
seeing His connection with everything. Krishna clarifies in this verse. Saying
that, actually, everything is sustained by Me. Now, existence of, nothing is
possible without Me. Not only am I the source of everything. But I am also the
sustainer of everything. So, you know, you know, after that, Krishna will now,
you know, you know, say that ok, everything comes from Me. But within that,
there are certain specific things which are My mani..., which are My Vibhutis.
But even the Vibhutis are endless. That is what He will state in this verse.

        nānto ’sti mama divyānāṁ vibhūtīnāṁ paran-tapa eṣa tūddeśataḥ prokto
vibhūter vistaro mayā

"nanto ’sti". That there is no end. End to what? "mama divyanam". My divine
opulences. "vibhutinam paran-tapa". That My divine opulences, there is no end to
them. "eṣa tūddeśataḥ prokto". That, of that, you know, "uddeśataḥ". "uddeśataḥ"
means as an example, I have spoken a few things. "vibhūter vistaro mayā".
"vibhūter vistaro mayā". My Vibhuti is the star. Expanded immensely. The Vibhuti
is very, very vast. And I have spoken a, just a few samples of it. So, what
Krishna has state..., started in this chapter, He is repeating now. And not in
the start of the Chapter. In the start of this section. "prādhānyataḥ
kuru-śreṣṭha". So, similarly, "uddeśataḥ". "tūddeśataḥ prokto". So, you know,
whatever, Arjuna, I have spoken to you, this is a sample. So, Krishna gives a
sample to help us to understand the broad principle. So, now, in this world,
also, you know, we will find certain things. Which attract us. So, according to
our culture, according to our time, place, circumstance. When certain things are
attractive, we hum..., we need to understand that attraction is the
manifestation of Krishna's opulence. So, now, here, we have to understand the
important principle. See, there is a cultural. And there is a spiritual. The
cultural can be specific. The spiritual is universal. And the spiritual can
maniest in diferent ways culturally. What does that mean? That means, Krishna is
talking about, you know, the spiritual, you know, the spiritual principle. That
God manifes..., God's opulence is manifest in this world, you know, through the
extraordinary manifestations of this world. So, when He is giving na..., those
extraordinary manifestations, as per the, you know, cultural and cosmological
understanding of His times. Now, of course, the Vedic understanding is not just
of His times. That means, it is not that Indra is just a God who existed five
thousand years ago. And does not exist now. You know. Or that, you know, you
know, any of the other people who are there. You know. Garuḍa and all those.
They do not exi..., they are not existing now. You know. They exist now, even
now. And they are, they are still a part of the comology. But, you know, they
may not be a part of our conceptual framework. Right now. Because we have been
educated in a different way. Now, as we keep, you know, studying the Vedic, you
know, scriptures, gradually, our conceptual framework will change. And then, we
will be able to relate with all these. And then, we will be able to understand
how these are the opulences of Krishna. You know. Right now, you know, see,
every example has a particular purpose. You know. Sometimes, if, if, we are, if,
say, we have never heard about, you know, if there are some e..., remote people
who live in some part of India who have never heard of, you know, say, some game
like tennis. You know. And then, they hear about some player. You know. Nadal or
Federer. Who are, you know, fifteen or sixteen times, they have won Grand Slams.
And that they hear some commentator saying, now, this player is, has as much of
fighting spirit like Nadal. Like whom? It is, it makes no sense to them. So, the
purpose of an exmaple is to make the unfamiliar familiar. The purpose of a, if
there may be, a concept is unfamiliar. To make it familiar, example is given.
But if the example itself is unfamiliar, then the concept does..., the, the
concept does not become familiar with the example. Then, actually, the work
increases double. That means, firstly, the, we have to understand the, we have
to come to the, what is the example? Ok. And then, I have to understand, what is
the ex..., what is the concept? And then, I, the work becomes double that way.
So, the work was made, meant to decrease. But the work can increase sometimes.
If the ca..., examples that we are giving are unfamiliar. And that is why Srila
Prabhupada, you know, would often give examples that people would understand.
So, for example, he would say that "yajna".

How do we understand the concept of "yajna"? You know. For western peop..., for
wes..., western audience, the idea of a fire sacrifice was very exotic. The idea
that, oh, you lit a fire. And appraise some Gods. There is not much of that sort
of thing which they are ever familiar with. So, then, Prabhupada familiriasing
by saying, it is basically like tax. There is a universal government. And we
have to, you know, pay attribute to the universal government. Just as we pay tax
to our governments. Prabhupada give the example of a tax. So, similarly, now,
if, you know, you know, when, what is the ecstasy of Vaikuntha? So, you know,
what is the ecstasy of chanting Hare Krishna? And ecstasy of returning back to
Vaikuntha? Now, the scriptures may say that, the ecstasy of Vaikuntha is a
thousand time more than the ecstasy of "Brahmanand". People say, what is
"Brahmanand"? So, what was told to be explained, so, Vai..., the Vaikuntha
Ananda is unfamiliar. And if we say that this thousand times "Brahmanand".
"Brahmanand" is also unfamiliar to people. So, when we explain one unfamiliar
concept with another unfamiliar concept, then we do not make the unfamiliar
familiar. We double the unfamiliar, unfamiliarity. So, that is why Prabhu...,
Prabhupada would give example, say, one time, Prabhupada, what is the ecsta...,
what is the ecstasy of in Vaikuntha? Of going to Vaikuntha? So, Prabhupada said,
it is like floating in an ocean of LSD. Floating. Ah, yes, I want to go to
Vaikuntha. That is what his audience said at that time. So, now, we know, one of
the offenses against the holy name is to, you know, is, is to give some mundane
intepretation of the holy name. So, comp..., is comparing, you know, you know,
Vaikuntha to an ocean of LSD a material interpretation? No. You know. Material
interpretation is offensive when the material intepretation is reductive.
Reductive means that the spiritual is reduced down to the material. Then, it
becomes offensive. So, for example, if the de..., concept of deity is reduced
down to, you know, oh, it is just a stone representation which reminds us of the
Absolute Truth. So, when the spiritual is brought down to the material. When it
is reduced. And it is said there is no higher reality. You know. Why do you feel
good when you chant Hare Krishna? Oh, because you know, there are certain ways,
kind of, kind of chemicals that are fired in the brain. And those chemicals make
a person feel good. Now, that may be a part of the process. That may happen. But
that is not all that there is to it. Actually, beyond what has been happening in
the brain chemicals, beyond the whole body, bodily setup, there is the soul. And
the soul has been activated. And its natural joyfulness is being aroused. So,
therefore, you know, actually speaking, the important point is to be relevant.
So, Prabhupada was rem..., remarkably revelant..., relevant. The, you know, so,
now, you know, the principle that Krishna is talking about over here is that
whatever attracts people, that manifests His opulence. And Kri..., and, so,
similarly, in today's times, you know, there may be of different things that may
attract people. And when the, when s..., people are attracted, we have to be
able to have our Jnana Chakshu. Our raised knowledge clear enough to see that,
actually, this is an opulence of Krishna. And this opulence of Krishna is
manifested in this person in this way. And then, say, for example, there may be
a very form..., famous musician. Who attracts thousands and thousands, millions
of people with music. Now, that musician's opulence is actually Krishna
manifesting opulence through that person. So, similarly, it may be sport stars.
It may be business tycoon..., business magnates. It may be different kinds of
people. So, when, at one level, we could just say, all this is just maya. You
know. That is ok. That is one way of looking at it. But, you know, that is where
people's consciousness is. We cannot just dismiss the fact that most people are
conscious of material things. So, that if, if Arjuna had adopted such a
dismissive attitude, yes, everything material is maya. Just reject it. Then,
there would have been no need for the Vibhuti Yoga chapter. And if Krishna had
wanted us to adopt that approach. Then, Krishna would also not answer. You know.

        keṣu keṣu ca bhāveṣu

Kri..., you know, Arjuna is asking, you know, how can I rememer You? How can You
be remembered through material manifestation? And Krishna says, actually, the
material is illusion. Forget it. Nothing beyond matter do spirit. Krishna does
not say like that. Krishna gives exa..., gives examples by which Arjuna can
remember. So, for us, also, you know, when Prabhupada was traveling in a plane.
And that time, there was Charlie Chaplin movie. So, Prabhupada was laughing at
the jokes over there. And then, when devotees asked that, you know, Prabhupada,
you know, that, that, generally, devotees' idea is anything that you cannot see
explicitly connected with Krishna, that must be maya. So, why, Prabhupada? They
were, they were bewildered. Prabhupada watching a Charlie Chaplin movie. And
laughing. And laugh..., Prabhupada was hilari..., enjoying it. And they then
asked Prabhupada. Prabhupada said that actually, Charlie Chaplin's humour is a
manifestation of Krishna. You know. Krishna's, you know, capacity for humour is
manifested in a sma..., very small fragmental way through Charlie Chaplin. So,
this is the view of connection. Prabhupada said this humour is original. And it
is the spark of Krishna. Krishna's qualities. So, you know, you know, that means
the karmi way would be of looking at things would be, oh, this humour is so
nice. Let us enjoy. Enjoy. Enjoy. And do not think of anything else. Laugh so
that you, you know, you know, so, you know, the, you know, so that you can
for..., forget your sufferings. And many people say that, you know, you have to
laugh to stop from crying. Now, material life makes us miserable. And we want to
cry. So, to forget that, just laugh. Laugh. Laugh away. And the other extreme
would..., that is a karmi way of looking at things. The jnani way of looking at
things would be, hey, this is all illusion. So, all place of suffering. And this
laughter is also a part of suffering. Part of the illusion which will perpetuate
our suffering. But the bhakta ways to see the connection. To see the connection
between things and Krishna. So, there is this, so, that is the Vibhuti of
Krishna that is manifesting through a particular person. Now, we do not go and
start a, a, a, start watching Charlie Chaplin movies. To think, oh, let me see
the Vibhuti of Krishna through that. You know. That is not the only way to see
Krishna's Vibhuti. You know. Kri..., we can remember Krishna even go..., by
going to the temple. And by seeing the deities. And by reading about Krishna's
pastimes. You know. That is a direct way. And that is the primarily recommended
way. But the point is that Krishna Consciousness does not have to be limited
only to activities that are explicitly Krishna Conscious. That means going to
the temple. Studying the scriptures. Chanting the holy names.  Associating with
devotees. Traveling to pilgrimages. So, these are explicitly devotional
activities. And, you know, they help us definitely in practicing Krishna
Consciousness. And becoming Krishna Conscious. And they are vital. But we should
not pigeonhole Krishna Consciousness only into these activities.  Krishna
Consciousness extends everywhere. The jurisdiction of Krishna Consciousness is
everywhere as Prabhupada has said in the Seventh Chapter. So, now, how can we be
Krishna Conscious in what we are anyway conscious of?

See, when we are in the world, at that time, there will be certain things which
we will be conscious of. Just by the fact that we are in the world. There are
certain politicians. There are certain sport stars. There are certain movie
stars. They are constantly in the news. People are talking about them. So, it is
not that we have to delight in those things constantly. But it is not that we
have to reject all of them entirely as mundane gossip. If there are times when
we have to, we are exposed to those. We are, we are, we are in..., inter...,
interacting with those things in some way or the other. Then, we try to see the
Krishna factor. So, even in the material manifestations, whatever is
extraordinary in our times. You know. That would be a manifestation of Krishna.
You know. That would be a manifestation of Krishna. So, how is it a
manifestation of Krishna? Because in this particular generation, in this
culture, that person. Or that project is, you know, attracting people's
attention. And that capacity to attract people's attention is ultimately coming
from Krishna. So, we do not want to get specifically attracted to that
manifestation. But whatever attraction is by anyway there. Either in our mind.
Or in people's mind. Because of which, our, al..., at a, con..., con...,
consciousness or attention also goes sometimes there. Then, we connect that to
Krishna. So, often, we have to, you know, illustrate eternal principles with
contextual examples. So, the, you know, examples that are given in the Bhagavad
Gita of Krishna's Vibhuti, they are, you know, they are also factual. That
means, there is a part of the Vedic cosmology which is always true. But they are
not what people are familiar with right now. So, we can give examples of
Krishna's Vibhuti based on what is familiar. And through that, help people to
come closer to Krishna. And that way, you know, they can move, you know, they
can gradually become Krishna Conscious. So, this is the principle of Vibhuti.
So, whatever attracts u..., whatever attracts us. Whatever attracts people. We
connect that with Krishna. And by connecting that with Krishna, we become
Krishna Conscious. You know. Through the things of which we are anyway
conscious. So, if we are in a, if we are students have been in a class. And
there is a student who is brilliant. You know. That student answers all the
questions. Now, there, there will be, naturally, that person will be attracted
to others. Will be attractive to the others. So, then, you know, you know, that
excellent student, we can see that this student's intelligence is actually
manifestation of Krishna. So, if this student can attract so many people, then
how much more can Krishna attract? And when I develop my relationship with
Krishna, how much, you know, how much joy will be there in that relationship?
Like that, we can contemplate. And we can move closer to Krishna through that.
So, the whole process of bhakti yoga is the process of not rejection. But
connection. And that connection of matter with spirit is revealed in a beautiful
way through this Chapter of "Vibhuti Yoga". So, now, Krishna will tell in the
last verse, in the second last, in the last but one verse of this chapter of how
He will be, how actually everything is but a spark of His splendor. Let us look
at this verse.

        yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā tat tad evāvagaccha
tvaṁ mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam

"yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ". "śrīmad". "yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ". So,
wherever one sees "vibhūti". You kno. "śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā". So, whatever
existence is, you know, you know, wherever there is beautiful. "śrī-mat" is
beautiful. Like we have the word "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". So, the "Bhāgavatam" is
the book of the "Bha...", is the book about "Bhagavān". And "Śrīmad" is that
which is filled with beauty. It is the beauty of the intimate love of the Lord
with His devotees. "ūrjitam eva vā". That which is beautiful. That is glorious.
And that, you know, all that is beautiful, you know, all that is opulent. All
that is beautiful. All that is glorious. That is "mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam". It
is manifesting. "mama tejo-’ṁśa". My effulgence a spark. A fragment. A spark.
You know. So, you know, a, it is but a spark of My splendor. So, a devotee, you
see, we can, if we are attracted only to the sparks. The sparks will give us a
little pleasure. But that pleasure will soon end. And then, we will be left with
nothing. So, instead of being attracted to the sparks. We will let the sparks
remind us of the whole. And then, redirect our attraction to the whole.  If we
keep attract..., being attracted to the sparks separate from the whole, then we
will have infinite longings. I want this. I want this. This is attractive. This
is attractive. This is attractive. This is attractive. We can have infinite
longings. But instead of that, we can be longing for the infinite.  Instead of
infinite longings. One thing. Second thing. Third thing. Fourth.  Future will go
on forever. A devotee instead choose..., chooses longing for the infinite. The
infinite has all the attractive things that are present in different people. In
one place, all of them are present. So, let us long for the infinite. And, you
know, that is the essential message of this chapter. So, we are anyway attracted
to things of this world. So, rise from longing for, infinite longings to longing
for the infinite. And in this way, we can redirect our consciousness towards
Krishna through gradual purification. Now, after this, Krishna will describe,
actually, what is the need for all this opulence?  Description?

        atha vā bahunaitena kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam
ekāṁśena sthito jagat

"atha vā". However, otherwise, you know, or "bahunaitena". "bahu" means many.
"aitena". This. You know. Many like this, I can, many of this, I can talk about.
But "kiṁ jñātena". What is the use of knowing all of that, Arjuna? Just
understand one thing. "viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam". "viṣṭabhya" means pervaded.
"viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam". "idaṁ" is this world. "kṛtsnam" is completely. The
word "kṛtsnam" is different from "kṛstnam". The word "kṛtsnam" has come many
times in the Gita. You know. In the Fourth Chapter, it has come:

        yasya sarve samārambhāḥ kāma-saṅkalpa-varjitāḥ jñānāgni-dagdha-karmāṇaṁ
tam āhuḥ paṇḍitaṁ budhāḥ
        
You know. That is not a, and many other places.

        yasya sarve samārambhāḥ kāma-saṅkalpa-varjitāḥ
        
You know. You know. Ya. "karmaṇy a...". The verse before that. It, that was
4.19. 4.18 is:

        karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed akarmaṇi ca karma yaḥ sa buddhimān manuṣyeṣu
sa yuktaḥ kṛtsna-karma-kṛt

"kṛtsna-karma-kṛt". "kṛtsna-karma" is all activity. That person may engage in
all activity. That person will stay, you know, unbound if the person has proper
understanding and, you know, while acting. Similarly, that was in the Fourth
Chapter. Seventh Chapter, also, "kṛtsna", the word has been used. So:

        etad-yonīni bhūtāni sarvāṇīty upadhāraya ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ
prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā

So, there, also, in the Seventh Chapter. After describing how He is source of
material and spiritual energy. 7.4 and 5. In 7.7..., 6, Krishna says that, you
know, "ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ". For the whole world, I am the "prabhavaḥ".  And
I am the "pralayaḥ". I am the source. And I am the final destination. Final
shelter. So, "kṛtsna" is different from Krishna. So, here, He is saying
"ekāṁśena". "ekāṁśena" is saying that, you know, "ekāṁśena sthito jagat". So,
"viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam". The whole of crea..., existence is pervaded by just
one fraction of mine. "ekāṁśena". You know. You know. So, what does this refer
to? "ekāṁśena sthito jagat". Let us look at this. I pervade all of existence
with just one fragment of Mine. So, this has multiple meanings. But one specific
meaning is how Krishna is the pervading the universe through the Supersoul. We
know there are many man..., manifestations of Vishnu. There is Mahavishnu.
"Garbhodakaśāyī Vishnu". "Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu". So, among all these, there is
the manifestation of Krishna in the form of, you know, the
"Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu". Who is the greatest manifestation in term..., who is the
all-pervading manifestation. So, let us look at this. This is a diagram. It is
description about how Krishna pervades all of existence.

        atha vā bahunaitena kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam
ekāṁśena sthito jagat

So, here, we will see that Krishna is the cause of all causes. And f...,
"sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam". From Krishna comes Balaram. It is based on the "Bhā...",
"Bhāgavatam". And also further elaborated in "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". So, from
Balaramji, there are four expansions. They are called the, you know, the, f...,
Chatur Viva. Vasudeva. Sankarshana. Pradyumna. And Aniruddha. Now, from
Sankarshana comes Narayana. And from Narayana comes the second quadruple
expansion. Second set of four expansion. That is the second Vasudeva.
Sankarshana. Pradyumna. Aniruddha. Now, all these is actually in the spiritual
world. And these are eternal manifestations. Now, beyond that, there are the
manifestations who are called as "purusa-avataras". These are the manifestations
who interact with Prakriti. They do not get contaminated by Prakriti. They are
still transcendental. But they interact with Prak..., ma..., material nature.
The other manifestations, Balaramji. And Vasudeva. Sankarshana. Pradyumna.
Aniruddha. They do not directly interact with material nature. So, there is
"Maha-Vishnu". Then, there is Garbhodakashayi Vishnu. And then, there is
Kshirodakashayi Vishnu. So, Maha-Vishnu is the person. Maha-Vishnu is the
Supersoul of, He is also called as Karanodakashayi Vishnu. Maha-Vishnu is the
Supersoul of all of existence. Now, of the, you know, not just of one universe.
But all universes. So, it is from Him that everything comes along. Then,
Garbhodakashayi Vishnu is the, you know, He is Supersoul of each universe. Now,
He expands from Maha-Vishnu's body, all universes come out. And then,
"Maha-Vishnu" expands as the "Garbhodakashayi Vishnu". And He is present in
expanded form, in that, you know, in the, in each universe. And then, there will
be one that Kshirodakashayi Vishnu. Kshi..., Kshirodakashayi Vishnu is the
Paramatma. So, He is present at the top above the Maloka, also, in the, you
know, of the next bank. So, Shri Sagar. But along with that, He is also present
as, present as the, you know, you know, Supersoul in the heart of all living
beings. So, that is Kshirodakashayi Vishnu. So, now, Krishna is telling, this
Kshirodakashayi Vishnu is all-pervading. How is He all-pervading? Because the
Supersoul exists:

        anda tarastha paramanu uchayan tarastham paramanu

He is present in the heart of all living beings. He is present in every atom.
So, now, we will look back at this. And Krishna will understand. "ekāṁśena".
"ekāṁśena". Look at where Krishna is. Then, we will look at where Krishna is.
And from there, we come down all the way to the, Krishna has so many expansions.
Out of it, just one except..., expansion is Kshirodakashayi Vishnu. So,
Kshirodakashayi Vishnu is one expansion. Krishna is saying, "ekāṁśena sthito
jagat". Now, here, now, Krishna is the cause of all causes. Krishna has told
that very clearly. "ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo". And Jiva Goswami, are, uses this
to, verse to establish how Krishna is the source of everyone means that Krishna
is the source of Vishnu, also. You know, normal, you know, idea within Hindu
culture is that, Vishnu has ten incarnations. And one of them is Krishna.  So,
that is not an entirely incorrect understanding. But that has to be understood
in the proper context. Let us start to understand, you know, that point of view,
how actually Krishna, is Krishna the source of Vishnu? Or Vishnu is the source
of Krishna? So, we have to understand that there is the concept of Krishna as
the Avatari. And Krishna as the Avatara. So, Krishna, the Avatari is the source.
You know. Who is present eternally in the spiritual world. So, that Krishna is
actually eternal. And that Krishna is the source of all living beings. And all
manifestations of Vishnu, also. He is eternal. He is existing in the spiritual
world forever. So that Krishna is the Avatari. He is, you know, He is
manifesting the Madhurya Bhava. In the spiritual world, He does not manifest so
much the Aishwarya Bhava. He is the Supreme Lord. And from that Krishna, what
happens is, there is expansion where there is Vishnu. Then, there is Brahma. And
then, there is Shiva. So, they are connected with the material existence. Now,
of course, Kri..., from Krishna, it is not that Vishnu comes directly. We just
now saw how from Krishna Vishnu comes. And actually, there is not just one. But
there are three Vishnus. So, now, in this diagram, in the previous diagram, the,
the elaborate chain through which from Krishna, Vishnu manifests. That is talked
about. And the three lev..., three Vishnus are also talked about. But here, we
are not going into technical details. We are understanding the principle now.
So, there is Krishna who is "sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam". From whom, through a, from,
through a chain, Vishnu manifests. Now, after Vishnu has manifested, after that,
what happens? Vishnu is in charge of maintaining this material world. So,
whenever there is danger in this material world, at that time, the devatas go to
Vishnu for help. And when they go to Vishnu for help, Vishnu seeks their help.
And gets, you know, Vish..., the Vi..., this, Vishnu says that, I will help. And
wha..., how will I help? He says, an incarnation will come. So, incarnation or
Avatara simply means that which descends from the spiritual world to the
material world. So, Vishnu in a sense is like, you know, is not, is from some
people's perspective, Vishnu might be the source. Because they think that we
prayed to Vishnu. And then, an Avatara came. So, their idea is that Vishnu is
the source. So, Vishnu sends his various Avataras. But what is not understood is
that Vishnu is not so much as a source as a gateway. You know. As a gateway
means, that actually, the prayers go up from here to Vishnu. And then, there are
so many Avataras up there in the spiritual world. And then, according to the
specific pastime that is required, a specific Avatara comes down. So, Vishnu is
not the source. But is the route. Through which, the various incarnations come.
And from the point of view of people in this world, it is Kri..., Vi..., the,
Vishnu was prayed to. And then, Krishna came. So, in that sense, some people may
think that Krishna is an incarnation of Vishnu. So, from the point of view of
limited perspective in this world, it might be true. But beyond the perspective
of this world, there is the perspective of, a, when we see all of total reality.
And in that perspective of the complete reality, what we understand is, beyond
Vishnu, there is Krishna. Who is eternally existing in the spiritual world. And
from that world, you know, in that world, He is manifesting 64 qualities. Unlike
the Vishnu forms, which manifest 60 qualities. And He has all opulences. And He
is the source of all in that sense. He mani..., manife..., manifests the
sweetness of, you know, within, you know, you know, of Rupa-madhurya".
"Venu-madhurya". "Lila-madhurya". And "Bhakta-madhurya". You know. These four
special opulences. He has His special sweetness of form. "Rupa-madhurya". You
know. That is not present in any incarnation. The sweetness of Krishna's
threefold many form. Then, the "Lila-madhurya". Very intimate pastimes that
Krishna performed. Especially the madhurya-rasa. Then, the sakh...,
vatsala-rasa. And even the "sakhya-rasa". They are not so much present within
other incarnations. Or other forms of Vishnu. And similarly, a, "Lila-madhurya".
"Venu-madhurya". Now, Krishna has this Kri..., Krishna uses His flute. And with
the flute, He conquers the heart of His devotees. And calls all of them. And
then, there is "Rupa-madhurya". So, sorry. "Rupa-madhurya". "Lila-madhurya".
What was it? "Bhakta-madhurya". So, yes, a devotee is, whose sweetness themself
is so great. Even Lakshmi Devi wants to, you know, aspires to have what the
gopis are getting. So, the gopis are simply cowherd you know, w..., girl...,
cowherd girls. And Lakshmi is the goddess of fortune. But the gopis, also,
Lakshmi recognises that what the gopis are getting are so special. And she
wants to enter into rasa-lila. So, these special opulences which Krishna has,
others do not have.

That is why our acharyas have described that actully, Krishna is very special.
And it is, we are attracted to our Krishna. Now, this does not mean that we look
down upon Vishnu. That is not the point. Vishnu is also exalted. And worshiping
Vishnu can also take us back to the spiritual world. And we have to understand
this very clearly. Otherwise, you know, we will unnecessarily minimise or deride
Vishnu bhaktas. No. That will also take one to liberation. You know. But from
the rasa point of view, there is some difference. And we have to recognise that
difference. So, Krishna is saying "ekāṁśena". By, My, a fragment of My opulence,
I have pervaded all of existence. So, here, you know, Prabhupda makes the point
in the purport that some people say that all Gods are the same. And we can
worship any Gods. But Krishna is making it very clear. That actually, He is, or
everything else that is existing, that is just a man..., manifesting a spark of
His splendor. So, it is not that everything, you know, worshiping the spark and
worshiping the whole is the same. No. You know. They are having only a sparse.
And then, Prabhupada quotes "Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa". You know. That:

        yac-chakti-leśāt sūryādyā
        gbhavanty aty-ugra-tejasaḥ
        yad-aṁśena dhṛtaṁ viśvaṁ
        sa kṛṣṇo daśame ’rcyate

So, he says that "yac-chakti-leśāt". That just by a part of His energy,
"sūryādyā". "sūryā" gets his power. And, you know, "bhavanty aty-ugra-tejasaḥ".
It is "ugra-tejasaḥ". It is formidable power. Its effulgence comes from, it,
Krishna's energy. And then, further, "yad-aṁśena dhṛtaṁ viśvaṁ". By "aṁśena", He
is sustaining the whole "viśvaṁ". "sa kṛṣṇo daśame ’rcyate". And therefore, that
Krishna is worshipable. That Krishna should be worshipped. So, now, let us move
onto the Eleventh Chapter.

In the Eleventh Chapter, Krishna speaks primarily about, you know, the "Virata
rupa". So, what is the context here? Krishna has said that I pervade all of
existence. How do you pervade? That, how, you know, that is what Arjuna will
ask. Let us have an overview of the Eleventh Chapter. And then, we will move
forward. You know. So, Eleventh Chapter is among the longer chapters. 55 verses
in this chapter. You know. Third longest chapter in the, you know, Gita. You
know. 78 Chapters is the, you know, you know, 18th, longest, 72 chapter...,
seven..., seven, seventy, 78 verses. 18th Chapter. 72 verses. Second Chapter.
And 56 verses, Eleventh Chapter. So, 1 to 4 is Arjuna's request. Please beho...,
show me Your universal form. Then 5 to 8 is Krishna's description of the
universal form. So, Krishna, what Arjuna is going to, so, is, see, is so
extraordinary that, you know, Arjuna, Krishna needs a con..., Arj..., that
Arjuna need a context to understand. So, Kri..., before Krishna gives a, you
know, vision, He gives a description. Ok. This is what you are going to see. And
then, after that, you know, this is the only chapter in the Bhagavad Gita where
"Sañjaya" also comes in again. "Sañjaya" does not come in so much. He has just
come in the First Chapter. Second Chapter. And then, he will come in the 18th
Chapter.  But in-between, he comes in the Eleventh Chapter. So, what Arjuna is
seeing, that, you know, you know, you know, the narrator takes a scene back.
And says, ok, so, Krishna and Arjuna are discussing. And that is what is being
reported by "Sañ...", you know, reported by "Sañjaya" to "Dhṛtarāṣṭra". And that
is what is being, we have discussed by "Vaishampayana" with "Janamejaya". So,
that is the meta conversation that is happening in the Mahabharata. So, in that
conversation, you know, you know, you know, you know, the, till now the focus
was on what Krishna is speaking. What Arjuna is answering. Now, it, we take a
step backward. And then, you know, by this, "Sañjaya" describes what overall is
being seen over there. Then, when Krishna reveals universal form, then for five
verses, from 9 to 14, "Sañjaya" describes what he is going to see. And then,
after that, you know, Krishna, Arjuna when he sees the universal form, he
becomes overwhelmed. And he starts offering. He starts describing. And the
description soon develops to a prayer. So, 15 to 31 is the most detailed
description of the "Virata rupa". That comes in the form of what Arjuna is
seeing. He describes. And there, He also describes the "Kala rupa" when he sees
that. Then, after that, at 31, when Arjuna is seeing the Kala Rupa, he becomes
overwhelmed. And he asks. Who are you? Please just, please reveal Yourself to
me. So, from 32 to 34, that Krishna's instructions come in. That is. Krishna is
saying, become My instrument. That is the essence of His instructions. Then, 35
to thirty..., 46 will be Arjuna's prayers. Arjuna will tell, you know, what, you
know, wha..., he will start offering prayers. Expressing apology. And also,
seeking the darsh..., seeking forgive..., you know, seeking the darshan of a
chaturbhuja. So, that chaturbhuja will be revealed in 47th verse. You know.
And, will be, and then, and then, after that, Krishna will start speaking. And
there, Arjuna also speaks one verse. And Krishna speaks again. But the essence
of that conversation is, from 47 to 55 is, pure devotion grants, alone grants
all visions. Whether of universal form. Or of the four-handed form. Or of the
two-handed form. All forms. Like that. So, the chapter, you know, starts with,
you know, the revelation of God in matter. You know. Not in an imma..., not in
the way of Vibhutis as was in the Tenth Chapter. But in the point, way of
"Virata rupa". So, both are manifestations of God in matter. But this chapter
will talk about the "Virata rupa". And after talking about the "Virata rupa",
then the chapter will move on to describe the manifestation of, you know, you
know, you know, all forms coming becau..., due to pure devotion. So, the chapter
will culminate in pure devotion. So, let us look at the verses. So, Krishna,
Arjuna will speak right in the beginning.

        arjuna uvāca

        mad-anugrahāya paramaṁ
        guhyam adhyātma-saṁjñitam
        yat tvayoktaṁ vacas tena
        moho ’yaṁ vigato mama

So, "mad-anugrahāya paramaṁ". So, out of Your supreme, your, out of Your great
mercy on me, what have You done? "guhyam adhyātma-saṁjñitam". You have spoken
about spiritual knowledge to me. Which is very "guhyam". Which is not easy to
understand. The word "guhyam" has come in the Ninth Chapter.

        rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ

And then:

        idaṁ tu te guhya-tamaṁ

So that Ninth, Nor..., Ninth Chapter. And the Tenth Chapter. Which ultimately
focus on pure devotional service. On Krishna's glories that lead to the glory of
pure devotional service. They have been talked about. And Krishna, say, Arjuna
is saying, yes, I have just spoken this, what you have spoken is great mercy to
me. And then, "yat tvayoktaṁ vacas tena". That "uktam". "tvayā". "uktam". The
words that You have spoken. "vacas". What has happened by that? "moho ’yaṁ
vigato mama". My "mohaḥ" has gone away. "vigataḥ". "vigataḥ" means to go away.
Sem..., my "mohaḥ" has gone away. It is interesting that Kri..., Arjuna is
saying that, now, I have no "mohaḥ". In fact, this is what Arjuna will say at
the end of the Gita. When, in 18.72, to Arjuna will be asked, Krishna, have you
heard properly? And 18.73, you know, Arjuna will say "naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir
labdhā". So, there, also, he is saying the same "naṣṭo mohaḥ". And here, in
11.1, also, Kri..., Arjuna, Arjuna is saying that "moho ’yaṁ vigato mama". My
"mohaḥ" has gone. So, this statement of Arjuna also illustrates the point that,
you know, at 10.11, when the Bhagavad Gita is, Chatur Shloki is conclu..., is
given, is concluded. So, at that time, Arjuna has accepted Krishna's glories.
And, you know, glories position. "paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma". He has stated. And
that way, he has established. You know. He has shown that He has established
through understanding. And thereafter, whatever questions are there, they are
for, you know, you know, you know, "loka-saṅgraham". For the sake of benefiting
others. So, he is now thinking about how to benefit others. And accordingly, he
is asking questions. "mad-anugrahāya paramaṁ". So, out of Your great mercy, You
have spoken all this to me. And I am grateful to you. And by your, what You have
spoken, the "mohaḥ" has gone. So, when a teacher is teaching a student, the
teacher also wants to know by their, the student has understood or not. And so,
the student is telling over here. Arjuna is the student. That yes, my illusion
has gone now. And You have been very merciful to me. So, actually, when Krishna
speaks, it is out of His kindness. And that speech removes our illusion.

        bhavāpyayau hi bhūtānāṁ
        śrutau vistaraśo mayā
        tvattaḥ kamala-patrākṣa
        māhātmyam api cāvyayam

So, now, what all have You spoken? You know. "bhavāpyayau hi bhūtānāṁ". "bhava".
"apyayau". "bhava" means creation. "apyayau" is destruction. "bhūtānāṁ". Of all
of existence. "śrutau vistaraśo mayā". I have heard about it in detail. And
"tvattaḥ". And about You, also. Oh, "kamala-patrākṣa". Oh, lotused-eye One.
"māhātmyam api cāvyayam". I have heard about Your glories, also. So, this
"kamala-patrākṣa" is a very surprising and sweet form of address. There have
been many ways in which Krishna has been addressed by Arjuna. "vārṣṇeya".
"puruṣottama". You know. "mādhavaḥ". You know. "keśava". Many names have been
there. But this is a very intimate. Oh, lotused-eye One. So, normally, this sort
of address comes in devotional prayers. Where the Lord's beauty is being talked
about. So, this is surprising in the sense that soon after this, here, Krishna
is referring to, you know, being referred to as "kamala-patrākṣa". But soon
after that, the "Virata rupa" will come. And the "Virata rupa", the eyes are
blazing. And they, the eyes are so blazing that one cannot even look at the
eyes. So, it is the same God who is so attractive in one manifestation. And so
intolerably fearsome in another manifestation. So, actually, the whole flow of
the Gita is taking us towards the intimate understanding, to the symptom, to
understanding of God's intimate, intimate personality. Those intimate
understanding of God. And Arjuna's intimate relationship with Krishna, you know,
is revealed through this address "kamala-patrākṣa". Oh, "kamala-patrākṣa" is
lotused-eye One.

        tvattaḥ kamala-patrākṣa
        māhātmyam api cāvyayam

"māhātmyam". Your glory. What is the nature of Your glory? It is "avyayam".
"avyayam" means it is imperishable. You know. So, what is, you know, Arjuna
referring over here? We know that the "guhyam adhyātma" was talked about in
Ninth, Tenth Chapters. But what is He saying?

        bhavāpyayau hi bhūtānāṁ
        śrutau vistaraśo mayā

That the, you know, creation and destruction of all, of all living beings has
already been talked about. This is referring to Seventh Chapter. Eighth Chapter.
Ninth Chapter. Seventh Chapter, Krishna has said that, you know, everything
comes from Me. And everything is sus..., sustained by Me. And everything returns
to Me. That was 7.6. He talk..., mentioned it. And again, in Eighth Chapter, He
talked about the:

        sahasra-yuga-paryantam
        ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ 

8.17 to 8.19. And then, He went to the spiritual world with 8.20. And especially
in Ninth Chapter, He has talked about, you know, from 9.6 to 9.9 how:

        prakṛtiṁ svām avaṣṭabhya
        visṛjāmi punaḥ punaḥ
        bhūta-grāmam imaṁ kṛtsnam
        avaśaṁ prakṛter vaśāt

So, the creation and destruction, how it happens as a cycle. And how Krishna's
abode remains eternal and transcendental. And how Krishna remains the controller
of all this, you know, cycle of creation and destruction. That has been talked
about by Krishna. And that is what is Arjuna, you know, be..., Arjuna referring
to over here. So, on one side, yes, everything is temporary. And how it is
created, how this destroyed, You explain that to me. And then, along with that,
Your imperishable glories. You always remain "udāsīna-vad āsīnam". You remain
det..., detached. You remain transcendental. "mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ". 9.10, He
has described, also. So, You have described all this to me. So, Arjuna is
saying, yes, I accept this. Now, he is, Arjuna is making a, setting up a context
for his request. He is saying, yes, there is this destructible material world.
And there are Your indest..., Your indestructible glory, a position with Your
imperishable glories. So, now, I want, You have spoken this to me. Now, I have a
spea..., you know, you know, he is building up towards the request. So, what
will be the request?

        evam etad yathāttha tvam
        ātmānaṁ parameśvara
        draṣṭum icchāmi te rūpam
        aiśvaraṁ puruṣottama

"evam etad". So, you know, "yathāttha tvam". So, as You have said, so You are
manifest before me. "evam etad yathāttha tvam". "yathāttha tvam" means, you
know, as You have spoken, so You are. So, this is very nice verse. You know.
"Bhagavad-gītā As It Is", we say. So, "evam etad yathāttha tvam". So, as You
have spoken, so You are. You know. So, Krishna is telling here, actually, it is
not that there is some, Arjuna is telling over here not that there is some
higher reality beyond You. No. As You have told me, so You actually are. I
accept that. So, re..., is a repetition of, in one sense of what Arjuna has
spoken in, you know, 10.15. Where he says:

        sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye

I accept what You say. So, as You have spoken, so You are manifest before me.
And then, at the same time, "draṣṭum icchāmi te rūpam". I desire to see
something. What? He says "rūpam aiśvaraṁ". You know. The, Your "aiśvaraṁ rūpam".
So, when Krishna is manifest, as Arjuna, this is the "madhurya-rupa". It is an
intimate form. Krishna is describing the knowledge of His "aiśvaraṁ". How He
pervades all of existence. How He controls all of existence. But now, he also
wants to, he says that, I want to see. I want to know more, more about this
form. So:

        draṣṭum icchāmi te rūpam
        aiśvaraṁ puruṣottama

You are "puruṣottama". So, in the previous verse, only, it was
"kamala-patrākṣa". Yes, You are my intimate Lord. Lotus-eyed Lord. But I also
know Your position. You are the Supreme Being. "puruṣottama". So, I desire to
see Your "rūpam aiśvaraṁ". So, now, if we remember in 9.5, Krishna had said:

        paśya me yogam aiśvaram

So, there, He had talked about the "yogam aiśvaram". So, "yogam aiśvaram" refers
to the opulence, you know, of by, opulence of Krishna as He is manifest through
the creation. And by which, Krish..., we can come to know about Krishna. And we
can connect with Krishna. There was "yogam aiśvaram". Now, Arjuna is saying, I
want to see Your "rūpam aiśvaraṁ". So, I want to see that form by which You
pervade all of existence. So, He says, "ekāṁśena sthito jagat". I pervade and
sustain all of existence by just one spark of Myself. So, what is that one
spark? How do You do that? I want to see this. So, you know, "rūpam aiśvaraṁ".
You know. You know. I want to see Your "Virata rupa". So, let us see what he
says in the next verse. We will understand this further. Now, Arjuna phrases a
request very humbly.

        manyase yadi tac chakyaṁ
        mayā draṣṭum iti prabho
        yogeśvara tato me tvaṁ
        darśayātmānam avyayam

"manyase yadi". "chak...", "yadi tac chakyaṁ"". My dear Lord, if You think it is
possible for me. "mayā draṣṭum iti prabho". If You think it is possible for me
to see this form, my dear Lord. "yogeśvara tato me tvaṁ". "yogeśvara". Oh, Lord,
You are "yogeśvara". As, so, he is saying, if it is possible for You to show it
to me. But You, I know that it is possible because you are "yogeśvara".
"darśayātmānam avyayam". So, Your own glories. Imperishable glories. "māhātmyam
api cāvyayam". He has told the word "avyayam", He has used in the second verse
of this chapter, also. Now, he is using it again. And he is saying, you know,
"darśaya". "darśaya". So, "paśyāmi" was there. You know. I want to see. Now, if
you, I want to see, how will I be able to see? It is only when You give darshan.
When You reveal. So, "darśayātmānam avyayam". It is possible for You. You know.
So, it is possible for You to do it, my dear Lord. What is question, you know,
what is the question is whether it is possible for me to see. So, if You think
it is possible for me to see, then please reveal this form to me. So, here,
Arjuna exhibits humility. You know. It is, you know, the difference between
humility i..., and pride is that, humility begs and waits. Pride demands and
complains. You know. Pride think..., pride, then we are proud, we think we
already deserve something. And we do not get it, demand. Why is it not coming?
Why is this not coming? Why is this not coming? So, pride demands. And if the
demand is not for co..., fulfilled, the pride complains. There is humility.
Humility does not do that. What is humil..., what is the definition of humility?
Begs and waits. Yes, I this is what I desire. But then, I know, I am not
qualified. So, whenever I become qualified. You can reveal this to me, my dear
Lord. Humility begs and waits. That is the difference between humility and
pride. So, here, you know, Arjuna is making a bold request in terms of asking
that, please show me the "Virata rupa". But how is he, you know, phrasing that
request? He is saying it very humbly. Yes, my dear Lord, if You think I am
qualified. "manyase yadi tac chakyaṁ". Then, please reveal to me. Therefore,
please reveal to me. Now, in the early days of our movement, devotees, when they
came, for them, especially western devotees, it was a radical lifestyle change.
They just gave up everything of their past life in order to take to Krishna
Consciousness. And they all had their expectation that things would, results
would come immediate..., soon. So, you know, in fact, many devotees, in the
1970s, they think that, you know, within, by the next week, or next month, you
know, we are going to take over the world. And the whole world is going to chant
Hare Krishna. Devotees had that kind of euphoria. You know. Their exaggeration
in their outreach. And there were remarkable results which came out through that
outreach. You know. But another idea was that, not only that Krishna
Consciousness will spread very rapidly. But the idea was, we will also become
advanced devotees very quickly. So, Hayagriva Prabhu, once he went to
Prabhupada. Then, He said, Prabhupada, you know, I have been following the four
regulative principles strictly for six full months. And chanting 16 rounds,
also. Still, I have not had darshan of Krishna. So, Prabhupada looked at him.
And became grave. Still, I have not had darshan of Prabhupada. Just, you know,
Prabhupada was working on his Bhagavad Gita at that time. So, Prabhupada opened
the Bhagavad Gita. And he showed. Read this. So, he looked at it. And he read it
out. So, it was, it was actually this verse that Prabhupada showed him.

        manyase ...

If You think I am qualified, then please You reveal Yourself to me. So, he read
it again. He could not understand. Prabhu..., what is this, Prabhupada? He said.
That he said, Prabhupada said, what, what, read it again. And he read it aloud.
If You think I am qualified. And then, he understood. Prabhupada, yes, you know,
if You think I am qualified. That is what Arjuna is saying. Prabhupada said yes.
You know. Our qualification is not decided by us. Our qualification is decided
by Krishna. So, it is good that you are desiring to be advanced. It is good that
you are desiring to have darshan of Krishna. That desire is good. But a
devotee's attitude of humility makes sure a devotee does not demand. A devotee
desires. But does not demand Kri..., anything from Krishna. So, we are servants.
And naturally, because we love Krishna, we want more and more reciprocation with
Him. So, we would like to have His darshan. We would be very grateful.
Delighted. Ecstatic if we get that. But that is not a demand that a devotee
makes. Service means that we do not make demands. We want to serve. And at the
same, because it is a personal relation, that does not mean that, we, we cannot
have desire. The desire to have darshan Kri..., of Krishna is not sahajiyaic.
But the demand for that darshan is inappropriate from the point of view of
bhakti. So, Arjuna is phrasing the request humbly. My dear Lord, if You think I
am qualified, please grant me darshan. Now, how Krishna reveals His darshan, we
will discuss in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
