Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vR1mKzKeqiI
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=FbjA8SIHRyTnxKeYYqlh2azHGFF8MTU0ODQ4OTMyNkAxNTQ4NDAyOTI2&v=vR1mKzKeqiI&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_112_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_11_Text_32_to_35_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the Eleventh Chapter. The last chapter we discussed about, in the last class,
we discussed about Arjuna's description of the vision of the universal form.
And, you know, first, he was describing the universal form. Then, he described
the reactions of the various residents, you know, you know, to the perception of
the universal form. Then, he described his own emotions. And then, after that,
he described, the, suddenly, the vision comes down on the battlefield. And he
sees the various warriors there getting destroyed. Devoured. So, we discussed
there about the significance of the destructive aspect of God. So, God de...,
you know, destroys the temporary to make way for the eternal. And then, Arjuna
concluded with the question, who are You? So, from verse 32 onwards, you know,
the "viśva-rūpa" speaks. So, actually, it is Krishna itself. That says the
Bhaga..., "Sañjaya" does not say "śrī-viśva-rūpa uvāca". He says "śrī-bhagavān
uvāca". So, let us see what He says. You know.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        kālo ’smi loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddho
        lokān samāhartum iha pravṛttaḥ
        ṛte ’pi tvāṁ na bhaviṣyanti sarve
        ye ’vasthitāḥ praty-anīkeṣu yodhāḥ

So, "kālo ’smi". Time I am. And what have I come for? "loka-kṣaya-kṛt
pravṛddho". I have come for destroying the worlds. So, Kri..., Arjuna had asked
two questions. You know. "ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo". Who are You? You
know. And second was "na hi prajānāmi tava pravṛttim". I do not know what is
Your purpose. So, in that sense, the question also includes, what is Your
purpose? I want to know. So, in the first line, itself, both are described
succinctly. "kālo ’smi". I am time. Time I am. The destroyer of all the worlds.
And what have I done? I have come here for "loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddho".
"loka-kṣaya". For destruction of the whole worlds. "kṛt pravṛddho". "lokān
samāhartum iha pravṛttaḥ". So, all the worlds will be engaged in destruction.
All the worlds means, the principle kings of the worlds will be engaged in
destruct..., mutual destruction. And then:

        ṛte ’pi tvāṁ na bhaviṣyanti sarve
        ye ’vasthitāḥ praty-anīkeṣu yodhāḥ

So, "praty-anīkeṣu yodhāḥ" is all those warriors who are assembled over here,
they will be destroyed. You know. And "ṛte ’pi tvāṁ". "ṛte ’pi", "ṛte" can mean
except for you. Or it can mean without you. So, except for you means, actually,
everybody will be destroyed. But you will not be destroyed. So, we know that the
Kauravas were defeated. And the Pandavas were victorious. And when, you know,
you know, "Karṇa" fell on the 17th day. Shalya became the commander for the 18th
day. And Shalya was killed by "Yudhiṣṭhira". And after that, you know, the few
remains of, you know, you know, Duryodhana's soldiers tried to fight. And
Shakuni was killed by Sahadeva. At that time, Duryodhana fled. And then, he was
hiding under a lake. And, you know, you know, "Bhīma" found him. Challenged him.
And defeated him. And he was, he was, he were laid mortally wounded dying. So,
at that time, the Pandavas thought they had won the war. But that night,
"Aśvatthāmā" came. And brutally slaughtered, the, all the Kaurava warriors. So,
the, all the Pandava warriors. However, because of that tradition, that the
warriors who win the war, in order to sort of proclaim their victory. And lay
their claim on the, you know, land which they have won, the tradition was that
they sleep on the battlefield. On the battleground. So, they, you know, Pandavas
were sleeping on the battleground. And the, you know, the remaining soldiers who
were in the camp. You know. Soldiers. Warriors. Commanders. Everyone. So, they
were slaughtered by "Aśvatthāmā" with vica..., with "Kŗtavarmā". And
Kripacharya. And, you know, in this way, practically, everybody was killed. So,
the five Pandavas remained. Even the Pandava's sons were killed. Apart from
that, the only persons who remained were, you know, these three people.
"Aśvatthāmā". "Kŗta...", "Kŗtavarmā". And "Vik...". And, you know, "Kṛpa". And
from the Pandava's side, Krishna was still there. Then, "Sātyaki" was a "Yadava"
warrio..., warrior. Who, the only "Yadava" warriors who fought in the Kaurava,
in the war were "Sātyaki" on the side of the Pandavas. And "Kŗtavarmā" on the
side of the Kauravas. "Kŗtavarmā" was the commander of the Narayani Sena. And
along with the Narayani Sena, he came to fight. When Narayani Sena was chosen by
Duryodhana. Before the war took place. So, he also came. And "Sātyaki" was a
very close friend, you know, student of Arjuna. Friend and student. You know. He
had, he, he had also been at the, you know, gurukula of "Droṇā". And he had
learnt some things over there. But Arjuna had honed, you know, had, had honed
his skills through those, you know, intense training while Arjuna was in, you
know, Dwarka. So, they were very close. "Sātyaki" had also fought. "Sātyaki" was
there in the same place where the Pandavas were resting for the night. So,
these, you know, that means, practically, only these seven people. The five
Pandavas. You know. "Sātyaki" and Krishna on the side of the, you know,
Kaurav..., on Pandavas. And then, you know, these "Kŗtavarmā". "Kṛpa". And, you
know, "Aśvatthāmā" on the side of the Kauravas. And of course, there was one,
one more Kaurava who was actually a half son. Or, ha..., or, or a half brother
of the hundred Kauravas. So, he had been born, you know, from "Dhṛtarāṣṭra"
through a maidservant. And he had defected over to the Pandavas just before the
war had started. And he performed the final rites of all the Kauravas. So, he
also survived. So, practically, nobody survived.

        ṛte ’pi tvāṁ na bhaviṣyanti sarve

So, except for you, everybody will be destroyed. Now, you know, that means the
"kalarupa" is coming. And the "kalarupa" is ferocious for the materialist. And,
but for the devotees, the "kalarupa" is not ferocious. Just like Nrsimhadeva was
ferocious for the d..., d..., demons. But Nrsimhadeva was the abode of love for
Prahlad. And the same Nrsimhadeva who was roaring, like a fero..., fearsome,
frightening lion, started paring and passing like a gentle cat. When Prahlad
came in front of him, he offered obeisances. And then, "Nrsimhadeva" touched his
hand on Prahlad's head. So, we see, there is two pictures of "Nrsimhadeva". One
is roaring. Very fearsome. The other is smiling. Putting the hand of Prahlad.
So, you know, there is a famous verse from, you know, Shreedhar Swami whose
"istadeva" was Nrsimha. He said:

        anugra api ugra evayam

So, he said:

        potanam svakesari

Just as a lion is, is extremely fierce for everyone, except her own cubs.
Similarly, a, you know, the Lord Nar..., Lord in the form of "Nrsimhadeva" is
fierce for everyone. But not for His devotees. So, same way, here, also, you
know, actually, you know, the "ugra". The "Nara...", the "Virata rupa" does not
destroy the Pandavas. And "ṛte ’pi tvāṁ". Except for you. That is one way of
understanding it. And the "ṛte ’pi" can mean, another explanation is, even
without you. "ṛte" can mean without. The, what does it mean? It means that even
if you do not fight. Still, I have come here as time. And I am going to destroy
everyone. So, that means the destruction of the warriors is already ordained.
By divine arrangement. And even if you do not do it, you think that, oh, you
know, I do. I will not fight. I will not en..., curse in full reactions. I will
not kill my relatives. Still, their killing is already ordained. And that is
going to happen. You cannot stop that. That is the emphasis of "ṛte ’pi tvāṁ".
So, now, you know, here, there is an interesting verse from the "Kaṭha
Upaniṣad". Which also illustrates the point of how the Lord's glory is
all-sided. So:

        yasya brahma ca kṣatraṁ ca
        ubhe bhavata odanaḥ
        mṛtyur yasyopasecanaṁ
        ka itthā veda yatra saḥ

So, now, here, it is said that, it is quite a scary verse in one way. "yasya
brahma ca kṣatraṁ ca". That means brahmanas and ksatriyas. "ubhe bhavata
odanaḥ". So, they are all consumed. Devoured like a mill by the Supre..., meal
by the Supreme. "mṛtyur yasyopasecanaṁ". So, that, actually, as time, as time,
as the form of death actually consumes everyone. And who can know such a form of
the Absolute Truth? What does it mean? It, you know, again, we may have some
d..., disturbing notions of, you know, cannibalism over here. You know. Ca...,
you know, one thing is non-vegetarianism. Non-vegetarianism is to eat meat. But
cannibalism is to eat human flesh. Which is barbaric. It is outlawed according
to international law. And the practice might be there in some remote places. But
it is quite a barbaric idea for any civilised person. So, what, what, how, what
to speak of any human being doing it? Then, what to, a human being doing itself
is horrible. What to speak of the idea of God doing something like that? So, in
fact, you know, you know, a few yea..., you know, a year ago or so, there was a
court case in Russia. Where, you know, you know, the ROCs. The Russian Orthodox
Church. You know. Which wants sort to have monopoly on religion in Russia. You
know. Which tried to ban the Hare Krishna. Ban the "Bhagavad-gītā As It Is" of
Srila Prabhupada. And one of the reasons that they gave was this, this kind of
description. They said, they worshi..., these Bha..., these cu..., these people
worship a God who, who, you know, He drinks blood. And eats people. So, this is
a, this is, this is a barbaric cult. And, you know, we should not allow such a
cult to have any presence in In..., in our country. So, that was their argument.
So, actually, this is such a, you know, such a weak and, you know, distorted
argument, you know, without any philosophical context. Actually, if we look at
any scripture. If somebody wants to, you know, distort things out of context.
Then, anywhere and everywhere, that can be, doubt, distortion can be there. You
know. If we, if we look in the Bible. We will find that, especially in the Old
Testament that whenever the kings conquer any kingdom, what do they do? First
thing is that, they go and destroy the idols. Over there, in the temple. Their
idea is these are false Gods. And not only do they destroy the idols. There are
descriptions where, you know, in the Bible, where, say, for example, God, you
know, you know, God tells that this particular tribe is, you know, is a
contamination on the race. And you should not mix this with tribe. Otherwise,
your race will become defiled. And to ensure that there is no one become
contaminated. Actually, the who..., God orders. God orders means, one of the
messengers of, one of the persons who is considered to be a prophet, a messenger
of God. That person comes and says that this whole tribe should be killed. And
then, these people who are supposed to be the messengers of God. Who are
supposed to be the ambassadors of love, what if they just fall upon this whole
tribe. And not only the men. The women and the children, all of them are
slaughtered. And that is called as a cleansing operation. So, this horrible
description is there in the Bible. Similarly, similarly, in the Quran, we will
see these things. You know. In the Quran, also. You know. There is often
ruthless killing. Which happens at several places. So, you know, you know, there
are some jews over there. And one, some groups of jews surrender. Some, there
is, you know, in when, Muhammad con..., conquers Medina. And some groups of jews
fight. So, those who fight. They are defeated. And they are killed. And those
who decide they will not fight. They will surrender. After they surrender and put
down their weapons, you know, you know, the muslims are ordered, you kill all of
them. And those defenseless people who have voluntarily surrendered, then they
are brutally slaughtered. So, now, there are different interpretations. There
are different contextualisations. Some people context whether that it literally
means killing. Whatever different mean..., good, different meanings for that.
But the point is if Gen..., Genezis just goes into the literalistic explanation
of things, then every scripture in the world can be faulted. And we see that, if
we look at the Mahabharata war per say. The first and foremost point is that the
Mahabharata goes to exhaustible length to describe very clearly how ungodly, how
cruel, how vicious the Kauravas were. And it also goes to great length to
describe how godly, how conciliatory, how tolerant the Pandavas were. And the
Pandavas tried the, all possible means to avoid confrontation. Even Krishna
Himself went as "Shanti Dut". And nothing worked at that, aft..., you know, only
after that, they chose to have the war. You know. And it was not their choice.
It was a necessity for them. And that necessity was not just so that they would
themselves become the kings. That necessity was also because the world needed
godly administrators. So, it is all combined together which came over there. You
know. Which resulted in the war. You know. But this particular description, so,
first is the war is necesssary. So that, you know, there could be, you know, you
know, righteous administrator. Administration. Righteous government on the
surface of the earth. But beyond that, in the specific context of the war, the
Bhagavad Gita is a philosophical discussion. And within that philosophical
discussion, this is a revelation that is given. So, you know, this is a
revelation which is not to be taken literalistically. Yes. The point of the
"Virata rupa" is, Prabhupada also makes the point in his earlier purports. The
"Virata rupa" is not eternal. You know. There are, "viśva-rūpa" is not eternal.
In the spiritual world, in Vaikuntha, there is no, there is Goloka. There is
Ayodhya. But there is no "viśva-rūpa" loka. There is no form. There is no, you
know, planet where this particular form exists eternally. And there are the
devotees of this particular form worshiping eternally. No. This is a, this is a
temporary revelation which is meant to demonstrate the point of God's vibhuti.
How He pervades everything and exists everywhere. It is that which is
demonstrated by this form. And that is the highlight. Not anything else.

So, it is a revelation which is given. And within the revelation, through a,
a metaphorical way, what is demonstrated is that ultimately, everybody is going
to be destroyed. And we should not destr..., we should divorce destruction from
the jurisdiction of God. Just like a king may be very virtuous. But there is a
prison, also. And in the prison, you know, the pr..., each prisoners often are
there for punishment. So, the, just because the king is virtuous does not mean
that there will be no prisoners over there. So, similarly, in this material
world, destruction is a reality of life. And that reality cannot be denied or
rejected. Nor cannot be di..., can it divorced from the overall understanding
of, you know, you know, God, who, whose jurisdiction exists over everything in
nature. So, it is not that God has a particular vendetta by which He destroys
some people. Nor is it that, you know, He is cannibalistic. Simple point is this
metaphorical destruction is to, you know, you know, reg..., indicate how
everyone is in the jurisdiction, you know, everything that happens in nature is
within the jurisdiction of, you know, the Absolute Truth. So, you know, in, now,
peo..., even people are destroyed, their destruction is not because of, you
know, you know, God's malevolence. Their destruction is because of the, those
people's owm bad karma. Because of which, they have to face destruction. So, let
us look at the next verse now. So, once Arjuna understands that, ok, this
destruction is going to happen. Then, what? You know.

        tasmāt tvam uttiṣṭha yaśo labhasva
        jitvā śatrūn bhuṅkṣva rājyaṁ samṛddham
        mayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvam eva
        nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sācin

So, "tasmāt tvam uttiṣṭha". Therefore, oh, Arjuna, arise. What is the meaning of
therefore? Actually, therefore means, from the previous verse, it was said that,
see, all of them are going to die. You are not going to die. Except for you
would mean that that you are not going to die. Your victory. You know. So, it,
it was implied in the previous verse. And it will be explicitly said in this
verse that you are not going to die. Others going to die. That means if there
is a war, the other party is going to die. You are not going to die. That means,
that means you will emerge victorious. So, "tasmāt". So, that will be said
therefore. And it will further clear instead. "tvam uttiṣṭha ". Arise. "yaśo
labhasva". Attain victory. You know. "tasmāt tvam uttiṣṭha yaśo labhasva".
"jitvā śatrūn". Conquer over your enemy. "jitvā śatrūn bhuṅkṣva rājyaṁ
samṛddham". "bhuṅkṣva". "bhuṅkṣva" is enjoy. So, normallly, we say that devotees
should not enjoy anything. We are not meant to enjoy. We are meant to serve.
Yes. That is true. But even within service, there is enjoyment. So, it is not
that Krishna wants a, to de..., us to be deprived of all enjoyment. Actually,
Krishna wants us, you know, to stop depriving ourselves of enjoyment. Real
enjoyment is at the spiritual level. In our nature, as souls, in our natural
activity as parts of Krishna who lovingly serve Him. So, as long as we act in
material consciousness. And seek sense gratification. We deprive ourselves of
enjoyment. So, you know, you know, you know, actually, reg..., regulation, and
destri..., and restriction is not meant to deprive us of enjoyment. It is meant
to end our deprivation of enjoyment. So, there is some enjoyment at the material
level. There is real enjoyment at the spiritual level. So, you know, as long as
we are caught in seeking enjoyment at the material level, then we cannot relish
life at the spiritual level. Because our consciousness is caught over here. So,
when this is regulated, then our consciousness becomes free. It becomes
purified. It rises through a spiritual level. And we can enjoy the spiritual
level in relationship with Krishna. And when we practice devotional life, it is
not that we enjoy, only at the spiritual level. You know. There is, you know, a,
there is, for a devotee, you know, enjoyment within the service of the Lord even
inthe material world. That is not material enjoyment. You know. Devotee, you
know, you know, for example, when a devotee builds a big temple. For the
glorification of the Lord. That is, that is in one sense in the material world.
Geographically, it is at a particular place in a particular country. We could
say this in the material world. But the devotee gets great happiness over there.
In doing that. So, "bhuṅkṣva". Arjuna, you are going to rule, you know, conquer
and rule this kingdom. And you enjoy this prosperous kingdom. So, "jitvā
śatrūn". So, "jitvā śatrūn". Conquer all your enemies. "bhuṅkṣva rājyaṁ
samṛddham". And you are, once your enemies are destroyed, your kingdom will
become prosperous. And you can enjoy that prosperous kingdom. "mayaivaite". By
My arrangement, "nihatāḥ". Destroyed. "pūrvam eva". "pūrvam eva". In the past,
only. That means by My prior arrangement, the enemies are destroyed. So,
nowadays, people have this whole, you know, you know, you know, whole scandal
about match-fixing. That means some mat..., people are, players are playing a
match. But they have already been paid. Some players are paid to underperform.
Or perform in a particular way, so that the match result will go in a particular
way. So, when Krishna is saying, like this, by My arrangement, they are already
killed. Is this an example of match-fixing? The whole "Kurukṣetra" battle is
going to trigger. But its battle fixing. Krishna has decided that, that the
Kau..., Pandavas are going to be victorious. The Kauravas are going to be f...,
you know, f..., be defeated. So, is this a matter, matter of battle fixing? See,
the important point is not fixing. The point, important point here is of, you
know, not, not of fixing the battle. The important point is fixing of our
consciousness. See, the whole purpose of the Bhagavad Gita is to fix Arjuna's
consciousness and devotion. In this world, whatever God wants to do, He can do
without us, also.

You know. Even if God want..., if Krishna wants to build a temple, He can build
the temple without any of us. If Krishna wants to spread His message, He can
spread it without any of us. He can, He is present as the Supersoul in the heart
of people. And, you know, one revelation. One inspiration. One conviction which
the Supersoul grants can transform people far more thoroughly and permanently
than what the biggest lectures that the best preachers can give. So, Krishna
does not need us for anything. So, in that sense, we could say that the results
are fixed by Krishna. But Krishna can do whatever He wants, Himself. But Krishna
is not just concerned with results at the material level. Krishna is concerned
with transformations at the spiritual level, also. So, at, this transformation
at the spiritual level means, He is concerned with fixing our consciousness. In
His devotional service. By which, we become purified. Elevated. And liberated.
So, the word match-fixing is used to result, is used to talk about, you know,
you know, say, sports matches. In which, the result is fixed. But the word
match-fixing can be used in another way. That actually, you know, there are,
there is the concept of marriage matches. And matches are fixed, also. You know.
Ok. This boy should get married to this girl. So, ultimately, you know, the, you
know, the original and the eternal romance is between the soul and the Lord. So,
the match-fixing that the Lord is really interested in is our e..., reviving our
eternal relationship with Him. In enabling us to rev..., revive our love for
Him. And return back to Him. So, whatever external situations are there. The
challenges are there. The service opportunities are there. All of them are meant
as facilities so that we can fix our consciousness more on Him. So, "mayaivaite
nihatāḥ pūrvam eva". So, this is an additional impetus. The knowledge that, you
know, by Krishna's arrangement, all the opponents are already killed is not a,
you know, not a, a license for passivity. It is not, Prabhupada said in a
lecture, Arjuna did not tell Krishna, Krishna, anyway, You have killed everyone.
Already, You are God. You can kill everyone. And You killed everyone, only. So,
let You kill, let You kill everyone. I will sit. And I will drink "Bhang". No.
Prabhupada mimic some people. You know. Some religious people. Who, who do all
sorts of activities in the name of religion. And he says, no, Krishna did not
say that, Arjuna did not say that. Arjuna took up the responsibility. So, the
idea is to assure..., is to offer an assurance. Not to offer a license. A
license means, you can do whatever you want. No. Assurance means, you should do
this, but if you have some hesitation. Whether this will lead to success or not.
I am offering you assurance. By My arrangement, success will be there.
"mayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvam eva". And therefore, what should you do?
"nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sācin". "bhava sav...", so, "nimitta-mātraṁ". Become
an instrument. Now, it is interesting that sometimes, if you say, if you just
become an instrument. Then, it see..., it may seem to be demeaning for some
people. Why demeaning? You know. I am my own person. And I can do my own things.
Why should I just become an instrument for somebody else? I will do my own
things. Yes. We can do our own things. But the fact is that our own intelligence
is never as good as God's intelligence. And often, whatever we do, it may well
end up creating more problems than it solves. You know. We have discussed this
earlier how, you know, what is the best thing that, you know, the scientists can
do to help heal the ecology of the world.

You know. The best thing that they can do is stop doing anything. Why stop doing
anything? Because nature has its own capacity to heal. And much of what we are
doing is wounding nature. You know. We are exploiting natural resources.
Destabilising the ecological balances. You know. You know. Re..., extensive
deforestation. So many things we are doing. Which is actually ruining the
environment. So, you know, you know, what do we need to do? Stop interfering
with nature. Nature will heal itself. So, the point which I am making is not
that we have to go back. And, you know, put and say no to all scientific
progress. That is a cultural issue which requires a broad discussion. The
essential point is, whatever culture we are in, we should try to serve Krishna.
But the specific point which I am making over here is that all of us are meant
to serve Krishna. And, you know, in serving Krishna, we do the best justice to
our talents. And we bring about the best results. When we act according to our
own plans, then our, because our plans and our intelligence is finite. The
results that can come from them are also at best, you know, mediocre. You know,
the, if you want to, you know, the results that truly do good to everyone, we
simply should become instruments for God's plan. And when we become instruments
for Krishna's plan, by that, you know, our intelligence becomes complemented.
Completed. You know. And perfected by Krishna's intelligence. So, our
intelligence is this much. But Krishna's intelligence is infinite. And then, we
can do wonderful things. So, when Krishna says "nimitta-mātraṁ", He does not
minimise Arjuna in that. He immediately, He complements it by saying
"savya-sācin". "savya-sācin" means you are, you know, you are very skilled. You
know. For an archer to be skilled, shot, shooting, that itself is extraordinary.
Arjuna was so skilled. That even at night in darkness, he could shoot arrows
accurately and hit targets. You know. So, that was his skill. And that itself is
extraordinary. He was the best archer in the world. But not only was he the best
archer. He was ambidextrous. Ambidextrous means, he could shoot exa..., equally
well with both hands. So, you know, normally, the archers will shoot like this.
With the right hand. Left hand. But he could shoot with the left hand. Right
hand, also. Both ways. So, he was, so that ambidextrousness was additional
virtue.  And through the address "Savyasācī", Krishna is acknowledging Arjun's
expertise. So, it is not that when we become devoted to God, our expertise and
our abilities are to be of no use. No, our abilities are to be used. And they
are acknowledged. Even in devotee circle. If some devotee has singing ability.
Some devotee has managerial ability. Some devotee has, you know, speaking
ability. So, different devotees can have different abilities. And they can be
used in Krishna's service. In fact, they attain their perfection when used in
Krishna's service. So, "nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sācin". Become an instrument
in this battle. So, through this verse, Krishna is telling Arjuna that this
whole world is moving according to a plan. Prabhupada writes in the purport that
people think that everything is happening by chance. But no. Everything is
happening by plan. And our perfection is to understand that plan. And cooperate
with that plan. Now, we may wonder, how can I know what is God's plan? Is God
going to come and tell me? That this is My plan? Cooperate with it? Or is it
that whatever senior devotees tell me, that is my plan? That is my plan? Now,
somebody says, the spiritual master's instructions are the p..., are Krishna's
plan. But we may not have access to spiritual master's instructions, also. So,
the important point is that there are broad aspects of Krishna's plan. And when
we take care of those broad aspects. Then, the specific aspects take care of
themselves. That means that when we take care of the, for example, our direct
connection with Krishna. We ensure that we study scriptures properly. We do our
sadhana properly. Then, through these, we show Krishna that we want to serve
Him. When we express our desire to serve Him in this, such a way, then other
times, also, Krishna gives us intelligence of how best we can serve Him. So, you
know, when it is clear to us how we should serve Krishna. At that time, we
should clearly serve Krishna. And then, when it is not clear how we can serve
Krishna, at that time, Krishna will also give us guidance of how we can serve
Him. So, we do when it is, first of all, when things are clear, we show Krishna
that, yes, I want to serve You. By clearly doing those activities. And then,
when, then, there, Krishna will reveal to us. Externally. Internally. In His own
ways. He will reveal. Ok. This is what I want You to do. So, we should not go
into a paralysis by analysis, more thinking what is Krishna's plan. We should
think, ok, whatever opportunities for service I have, I should take these
opportunities. And the more I serve Krishna, more I saw, serve Krishna, Krishna
see..., sees my sincere intention. The more Krishna will reveal opportunities
for service to me. And will guide me to make the best choices for myself. So,
serving Krishna is, it may seem, especially, especially with respect to sharing
Krishna Consciousness with others. Or even practicing Krishna Consciousness
ourselves. It may seem like mission impossible. You know. How can I alone? There
are so many people who are non-devotees. They are not interested in devotion,
also. How will they take up? I alone cannot practice. It is mission impossible.

But actually speaking, when we understand that this is not my mission. This is
Krishna's mission. I am a part of Krishna's mission. And Krishna is Supreme.
In the Bible, it is said, when God is for you, who can be against you? So,
actually speaking, it is not that God is for us. It is, we should be for God.
So, when we are for God, then actually, God is there with us. And then, when we
understand that, then sharing Krishna Consciousness is not mission impossible.
It is mission unstoppable. Unstoppable. So, God's power. And nobody can stop
God's power. It is going to happen. So, "Śrī Chaitanya Mahaprabhu"'s mission is
going to spread all over the world. And:

        pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi-grāma
        sarvatra pracāra haibe mora nāma

So, "Chaitanya Mahaprabhu" has predicted that. In every town and village, My
hole name will be chanted. So, it is going to happen. So, Srila Prabhupada took
up the responsibility for that. And he got the glory. You know. Many of his
other godbrothers, somehow, they, they did not have that they were, you know,
in their own ways, exalted souls. They helped "Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura" preach vigorously within India. But they did not have that, you know,
vision, vigor. That level of faith. That, actually, yes, "Śrī Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu"'s mission could spread everywhere. And Bhaktisiddhanta, Srila
Prabhupada took that oppo..., you know, responsibility. And he got the glory.
You know. He shared Krishna Consciousness all over the world. So, "pit..., "pita
yati", so, "nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sācin". As devotees, we have confidence.
That when we are serving Krishna, Krishna's power with, is with us. That does
not necessarily mean that every single plan that a devotee makes will be
successful. It is a mission unstoppable. No, even we see, Prabhupada's many
plans were not successful. When he made the league of devotees. That was not
successful. He had took, shut it down and had to leave Jasi. You know.
Similarly, when he tried to help his godbrother. Assist his godbrother in their
missions. That was not a successful attempt. And they had to, and he had to
leave that place. So, when we say mission unstoppable, that does not mean
necessarily that every single activity that devotee does will be successful. It
is like:

        gange vogam udanvati

A Gan.., the Ganga, just as it keeps moving over the, towards the ocean. Now,
that does not mean that whenev..., when, anywhere any obstacle comes, the Ganga
will necessarily break down that obstacle. And move forward. Sometimes, when an
obstacle is too strong, you know, the Ganga may not break down. Ganga may find
another way to go ahead. It may go above it. It may go below it. It will go
left. It will go right. It will just keep moving onwards. So, like that, a
devotee keeps finding some way to keep serving Krishna. No matter what the
difficulty. So, mission unstoppable means, the mission itself will go on.
Although, in specific sit..., battles, there may not be always successes. But
overall, there will be success. Because it is the Lord's mission. The Lord's power
is there. So, now, why is it that devotees are not always successful. Is it that
God's power is not always with us? No. You know. You know. God is always with
His devotees. But He wants to make sure that, you know, we do not go away from
Him in the name of His service. Sometimes, success in this world may not be the
best thing for us. That success may infatuate us. That success may make us feel
proud. And that success may make us think that I am myself glorious. And I do
not need God so much. So, the service which we took up for the sake of God may
end up taking us away from God. So, that is why sometimes Krishna may allow us
to gain successes. And that can happen even in our internal life, also.
Sometimes, we are trying to battle lust. We are trying to battle greed. We are
trying to battle anger. And, and although we try to take shelter of Krishna,
still, these temptations overpower us. So, at that time, we have to understand
that this is simply becau..., this is not that Krishna's, you know, you know,
Krishna's holy name does not work. Not that, you know, Krishna Consciousness is
impotent. It is just that Krishna wants us to struggle to realise that victory
comes, not just by our endeavors. Victory comes by His grace. And He wants us to
sincerely and seriously beg for His grace. And when we do that, so, after
struggle, struggle, struggle, after that, when we succeed, then we will know,
this success has come. But it is not by my effort. By my effort, if success had
to come, it would have come much, much earlier. The fact that it did not come
earlier, fact it has come now indicates that it has come by Krishna's grace. And
because it has come by Krishna's grace, therefore, you know, I am, I am
dependent on Krishna. So, it is, I am successful now. But if I become proud,
then Krishna withdraws His grace. Then, again, I can fall. So, let me always be
dependent on Krishna. So, in this way, sometimes, Krishna gives us a failure so
that He can give us a greater victory. So, overall, a devotee will never be
unsuccessful. You know. Sometimes, a devotee may, may face reversals after
reversals in life. But through all those reversals, that, that may be the
whatever, what, that may be a treatment necessary for that devotee to take
greater and greater shelter of Krishna. Become free from infatuations, its
success in this world. And by that, return to Krishna, eventually. So, "Jatayu".
We see that he failed. At the material level. He tried to stop "Rāvaṇa". And he
could not stop "Rāvaṇa". Now, of course, there is a, you know, you know, you know,
there is, there is multiple explanations. You know. "Rāvaṇa", he believed. He,
although he was a lusty. He was wretched. He was demoniac. But still, he had
some believes in Vedic culture, also. So, before he, you know, a..., co...,
abducted Sita, he consulted an astrologer. He says, will this abstr...,
abduction be successful? So, the astrologer, now, actually, a good astrologer
would tell him, never do ab..., such an abduction. It is an irre..., abduction.
It is irresisting. But, you know, astrologer is, not all astrologers are always
pure-hearted. They are also money-minded. So, he said, actually, this is
particular time, the time, if you, you ca..., if you can abduct her in this
time, then, you know, your abduction will be successful. Otherwise, it will be a
failure. And it will cause your destruction. So, Jatayu, so, he planned it in
such a way that "Mārīca" would go. And he would, you know, distract Lord "Rāma".
And eventually, Lakshmana would also go away. And then, he will, would abduct
Sita. So, he had planned in such a way that the whole abduction could be con...,
con..., com..., completed in that vinda period. But when Jatayu was coming and
stopping him. Jatayu fought with him for a long time. Not in terms of days and
months. But for hours. And because of that, what happened was that the period
expired. And in that sense, the whatever auspiciousness might have been there
around this inauspicious activity of abducting someone else's wife, that was
also lost. Now, of course, we can say that the Lord is omnipotent. And the Lord
can get back His consort, no matter what time somebody abducts him. That is
true. But within the perspective of the lila, Jatayu did succeed in terms of
delaying the abduction of Sita. But, but from the overall perspective, we may
see that, ok, Jatayu had to die. So, how was this a success? So, actually, he
may have lost the battle against "Rāvaṇa". But, you know, he won the war against
maya.

How did he win the war against maya? In this world, actually, the same
instruction is given by "Vasudeva" to "Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja" when "Yudhiṣṭhira
Mahārāja" is utterly disconsolate and devastated. After the death of Abhimanyu.
"Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja" feels as if I, he is responsible. Because he requested
Abhimanyu to break the Chakravyuha. And he assured that all of us, Pandavas,
will come behind you to assist you. We will protect you. So, Ja..., Abhimanyu
went fearlessly. And broke the Chakravyuha. But as the remaining Pandavas,
"Bhīma". "Yudhiṣṭhira". "Nakula". "Sahadeva". "Dhrishtam". They are all trying
to go inside. Which are asked, you know, you know, you know, "Jayadratha" came
in-between. And he blocked all of them. And that is how Abhimanyu was left
alone. And then, Abhimanyu has eventually fought heroically. But he was
slaughtered by six Kaurava Maharathas. So, "Yudhiṣṭhira" felt re..., himself
responsible. You know. To protect myself from Chakravyuha of "Yudhi...",
of "Droṇāchārya". I send this 16 old boy to the slaughterhouse. How wretched I
am. So, at that time, Vasudeva came and consoled him. And Vasudeva told him
that, actually, you know, for a ksatriya, it is a perfection to die on a
battlefield. And actually, to die in a Dharma-yuddha, in the mission of the
Lord, it is not just a dharmic perfection. It is a devotional perfection, also.
So, he has attained an abode from which, which is actually the envy of even the
Gods. And in this world, no matter how high a person rises, that person can
always be pulled down by temptation. But Abhimanyu has now attained an abode
from where he will never be pulled down by temptation. So, that, so, rather than
lamenting for him. Who has attained such an ordinary destination. We should
lament for all of us, who still have to li..., live in this world of temptation
and tribulation. So, the point which Vasudeva is making is that Abhimanyu, he
may have died. He may have lost the war against the Kauravas. But he won the war
against temptation. He went to the arena beyond temptation. He went to the
spiritual world. So, like that, Jatayu, he may have lost the battle against, you
know, you know, "Rāvaṇa". But he won the war against maya. He won the war
against, you know, you know, s..., you know, illusion. Against temptation. You
know. You know. You know. "gridradipa". He is called. The "gridradipa" is
vulture. You know. Vulture is not considered to be very auspicius animal. Among,
among birds, also, vulture is not, considered to be among the lower. Tamasic
animals. So, as a vulture, so many vultures have taken birth. So many vultures
have died. And that has gone on throughout history. And will keeping going on
throughout history. But here is a vulture who served the Lord. And laid down his
life in the service of the Lord. And died in the lap of the Lord. Chanting the
name of the Lord. And had the Lord Himself perform his Antima Samskaram. And the
Lord offered water to him. Just like he offered water. So, water for his father.
So, that is actually the greatest fortune. And how many people get that kind of
fortune? So, therefore, this supreme fortune Jatayu got. By all this, you know,
it is understood that he went back to the spiritual world. So, he may have lost
one war against the, against, you now, against chi..., "Rāvaṇa". But he won the,
he may have now lost one battle. You know. Battle is like one segment. You know.
One unit of events. And war is the broa..., broader, you know, broader course of
the confrontation. So, like we have World War II. Within that, there can be the
battle of Normandy. There can be the battle of, battle of Paris. So, water
battles are there. So, battles are subsets. War is the megaset. You know.
Superset. So, you know, "Rā...", so, Jatayu may have lost the battle against
"Rāvaṇa". But he won the war against maya. And he went back to the spiritual
world. So, sometimes, even in our battles as devotees, we may lose, even our,
even in our lives as devotees, we may lose some battles.

But even if we lose the battles. We should not lose, we may lose the fight. But
we should not lose the fighting the spirit. Why? Because the fights will come
and go. But the fighting spirit is what is going to keep us going in our
spiritual life. And our fighting spirit is based not just on specifically
gi..., vid..., there, we win particular battles or not. It is based on the fact
that Krishna is there with us. And we are serving Krishna. And the opportunity
to serve Krishna is always there. No matter what happens. So, in that way, we
can keep marching ahead. Marching ahead. Marching ahead. Steadily. And we can
ultimately to attain Krishna. So, that is the ultimate goal and perfection of a
devotee's life. That, you know, keep serving Krishna. Irrespective of whether
there is victory or defeat at this level. Still, a devotee goes on. And, of
course, by the arrangement of Lord, the devotee can get extraordinary victories.
Far greater than what would otherwise impossible. Say, in this world, you know,
the maximum that a person can rise up to is what is ordained by the karma of the
person. A person can work very, very hard. But if the karmic credits are
not there, the person cannot rise as high as that person, you know, you know,
you know, as other people. You know. Prabhupada would say that, you know, many
people work hard. But not everyone becomes a millionaire. Or a billionaire. Or a
trillionaire. Why is that? You know. It is, yes, we could say that, you know,
this person was so shrewd. So intelligent. Made the right decisions. These are
true. That person made the right decisions. But there are also so many other
circumstances. Which are also important for the success. If those circumstances
were not there. The right decisions would not have taken place. And the right
decisions, the right decisions would not have had such a dramatically positive
effect. They had a positive effect. Because circumstances are also important.
And those circumstances are arranged by karma. So, you know, you know, we
understand that, in this world, the maximum that a person can succeed is
dependent on whatever the karmic, you know, credits are. But for a devotee, the
success is not limited by karmic credits. The devotee can, success can go far,
far beyond the karmic credits to as much as Krishna wants to empower the
devotee. And how much does Krishna want to empower the devotee? Actually,
Krishna wants to empower the devotee unlimitedly. You know. Prabhupada told the
devotees that, you know, if you just accept. You just firmly believe that
Krishna is Supreme Personality of Godhead, then Krishna can give the world in
just 18 days. Just as Krishna gave the world to Arjuna in 18 days. Krishna can
give the world to all of you in 18 days. Just have to strengthen your faith in
Krishna's supremacy. In Krishna's glory. In Krishna's potency. So, as devotees,
even if we have some failures. We may lose the fight. But we do not have to lose
the fighting spirit. If we maintain the fighting spirit. Ultimate victory is
guaranteed for a devotee. We will, let us go to the next verse here. So,
Prabhupada explains that, you know:

"If one is in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness and his life is devoted to the Lord’s
transcendental service, he is perfect."

So, he says, he should just fight in accordance with the desire of the Supreme
Lord. Then, he would be happy. So, irrespective of success or failure, he would
be perfect. And he would be successful. By the arrangement of the Lord.

        droṇaṁ ca bhīṣmaṁ ca jayadrathaṁ ca
        karṇaṁ tathānyān api yodha-vīrān
        mayā hatāṁs tvaṁ jahi mā vyathiṣṭhā
        yudhyasva jetāsi raṇe sapatnān

So, "droṇaṁ ca bhīṣmaṁ ca jayadrathaṁ ca". Actually, "Droṇa". "Bhīṣma".
"Jayadratha". These are enemies. And He says, "karṇaṁ tathānyān api
yodha-vīrān". All the other enemies. "mayā hatāṁs tvaṁ". By My arrangement, they
are killed. "jahi mā vyathiṣṭhā". "vyathiṣṭhā" is disturbed. Disturbance. Fear.
Apprehension. Give it up. Destroy your apprehension. "yudhyasva jetāsi".
"yudhyasva". Just fight. "jetāsi". Jaya. "jetāsi". You will conquer. "raṇe
sapatnān". In the fight, your enemies. So, now, when Arjuna has described the,
the "viśva-rūpa" darshan. At that time, he has mentioned. You know. "bhīṣmo",
"droṇaḥ", and "sūta-putra". You know. The "dhṛtarāṣṭrasya putrāḥ". And "bhīṣmo
droṇaḥ". And "sūna-put...", "sūta-putras" is mentioned. But he has not mentioned
"jayadrathaṁ" over here. And in fact, if you, if we just look at the, you know,
relative powers of the Kauravas warriors and the Pandava warriors. "Jayadratha"
was not a very prominent hero. In fact, when Duryodhana, you know, li...,
enlists the warriors on both sides. Actually, Duryodhana does not even bother to
mention "Jayadratha". He was Sudha Naresh. And either "Jayadratha" is mentioned,
now, "Jayad...", "Sudha Naresh" was mentioned. So, "Jayadratha" is not a very
formidable warrior. You know. But still, why is it Kri..., Krishna mention
here "Jayadratha"'s name? Because he knows that later on, "Jayadratha" is going
to play a very critical role. "Jayadratha" is going to, you know, cause the
death of Abhimanyu. And then, Arjuna is going to take the vow that "Jayadratha"
will be killed. I will kill "Jayadratha". And then, I will enter fi..., enter
into fire. And killing "Jayadratha" is going to be nearly impossible. Because
"Droṇa" will practically arrange the whole army to protect "Jayadratha". So,
actually, you know, that is, that Herculian, nearly impossible task, also,
Arjuna will be able to succ..., accomplish by the will of the Lord. And that is
what He is assuring. So, "jayadrathaṁ ca". Even "Jayadratha" will be killed. So,
"mayā hatāṁs". They will all be killed. So, Prabhupada writes:

"the plans of the devotees are as good as His plans."

The Lord's plans.

"One should follow such plans and be victorious in the struggle for existence."

So, we may not have to fight a battle like the, you know, it, it, the warriors
at "Kurukṣetra" are fighting. But we have our own battles. So, we will
be struggle..., successful in that. So, "etac chrut...", "Sañjaya...", now,
"Sañjaya" is speaking. So, now, the screen is moving backwards. Camera is moving
backwards. "e...".

        sañjaya uvāca

        etac chrutvā vacanaṁ keśavasya
        kṛtāñjalir vepamānaḥ kirīṭī
        namaskṛtvā bhūya evāha kṛṣṇaṁ
        sa-gadgadaṁ bhīta-bhītaḥ praṇamya

"etac chrutvā". After hearing this. "vacanaṁ keśavasya". He heard the words of
Keshava. Then, "kṛtāñjalir". He folded his hands. "vepamānaḥ" "vepamānaḥ" is
trembling. You know. Actually, although the "Virata rupa". Although,
"viśva-rūpa" spoke such encouraging, action-calling words. But still, the
"viśva-rūpa" was quite fearsome to see. And still, Arjuna, he is overwhelmed
that this formidable, fearsome, unparallel form is actually bestowing, you know,
blessings on me. He has called me to do something. So, it is, it is thrilling.
But at the same time, the form is fearsome. So, there is "vepamānaḥ". There is
trembling, still. "vepamānaḥ kirīṭī". So, "kirīṭī". He is the crown-wearer.
Prahupada translates "kirīṭī" as helmet. Or crown. Whatever. It can refer to
crown, also. So, the, what is worn, helmet basically is what is worn on the
head. You know. So, it acts as protectio..., protectio..., it has protective
purpose. And also, it has ornamental purpose. So, "kirīṭī". So, the point is,
why, why "vepamānaḥ kirīṭī"? Actually speaking, normally, ksatriyas do not
tremble over anything. Ksatriyas are trained to see blood. Violence. Ksatriyas
are trained to, you know, face death in the eye without flinching or fearing.
You know. Or fleeing, of course. Ishvara. "cāpy apalāyanam". "yuddhe cāpy",
"yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam". It is described in the 18th Chapter. When we look at
the qualities of ksatriyas. We will say that, one of the qualities is they never
run away from the battlefield. So, they are, you know, they, they have that
training. By which, they do not become fearful. Even in the most scary and
ghastly of situations. But this, you know, you know, darshan of the
"viśva-rūpa". Especially, the "kala" aspect of it is so fearsome. That even
that person who is "kirīṭī". That person who is a crown-wearer. Now, the
"kirīṭī" can be a generic reference to any ksatriya who wears the crown. But
specifically, it is one of the names of Arjuna, also. That Arjuna, who is the
greatest of ksatriyas. Even he is "vepamānaḥ". So, what cannot be done by
anything in this world can be done by the Lord. You know. Lord Shiva is so, such
a dhira that nobody can be bewilder him. It is described that once Parvati Devi
herself came. And tried to agitate him. You know. By even touching his private
parts. But S..., Lord Shiva did not get agitated. And Prabhupada said, this is
example of how person should be dhira. But then, Mohini-murti came. At that
time, you know, you know, just by seeing Mohini-murti, you know, you know, what
happened to Lord Shiva? Now, because he became wildly passionate. And even when
Parvati was right next to him, he forgot Parvati. And ran away. And ran away.
And not only to Parva..., you know, to, to offer his Mohini-murti, away from
Parvati. Even his own worshippers who were chanting "Om Namah Shivaya", they
were there. And he ran after Mohini-murti even in their presence. So, how this
happened? When the Lord wants, the Lord can overwhelm anyone and everyone. So,
the most, you know, dhira person can become completely adhira. The most fearless
person can become fearful. That is the nature of the Lord. "vepamānaḥ kirīṭī".
That is the omnipotence of the Lord. And then, what happened? "namaskṛtvā". He
offered obeisances. "bhūya evāha kṛṣṇaṁ". "namaskṛtvā bhūya". Why "bhūya"?
Earlier, also, he offered obeisances. When first time, he saw the "Virata rupa".
So, now, he is offering obeisances. "bhūya evāha kṛṣṇaṁ". "sa-gadgadaṁ".
"gadgadaṁ". His throat is in choked ecstasy. "bhīta-bhītaḥ praṇamya". So,
"bhīta-bhītaḥ". "bhīta-bhītaḥ" means, He is still fearful. What kind of awesome
form is this? "praṇamya". So, he offered obeisances. So, one is folding hands.
"kṛtāñjalir". "namaskṛtvā" is, "namaskṛtvā" is, you know, offering obeisances.
Then, "praṇamya" is bowing down. So, he does all that. And now, he starts
speaking his, you know, prayers.

So, earlier, it was a description. Now, it is a prayer. So, these prayers also
go through different phases. And we will look at those phases. But before that,
let us try to understand what is this "kalarupa"? In the S..., First Canto of
the "Śrīmad-Bhāga...", in the second Canto of the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam", there is
a description of the universal form. And that is described quite elaborately.
Now, the word universal form can refer to many things. You know. The basic
concept is that we connect the universe with God. And whatever manifestations we
see within the universe, we see them as Kri..., as manifestations of the Lord's
form. And by that, we, you know, spiritualise our vision of the universe. And we
understand the glory of God. So, the meditation on this "Vir...", on the "Virata
rupa", is called as the first step in God realisation. In the "Bhāgavatam". That
Chapter is entitled. Why first step? Because initially, people have material
consciousness. And generally, in material consciousness, things which are
materially big are respected by people. You know. If there is a group of lions,
then the biggest lion having the greatest strength, the greatest ferocity, that 
will be respect..., that lion will be respected as the king. Generally speaking.
So, that way, you know, in material consciousness, things which are materially
big attract attention and respect. So, that way, it is told that for such people
that when they are in material consciousness, conceive how bi..., how big the
Lord is. By contemplating on how that the, you know, the mountains are the bones
of the Lord. Contem..., may contemplate on how the sun and the moon are the eyes
of the Lord. Contemplate on how the rivers are like the water in the navel of
the Lord. And the trees are like the hair on the body of the Lord. Now, Srila
Prabhupada clearly explains in the "Bhāgavatam" that this is a
conceptualisation. Conceptualisation means it is not that the Lord has a
specific form like this. It is not that the Lord has, you know, some specific
form which, you know, Lor..., you know, where somewhere He is like this. So, it
is said that the higher planets are His head. The lower planets are His legs.
So, now, in, we know the universal, there are 14 planetary systems. But it is
not that, you know, separate from the universe, there is another form of the
Lord which extends from the top of the universe to the bottom of the universe.
This is a conceptualisation. The "Bhāgavatam" uses the word "kalipatah". And
Prah..., the word "kalipatah" is related with the "kalpana". "kalpana" means
imagination. And Prabhupada's try, you know, writes that, and in this way, the
Lord is imagined. The Lord's form is imagined by great thinkers. Now, we may
wonder, if there are great thinkers, why do they need to imagine anything?
Actually, the idea of imagination is not always bad. In that, imagination, that
conceptualisation can, you know, connect, you know, us with God. Then, that is
desirable. So, the idea is that these people by conceptualising about God in
this way, can, you know, become God conscious. At least, at the preliminary
level. So, later on, of course, it is said that these, you know, yogis shoul...,
these seekers should meditate on the Supersoul in the heart. And the
"Bhāgavatam" evolves its, you know, description to further. And eventually, it
talks about Bhagavan. You know. And then, it comes to Tenth Canto, Bhagavan. Sri
Krishna. So, the "Bhāgavatam"'s revelation is also progressive.

When in the First Canto, it gives the "Virata rupa" description. And then, it
goes on to describe the Paramatma in the heart. And eventually, it describes the
Supe..., transcendental person, Bhagavan who descends in various incarnations.
Now, within this particular flow, the "Virata rupa" that is described in the
"Bhāgavatam" is a conceptual tool for linking our materially observed
consciousness through the medium of matter to the Absolute Truth. But, you know,
the Bhag..., Bhagavad Gita's "viśva-rūpa" is slightly different. It is not a
conceptualisation. You know. In the "Bhāgavatam", it is described a yogi should
sit in a meditational pose. And then, go, try to close their eyes. Go into a
trance. And conceive of the form like this. Arjuna does not do like this over
here. So, although, the terms sometimes may be interchangeable. The exact nature
of what is happening is slightly different. So, here, in Arjuna's case, what he
sees is not a conceptualisation. It is a revelation. Re..., so, what is the
difference between a conceptualisation and revelation? Conceptualisation is
what? We have conceived by our own imagination. By our own creative skills. No
doubt based on scripture. Scripture gives some guidance how we should envision
the Lord. It is not that we can envision arbitrarily as per our wild
imagination. But we conceive based on scriptural direction. Still, there is
conceptualisation. Whereas in the case of revelation, it is not that Arjuna is
trying to see something with the mind's imagination. You know. Everything is
just flashed ahead in front of him. So, it is a revelation. And in this
revelation, what happens is, Arjuna is able to see the whole universe. So, that
means God can display His, you know, revelation whenever He wants. So, here,
when Arjuna is seeing the "viśva-rūpa". It is not a sadhana that he is doing. It
is a "krpa" that he is getting. When in the "Bhāgavatam", it is described that,
you know, about the "Virata rupa". That is a sadhana which the transcendent..,
which the beginners on the transcedental path to do. Took, you know, to
internalise the understanding of How God is so mind-bogglingly massive. So, so
great. So, to understand that, you know, that "Virata rupa" is a
conceptualisation from the "Bhāgavatam". This "viśva-rūpa" is a revelation. So,
we, "viśv...", so, we could say revelation is top-down. Conceptualisation is
bottom-up. You know. And generally speaking, in the "Virata rupa", when it is
desc..., there conceptualisation happen, that time, the "kalarupa" is not shown.
So, the "kalarupa" is specially shown by Arjuna. And there, Lo..., shown to
Arjuna by the Lord. Because the Lord wants to not only answer Arjuna's request
that please, you know, display the universal form. You know. Please display in a
vision what you have told me in description earlier. But the Lord also wants to
reassure Arjuna that the battle you are going to fight, in that, you will surely
be successful. Do not hesitate. So, Krishna has displayed, displayed the "Virata
rupa" several times earlier. You know. He has displayed some version, you know,
to mother Yashoda. When mother Yashoda opened, asked Arj..., Krishna, who had
supposed to have eaten mud, to open His mouth. And she saw the whole universe.
That is one kind of "viśva-rūpa". Then, another, He showed to Duryodhana. In the
war fie..., you know, just, when He had gone as Shanti Dut. And Duryodhana tried
to arrest Krishna.

That ws also, there, also, it was fie..., scary. And he saw practically all the
beings in the universe within the "Virata rupa". But there, also, he did not
see the "kalarupa". You know. Duryodhana did not see his, the destruction of
Duryodhana. Duryodhana did not see Duryodhana and all the brothers going inside
the Kri..., you know, form of the universal roof. You know. You know. In the
mouth of the universal form. That is a special vision which is given only over
here. So, that is why the word used "adṛṣṭa-pūrvaṁ". This has never been shown
before. So, this "kalarupa" is what is fearsome. The universal form is also
extraordinary. It creates astonishment. And mother Yashoda was also astonished.
But Ar..., mother Yashoda did not see any blood or anything like that. When
Duryodhana did not see anything blood or anybody getting consumed and devoured
like that. That consuming and devouring aspect is, you know, you know, what
happens with the "kalarupa". And when Ar..., and that is what Arjuna is
enquiring about. You know. Arjuna had himself asked, please show me "rūpam
aiśvaraṁ". And when he first saw the "rūpam aiśvaraṁ", he also identified.
"paśyāmi viśveśvara viśva-rūpa". So, I offer obeisances to You who are
"viśva-rūpa". So, if he has already identified this as "viśva-rūpa", he has
already identified this is actually Vishnu himself. Which is as in 24th and 28th
verses. He says in, "viśva-rūpa" in 16th verse. Then, why does in 31th verse he
ask "ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo"? Who are You? If he knows it is Vishnu. If
he knows, He is, you know, "viśva-rūpa", then why does he ask Him? Because the
"kalarupa" has never been seen. And that is why this particular feature within
the "viśva-rūpa", who is this? Who is devouring everyone? That is what he asks.
And he is, he has described this "kalarupa". So, now, after understanding that
this "kalarupa" is there. You know. Within the, you know, the "viśva-rūpa" is
there. You know. And then, Arjuna will offer prayers. And we will discuss these
prayers in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
