Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CWUsF6y-9Gk
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=wHaCMC-Z_EBNgAfYY11hnHSxMLx8MTU0ODQ4ODU0MkAxNTQ4NDAyMTQy&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_092_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_07_Text_25_to_30_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=CWUsF6y-9Gk

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
coming to the conclusion of the Seventh Chapter. So, this chapter has three
sections. The first section was, verses one to twelwe talks about how, you know,
you know, Krishna pervades everything. Krishna underlies everything. Knowledge
of Krishna is actually knowledge of everything. Then, we have discussed from
verses 13 to 24 about how, you know, depending on whether people know Krishna
properly or not, they either, you know, real..., defy Krishna. They surrender to
Krishna. Or they surrender to something connected with Krishna. But not directly
Krishna. That is. So, 15 talks about those who do not surrender to Krishna. 16
to 18 talk about, 16 to 19 talks about those who, you know, approach Krishna.
And eventually surrender to Him. "bhajante" is in 16. And "prapadyate" is in 19.
Then, 20 to 23 talks about, you know, those who surrender to Krishnetara in the
form of the devatas. And then, 24 talks about those who approach the Brahman.
Now, "paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto". That one, you know, Kri..., so, this "bhāvam".
Which we discussed. Sridhar Swami explains that the "bhāvam" actually refers to,
you know, form of the Lord. And Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura also quotes this
in his commentary. "bhāvam". So, "bhāvam". What is this higher? "paraṁ bhāvam".
Transcendental nature. That transcendental nature is that the Lord has a form,
has a personality. And He performs pastimes. And this higher nature, we do not
know. "paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto". His higher nature. Higher nature as, now,
somebody may say, no, no. The impersonalists may say, actually, the higher
nature is the impersonal nature. But then, Krishna has very clearly said in the
same chapter. 7.7:

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat
        kiñcid asti dhanañ-jaya

There is no truth higher than Me. So, when He so clearly stated that, it is
unwarranted to, you know, say that there is some truth higher than Krishna. Now,
if we look at the Bhagavad Gita, there are some verses which may, which, you
know, can be interpreted in different ways. But if we look at the overall tenor.
And we look at the context of those verses, also. We will see that the, you
know, interpretation of the impersonal reality is the higher reality does not
stand intellectual scrutiny. So, now, immediately after this, "paraṁ bhāvam
ajānanto", Krishna will give an indication of what is His "paraṁ bhāvam". And
there, also, He does not talk about some impersonal Brahma. He talks about
Himself. So, let us look at this verse. So, this last section is explanation of
how knowledge of Krishna leads to liberation. 7.14 has stated that:

        mām eva ye prapadyante
        māyām etāṁ taranti te

That those who surrender to Me will attain, will be cross over maya, will attain
liberation. But how such a thing will happen has not been explained till now.
So, that is what Krishna, that will be explained in this section. So, let us
look at this. 7.25:

	nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya
	yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ
	mūḍho ’yaṁ nābhijānāti
	loko mām ajam avyayam

So, "nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya". Actually, "prakāśaḥ" means manifested. So, I am
not manifested to everyone. "yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ". I am covered by "yoga-māyā".
H..., "mūḍho ’yaṁ nābhijānāti". "mūḍho". "mūḍho" means the fools do not know Me.
"na". "abhijānāti". They do not Me. Why? "loko mām ajam avyayam". They do not
know that I am unborn. And I am inexhaustible. "loko mām ajam avyayam". So,
Kri..., now, if we see, I should, this verse, you know, th..., Krishna is
talking about "aham" twice. He is talking about "aham" twice. So, He is not
talking about some reality higher than Him. You see. "aham". "aham". Very
clearly. I. So, He says, I am not manifested everyone. So, who is that I that is
being referred to? Krishna as a person is standing in front of Arjuna. And He is
saying, I am not manifested everyone. "nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya". So, why is He
not manifested everyone? Because actually, Krishna reserves the right to reveal
Himself or conceal Himself depending on His own sweet free will. So, in today's
society, everybody wants to know about their rights. You know. You know. So, for
example, women have their rights. You know. The, you know, lower caste, they
have their rights. The colored people. The African. Americans. They have their
rights. So, like that, different people have their rights. You know. So, among
those different people who have their rights. What about the rights of Krishna?
What about the rights of the Supreme Lord? You may wonder, what is the right of
the Supreme Lord? The right of the Supreme Lord is to decide whether He will
reveal Himself. Or not reveal Himself. Even in this world, the more powerful a
person, the more influential a person, that person can choose. You know. We, if
the p..., you know, sometimes, people say, if God exists, let Him come in front
of Me. No. We are not the order givers to God. We are the order carriers of God.
You know. If they, we cannot demand the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister
exists, let him come here. No. We cannot demand like that. If a tri..., if a
child who is born in a tribe in a forest has never heard of the Prime Minister.
And somebody tells Him. You know. You are living in this part. This, your
village, we just small part of huge country. And this entire country is actually
controlled by the Prime Minister. You know. Then, so, he says, who is the Prime
Minister? I have never seen him. I do not believe. Now, he says, hmm, the, let
the, if the Prime Minister is, let him come here. If he does not come, we do not
count of ten. Then, he does not exist. Well, we have to tell them that, you
know, what is needed is, you know, a count of the brain substa..., of the brain
tissues in his head. It is not that God has to, you know, the Prime Minister has
to come within a particular count. Actually, you know, you know, he has to
understand the position of the Prime Minister. And the Prin..., Prime Minister
has a right. Even if somebody goes and meets the Prime Minister, the Prime
Minister has the right whether to choose to meet or not meet that person. So, if
ordinary people have their rights. If powerful people have their rights. Then,
what about Krishna? Who is supremely extraordinary. Supremely powerful. He has
His rights. And Krishna says that "nāṁ...":

        nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya

I have to not become manifested everyone. Now, why does Krishna not become
manifested everyone? Why does He let Himself be concealed by "yoga-māyā"?
Because, you know, He reciprocates according to our desires. We say, no. I want
to see God. So, He should reciprocate according my desire. And come in front of
Me. No. When we say, actually, will Krishna reciprocate. It is not just
according to our spoken desires. It is according to our overall mentality. You
know. Even when I want to, a, deman..., a, demanding. I want to see Krishna. Let
Him come in front of me. If the attitude is one of defiance. And, you know, not
of, you know, you know, dependence, then we cannot access Krishna. Why? Because
ultimately, we are anu. And Krishna is vibhu. We are tiny. And Krishna is
mighty. So, you know, actually, we can access Krishna only when we turn to Him
with devotion. Just as the person on the Earth cannot demand. Sun rise! The Sun
will rise of its own accord. And it rises. It will become manifest to the
people. So, similarly, Krishna, it is described that He has His own will. And He
chooses when to manifest. Chooses when to not manifest. So, if in our heart,
there is the desire to defy Krishna. Then, that means. We think that I am God. I
am Supreme. Or even If I am not supreme, you know, certainly, Krishna is not
supreme. Maybe, there is no supreme only. Maybe, nature is supreme. Maybe, an
all, impersonal light is supreme. Or my own conception is supreme. Whatever. But
certainly, Krishna is not supreme. So, this kind of attitude, you know, will not
take us very far. This kind of attitude will keep us trapped in material
existence. And in order to come out of material existence, we need to, you know,
bet..., give up this attitude. So, when Krishna sees that we want to be, you
know, surrogate Gods. That mean..., we want to be substitute God. We want to play
God. Krishna allows us to play God. And He does not reveal His omnipotence in
the world. Except ultimately as death. So, "antasi". You know. "antaka". The
death, death is called "antaka". Death. Who does "anta". So, Krishna will
manifest as death at that time. And everything will be finished at that time.
But death is not Krishna's cruelty. Death is Krishna's m..., m..., arrangement
by which we can continue to play our game if we want to. Or we can make up and,
you know, realign ourselves with reality. If we want to. There, so, death acts
as a reminder. As an educator. If we are going to take that education. If we do
not want to, then we can continue our misadventure lifetime after lifetime. But
the point is that Krishna has His right. We cannot, you know, ask Krishna to
re..., come, a, before us with an attitude of defiance. You know. Our attitude
towards the Sun cannot be of defiance. It has to be of dependence. Sun comes of
its own accord. And when we, Sun comes, then we get benedicted by the warm. And
the light that comes from the Sun. Similarly, Krishna manifests by His own will.
And Krishna is ready to manifest even at this moment. But it is not just our
express desire. It is our underlying attitude that is important. So, Krishna
sees our attitude. And if our attitude is not, you know, a, the attitude of
dependence. Of service. Of compliance. You know. Then, Krishna will not
manifest. So, you know, how do we show Krishna that we want to, f..., see Him?
Not by defiance. But by dependence and by compliance. Compliance means that we,
h..., h..., co..., recognising our subordinate position. Start serving Krishna.

        sevonmukhe hi jihvādau
        svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

So, "sevonmukhe hi jihvādau". When we start serving Krishna sincerely.
"sevā-unmukhe". When we become "unmukhe" towards Krishna. When we turn towards
Krishna with an attitude of devotion. Then, "jihvādau". Beginning with the
tongue. We start chanting. And taking prasadam. And serving Krishna. "svayam eva
sphuraty adaḥ". Himself, He becomes manifest. By His own free will. So,
"svayam eva sphuraty". "eva sphuraty". So, you know, by, we understand that we
are tiny. And Krishna is infinite. And Krishna wants us to choose whether to,
you know, turn towards Him. And love Him. Or to turn away from Him. And defy
Him. And try to be independent of Him. So, for those who want to be independent
of Him, you know, they, for them, Krishna allows them to maintain their notion
of independence by not revealing His glories. So, even if they claim to be
turning towards Krishna. Even if they claim to be turning towards, you know,
spiritual inquiry. Yes, I want to know about God. Where is God? Is God a person?
No. He is impersonal light. So, people may seem to want to know about God. But
often, you know, what they were doing is, simply trying to impose their opinion
on God. When they are doing that, then, th..., th..., they are basically, you
know, in the name of trying to know God, play, they are trying to play God. It
is. My opinion is the best. So, therefore, "mūḍho ’yaṁ nābhijānāti". For such
people, Krishna does not reveal His glories to them. Krishna says, they are
"mūḍho". "na". "’yaṁ". "mūḍho ’yaṁ nābhijānāti". These people cannot know. What
they cannot know? "loko mām ajam avyayam". They cannot know that I am "ajam". I
am imperishable. And "avyayam". I am unborn. And I am imperishable.
Inexhaustible. This means that Krishna is saying that, I am infinite. You know.
I am beyond time. It was not that I came in ex..., existence at a particular
time. And it is not that, you know, My existence will end at a particular time.
"ajam". "ajam" means no beginning. And "avyayam" means no ending. So, this is
actually a logical continuation of 7.24. Where Krishna is telling that:

        avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ

That was unmanifest before. And I have become manifest now. And those who think
like this, they are "abuddhayaḥ". So, Krishna is similarly continue, continues
with same point over here. And He is saying that, actually, I am "ajam" and
"avyayam". And those who think that as particular form which I am manifesting
in, as Krishna, this is a particular beginning. And a particular ending. They
are mistaken. Krishna says, in this form, itself, I am manifested all times. You
know. So, those who cannot understand Him are "mūḍhaḥ". So, Krishna is revealing
over here to us that what we need is not an attitude of defiance. But avi...,
attitude of compliance. When we follow comp..., m..., His instructions, then
gradually, progressively, you know, and increasingly, Krishna will reveal
Himself to us. Now, there is this interesting word over here.

        yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ

So, now, Krishna is talking about here, with the covering. Now, Krishna is
talking about foolish people over here. "mūḍhaḥ". So, now, "mūḍhaḥ" as will be
covered by "maha-māyā". Not by "yoga-māyā". We know that there are these two
categories of energies. The "maha-māyā". And "yoga-māyā". So, "maha-māyā" is the
energy which allows people to enjoy separate from God by giving them false
conceptions. You know. That I am the body. I am a male or a female. I am
separate. Independent of God. And I can enjoy by gratifying my senses. So, all
such conceptions come because of "maha-māyā". And in contrast to tho..., with
that, there is "yoga-māyā". "yoga-māyā" is, we discussed earlier how that is
an oxymoron. Two contrasting words brought together. You know. To, you know,
convey a deeper meaning. "yoga" means connnection with Krishna. "māyā" means
disconnection with Krishna. So, how can we have connection-disconnection? So,
you know, you know, the idea is that there is a disconnection with the un...,
with the idea that Go..., Krishna is God. And there is a reconnection. "yoga".
There is a reconnection with the understanding that, actually, this God is, I,
as God, this God is v..., s..., child, small boy. That is what Yashoda Mayi
thinks. This God is my friend. So, all such notions are under "yoga-māyā". Hmm.
So, "yoga-māyā" is the illusion that increases devotion. "maha-māyā" is the
illusion that depletes devotion. So, "yoga-māyā" brings about the opp...,
illusion that increases devotion. So, then, here, the question comes up. Why is
Krishna using the word "yoga-māyā"? So, He is, you know, there are several
understandings of this. First is that, actually, Krishna is referring to Himself
over here. You know. He is not talking about, the covering is not so much to,
you know, you know, you know, you know, describe, you know, m..., m..., m...,
the conditioned soul. Krishna is describing Himself. So, Prabhupada translates
precisely as:

"For them I am covered by My internal potency,"

So, I am covered by My internal potency. That is true. But for who? For them.
Just as we discussed earlier, the cloud, if, for the people on the gla...,
ground, the cloud, you know, the Sun is covered by the cloud. Although, Sun is
far greater and cannot be covered by the cloud. So, from Krishna's point of
view, "yoga-māyā" and "maha-māyā" are the same. How are they the same? Because
both of them are ultimately the same energy. I, they are just performing
different functions. Prabhupada would give the example of how a heater can be
used, you know, electric energy, electric energy can be used to heat. Or it can
be used to cool. Either way, the energy is the same. So, therefore, actually,
you know, the energy is one. But it has, having, having different function. So,
because Krishna is talking in terms of, you know, you know, you know, Himse..,
His position. So, He is saying that, actually, when it comes to, you know,
covering Him. The point is that it is actually the maya which does that. The
word "yoga-māyā" is not necessarily used here in the same, m..., technical or
categorical sense as the two categories "yoga-māyā" and "maha-māyā". Krishna, it
is simply used in the sense that, actually, you know, there is a covering
adjacency, which covers. So, certainly, the souls who, you know, who:

        mūḍho ’yaṁ nābhijānāti

So, those who are "mūḍhaḥ". That is not referring to the devotees like Yashoda
Mayi. Or sridama. Or Sakhas. Like that. But these are referring to the, what is
two categories of people. Especially, second category of people. The demigod
worshippers. And the impersonalists. It is referring to the impersonalists. We
can say, I do not become, I, in my personal form, does not become, do not become
manifested to such people. Because they do not understand My unborn and
imperishable nature. You know. You know. So, now, Prabhupada raises simple point
over here. That ok, Krishna is saying:

        nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya

I am not revealed to everyone. But when Krishna was present on the Earth, at
that time, was He not revealed to everyone? So, when Krishna appears, there is
something mysterious that happens. Actually, it is, Krishna may be available.
Accessible to the vision. But Krishna is not just seen with the eyes. He is
seen with the heart. And if the heart does not have devotion, seeing Krishna
with the vision does not help much. Devotion is the real vision that enables us
to see Krishna. You know. You know. Without that, we cannot really, h..., h...,
see Krishna. We may see something. But we do not understand Krishna's position.
So, there are many warriors at the time of, at the time of the Ku...,
Mahabharata war. And those warriors were thinking of Krishna not as the Supreme
Lord. They were thinking of Him as just another warrior. Yeah. Very powerful
warrior. He has killed many demons. But He is just another warrior. So,
Balaramji was, Krishna did not like this pos..., a, conception of the other
kings. And He spoke strongly determined to show His power. And even when Krishna
showed His power. And still, after that, also, there were people who did not
accept Krishna's supreme position. We know that Sri..., in Canto, this
described, shyama, for, you know, demoniac king, you know, Paundraka who claimed
to be Krishna. And even when this, a, Krishn..., clippers, who did claim to
be Krishna, came in front of the real Krishna. Still, that person continued in
dragging. And in fact, the messenger said that, actually, you have taken my
paraphernalia. Return it to me. So, the bogus Krishna is telling the real
Krishna that You have taken my paraphernalia. You take my, my chakra, you have
taken. Return to it me. Otherwise, I will come and punish You. So, Krishna and
all Yadavasis laugh over, Yadavamshis laugh over there. And then, they challenge
him for battle. And when he, Paundraka comes in the battle. And Krishna releases
chakra. He says. You wanted my chakra? Here. Take it! And he releases chakra. And
what happens? Tuck. Just cuts off the neck of Paundra comes back. So, Krishna
does not like those who defy His position. And He kills them not out of any
hatred for them. But to save them from the offense that will come by pretending
to be Krishna. Usurping Krishna's position. So, the whole point is, you know,
the "mūḍhaḥ"s who are being referred in this verse, they are the demo..., they are
people who miscon..., misunderstand Krishna's higher reality. Personal reality.
They think of Krishna as impersonal. And that is why Srila Prabhupada raises in
the point. See, He was manifested to everyone. But His supremacy, His position
was not revealed to everyone. Then, Prabhupada quotes this famous verse in the
"Īśopaniṣad" which we have discussed earlier. Mantra 15.

        hiraṇmayena pātreṇa
        satyasyāpihitaṁ mukham
        tat tvaṁ pūṣann apāvṛṇu
        satya-dharmāya dṛṣṭaye

So, your face is covered by effulgence. Please remove that effulgence so that I
can see your true nature. "satya-dharmāya dṛṣṭaye". Hmm. Now, here, after
Krishna explains very categorically how He is the Supreme Being. Now, He starts
saying that, He is, people, they are in illusion. Who are trying to catch Me.
So, going back, backwards, we know that Krishna has already talked about, you
know, His supreme position. Now, let us look at it further.

        vedāhaṁ samatītāni
        vartamānāni cārjuna
        bhaviṣyāṇi ca bhūtāni
        māṁ tu veda na kaścana

So, "vedāhaṁ samatītāni". "samatītāni" means completely. "samatīt", you know,
is, so:

        vedāhaṁ samatītāni
        vartamānāni cārjuna

"samatītāni" means complete pastime. You know. "vartamānāni". "vartamānāni" is
present. "cārjuna". O Arjuna. I know past. Present. "bhaviṣyāṇi ca bhūtāni". I
know the future, also. "bhūtāni". All living beings, I know. "bhūtāni māṁ tu
veda". So, all living beings, I know. But Me, no one knows. "na kaścana". Hmm.
What does it mean when Krishna says, Me, no one knows? Krishna is telling that,
ok, people may know Me as a historical person. Krishna may know me as a, as a
person whom some peo..., other people consider to be Supreme God. But they do
not understand how I actually am. And that can be understood only through
devotion. That will be discussed in the 18th Chapter. Of course, it will be
discussed in several places repeatedly, also. And in this context, here, you
know, Krishna is assuring Arjuna. Arjuna, do not worry. You know. You are
concerned about what is going to happen to the, your, your relatives, who you
have to kill. Just do not worry about that. Actually, I am going to ensure that
they will be well taken care of. If they are pure enough, they will get
liberated. And return back to Me. If not, they will take birth in another life.
But I have shown you what even the partial performance of devotional service can
give. What result it can give. Therefore, how much greater is the result that
one can get by whole-heartedly engaging in devotional service. And that is why,
that is what one should try to do. When one tries to do that, then one will get
elevated. Ultimately, liberated. So, how can Krishna know the future? Now, this
is a complex question. And there are no easy answers. But I will try to explain
this. First of all, by exa..., analysing a little bit what do we mean by future.
You know. There are futurologists. Alvin Toffler was one of them. He, him, so,
like that, there are many futurologists. They try to look at the oil. And they
think about its future. What is the future going to be like? And they try to act
accordingly. So, m..., they try to prepare society, also, to act. So,
astrologers are there. M..., who help people to, you know, understand what is
going to happen in the future. Some peop..., other people who have all sort of
mystical rituals. When, when their particularly as going to be attacked and
destroyed by the inevitable power of time, then these living entities, they try
to take shelter. But they cannot take shelter of anything. So, ultimately, they
will all be destroyed. So, we all want to protect ourselves. And for that
purpose, we want to know what is going to come in the future. But we cannot. So,
when Krishna says, I know the future, also. Does it mean that Krishna knows, you
know, the future and our future is programmed? You know. We have to understand
that Krishna's knowledge of the future is like our knowledge of the past. What
does it mean? Krishna's knowledge of the future is like our knowldge of the
past. Our knowledge of the past is knowledge without control. You know. If I
know yesterday, you know, a, might, I just want to do, sleep for seven hours.
But I slept for fiften hours. You know. Fifteen hours is a bit too much. Maybe,
I just sev..., seven hours. I slept for ten hours. Then, I know that. But I
cannot change it now. It is knowledge without control. We can think about the
past. We can observe the past. But we cannot change it. So, when we say
Krishna's knowledge as the past is like our knowledge of the future. What it
essentially means is that the conceptions are similar. Although, there are
some differences, also. So, major differences that, you know, Krishna's position
is different from ours. So, even time is His servant. And because time is His
servant, therefore, actually speaking, ev..., all, ul..., time destroys all
living beings. So, all living beings are ultimately His servants. So, when
Krishna, you know, goes home. In His pastimes, He goes home. At that time, does
He act as if He knows what is going to happen in the future? Although, He is
within His pastimes. And He knows everything that is going to happen. But He
does not act that way. Why?

Because His goal is not to, you know, prove His divinity. His goal is to
reciprocate with the love of His devotees. And therefore, when Yashoda Mayi
says, oh, are you hungry? He says, yes. Lunch go to, very quickly as very
hungry. Krishna says. Yashoda Mayi says, come Kri..., come Krishna quickly,
say. Just wash your face. Take a quick bath. And, you know, f..., food is ready
for you. Please come and take it. So, then, she offers Krishna and Balaram a
big, big feast. So, now, in one sense, now, we are trying to understand the
future from this, f..., first, to understand the point of future from the
spiritual perspective. And then, from the material perspective. Or from the,
with respect to spiritual world. And with respect to the material world. So,
actually speaking, when Krishna is in the spiritual world, there, also, He knows
everything. But at the same time, when He is involved in a pastime, He forgets
that He knows anything. That is how Krishna may do certain things to enhance the
rasa. To increase the lila of His pastimes. How does He increase the rasa? How
does He enhance the lila of His pastimes? By creating the sense of
unpredictability which is resolved by His intervention alone? So, how does He do
this? For example, you know, somebody might be having, you know, some sort of
issues. So, just like a student is studying. Student has free will whether to
study or to not study. Now, when the teacher is observing the student. This is a
rough example. But illustrate the principle to us. You know. Krishna, He is
all, all-knowing. The teacher may not be all-knowing. But still, the teacher can
also see. Lookings at the trajectories. So, the student studies. Then, student
will do like this. And the student will develop educated mind. Will develop the
culture of hard work. And will eventually attain success. On the other hand, if
Krishna does not do that, then what will happen? You know. So. You know. Not
Krishna. Sorry. If the student does not do that. Then, what will happen? Student
will fail. So, the pathways are there. And depending on the choice of the
pathway, there will be immutable result after that. So, what Krishna reveals
is something similarly. Now, Krishna is God. He can know the future. He can
change the future. Now, Krishna does not even have to give us free will. He can
make us act as robots, completely obeying His obey..., command. But that is not
what Krishna does. Krishna gives freedom. Krishna gives freedom by which He
allows us to be tasted. But He also allows us to become purified by that. By
seeing how trivial it is. You know. Trivial it is to bother about these things.
F..., better bother about developing your relationship with Me. Whether focus on
developing ourselves spiritually. Because that alone will lead to lasting
benefit.

        māṁ tu veda na kaścana

So, Krishna is throwing a challenge to Arjuna's spirit. Trying to, you know,
direct him away from the fear which has paralysed Arjuna. He is saying that,
actually, why should I fight? That was Arjuna's question originally. So, Krishna
will replying. Why should you not fight? Why should you not fight? Now, Krishna
knows the result in the future. What is going to happen. So, Krishna knows
everyone who is going to die. Krishna knows everything is going to die. But
still, Krishna lets the fight go on. Because His goal is, you know, you know, to
perform a lila. Now, lila does not mean that people do not misuse their free
will. Be aware, i..., it is actually, ha..., we have free will. But there are
trajectories. And depending on the trajectories that we choose, we will get a
consequent result. So, as devotees, our, we should not worry unnecessarily about
these sort of things. Oh, where did this, where what happened to this person?
What will happen to me? What will happen to that person? No. We just keep
bringing our devotional service steadily. And eventually, by Krishna's mercy. By
Srila Prabhupada's mercy. In a presence of Krishna, the inner revelation of
Krishna will happen within our hearts. We have to understand that it will
happen. We just have to be patient. And persevearent. Just keep going on and on.
And then, that will happen. So, Krishna is saying "māṁ tu veda na kaścana". Me,
no one knows. Prabhupada gives same cloud example over here in the purport. Now,
Krishna goes to a new topic now.

        icchā-dveṣa-samutthena
        dvandva-mohena bhārata
        sarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ
        sarge yānti paran-tapa

H..., so, kama, krodha, samutt..., ka..., Sorry. "icchā-dveṣa-samutthena". So,
by, because of desire. And because of "dveṣa". Aversion. Of attachment. And
aversion. "samutthena". Together timed. "samutthena". "dvandva-mohena bhārata".
There is, there is a delusion. Two kinds of delusion. S..., "dvandva-mohena
bhārata". When there is no "dvandva", then what happens? "sarva-bhū...". That
"dvandva" is, actually, the cause of suffering for all living beings the, for
"sarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ". All living beings become deluded. "sarge yānti
paran-tapa". "sarge yānti". "sarge yānti" means at the time of giving birth. So,
when the universe is born, p..., how is everything? "sarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ".
"sarge yānti". That means "sarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ". Actually, all living beings
are born in illusion. How is that? You know, we may say Happy Birthday, you
know, to a friend or to ourselves. But, you know, the said truth is that we are
not happy when we are born. When, on our birthday, we are crying. Of course,
there is a joy that a new life is born. That joy is not to be taken away. But at
the same time, the fact is that birth in and of itself is not a joyful
experience. There is pain. Even for the other is also screaming in pain. The end
result is definitely joyful. The new life comes in, at, the world. But ultim...,
and that new life is not just a life that comes from the world. That life can go
successfully out of the world. If the parents practice devotional service. And
share devotional service with the child. Then, the child can become their
liberator. The child later on becomes, you know, spiritually centered in one's
life. So, that is what Krishna, you know, allows us. But "sar...":

        sarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ
        sarge yānti ...

Actually, all living beings are born into illusion. So, we have to become
liberated from that illusion. And for becoming liberated from that illusion, we
need to move forward steadily. Steadily. Steadily. Steadily. So, one, two,
three. four. We take small, small s..., baby steps in our spiritual life. And as
we keep taking these baby steps, ultimately, we will discover that, we have done
so much in Krishna's service. How amazing it is. But we are all born illusion.
So, now, where does this ill..., ill..., illusion come from? So, Krishna has
used two words over here. "sammohaṁ". And "dvandva-mohena". So, what is the
difference between the two? "sammohaṁ". And "dvandva-mohena". So, let us look at
the literal translation to understand this. "icchā-dveṣa-samutthena". That by
the combination of "icchā" and "dveṣa". That is, "icchā" and "dveṣa" can refer
to many things. Here, "icchā" can refer to the desire to enjoy separate from
Krishna. And "dveṣa" can refer to the resentment, the hatred, about Krishna's
position as the enjoyer. You know. So, "icchā-dveṣa-samutthena". So, generally,
we have "icchā" for that which we like. And "dveṣa" for that which we do not
like. So, this, this word, "icchā-dveṣa" has been used many times. But if we
look at this context, it is the Seventh Chapter by Krishna is giving knowledge
of the absolute. And, you know, and further, Krishna had asked, you know, for a,
you know, you know, actually, you know, Krishna is giving knowledge about
Himself. And here, Krishna is talking about His own position. So, here,
"icchā-dveṣa" refers, not generically just attraction and aversion. It, Krishna
it, is, the, referring to, actually, i..., it is context. That means when a
person has an "icchā" to enjoy separate from Krishna. And has the "dveṣa", for,
you know, Krishna being the enjoyer. And for those who are serving Krishna.
Accepting Krishna to be the enjoyer. So, "samutthena". So, "icchā-dveṣa" is
"samutthena". There is, m..., from this "icchā" and "dveṣa", what happens is,
m..., because we like something, we do not like thing. Therefore, we think when
we get the, what we like, we call it as good. When we get that which we do not
like, we call it bad.

        yasmāt priyāpriya-viyoga-saṁyoga-janma-
        śokāgninā sakala-yoniṣu dahyamānaḥ

So, here, Prahlāda Mahārāja says that, that which is "priyā". When there is
"viyoga". Separation from that. We call it misery. When there is "apriyā". And
there is "saṁyoga" of, to that, then we call it pleasure. But when there is
"priyā" and "priya", then there is a problem. So, actually, hmm, 
"icchā-dveṣa-samutthena". Just, so, I mean, there is "yasmāt". So, when there
is, we get that which is "priya". Then, there is, you know, happiness. When we
get that which is "apriya". There is, when, when there is "viyoga" from the
"priya". That means the "priya" is taken away. Then, there is misery. When there
is, you know, you know, "priya". "saṁyoga". "vida". "saṁyoga" means union. When
we are united with the undesirable, we suffer. When we are separated from the
desirable, we suffer, also. Those are the two ways in which we are in suffer.
So, m..., m..., I want the sweet to eat. And there is no sweet. Then, I suffer.
On the other hand, I want, you know, I do not want a particular, maybe subji.
Better go with subji. I do not want that subji. And that very subji is there.
Then, also, there is suffering. So, when we do not get what we want. And when
you get what we do not want, that we suffer. So, basically, then we start
labeling things. What does suffering mean? Hey, this is bad. This is good. So,
we label generally things based on our own likes and dislikes. So, "icchā" and
"dveṣa" lead to "dvandva-mohena". And, so, "dvandva-mohena" is the illusion of
duality. Hmm. But, m..., so, Prabhupada is saying, "bewildered by dualities".
But the overall setup of a world view, where there is "icchā" and "dveṣa". That
is called as "sammohaṁ". So, "sammohaṁ" means "samya karupena moha". The
complete illusion that is there. That is "sammohaṁ". So, what is the difference
once again? Actually, you know, you know, there is a foundational illusion. Just
like when a person goes to watch a movie. At that time, that person f...,
so, sits down. And then, forgets that I am the, you know, I am a spectator. And
thinks that I am actually a vicarious participant. Vicarious means I, when I am,
identify with someone. And then, I try to enjoy. Based on that identification.
Hmm. So, now, within the movie, certain things happen which we may like. And
certain things which we may li..., may not like. So, when the hero is with the
heroine, w..., we may like it. When the hero is being beaten by the villain, we
may not like it. So that there is, you know, this point of "dvandva". Good and
bad within the movie, also. And that "dvandva" is based on "icchā-dveṣa". What
we like. And what we do not like. But this whole getting up. And getting into
the setup of "icchā" and "dveṣa". And then, "priya" and "priya" because of
that. "dvandva-mohena". That, all that has happened because of the "sammohaṁ".
"sammohaṁ" is the, first of all the desire that I want to watch the movie. So,
when we start watching the movie, there is certain image I like. Certain image
which I do not like. And then, I label them as good or bad. That is an illusion.
You know. But foundationally, wanting to watch the movie itself is an illusion.
So, He is saying that, all living beings are born into this delusion.

        sarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ
        sarge yānti ..

All living beings are born into the illusion of material existence. Where they
think of themselves as separate from Me. So, what is the connection between
this verse and the previous verse? You know. The previous verse was saying that,
Krishna says, I am free from illusion. So, let us look at these three verses.
25th was saying that, I am not visible to everyone. You know. I am not, I am not
manifest to everyone. 26th says, say that, I know everything. And 27th says
that, actually, you know, this "sarva-bhūtāni" are "sammohaṁ". All living beings
are w..., deluded. So, here, Krishna is clearly differentiating b..., between
His position and the position of the living entity. Just like we earlier gave
the example of Sun. Clouds. And the person on the Earth. So, the ob..., observer
on the Earth is covered by the clouds. But the Sun is not covered by the clouds.
So, Krishna is like the Sun. You know. The illusory potency is the cloud. And
the living entity is like the, m..., person on the Earth. So, the living entity
may, for some time, temporarily feel that as if I am liberated. If the cloud
just moves a little bit. So, he start think..., I will start think..., see, I
have, starting to see. You know. But the clouds are much bigger. So, one cannot,
m..., remove the clouds by one's own effort. You know. It is not like cobwebs in
the roof that I just move around. And remove the cobwebs. Like that. There is no
stick that I, which I reach the cloud. And tuck. Shake away the cloud. I want to
see the Sun. I cannot do anything like that. I have to depend on divine grace.
You know. So, this verse can often be used to refer to the, hmm, origins.
Ultimately, the question of origins, how we fell away from the spiritual world
is a vexed question. How we originally came here. And where, that is a vexed
question. Why vexed? Because, you know, that which is beyond the conceptions of
time and space is very difficult to co..., understand within the conception of
time and space. That is why when Prabhupada was pressed on this question,
Prabhupada will often give the example that, you know, you know, when a person
is drowning in the ocean, one should think finally about getting out. Not h...,
bother oo much about how one fell into the ocean. So, still, the point is
"icchā" and "dveṣa". So, in the biblical tradition, there is the sto..., story
of Adam and Eve. And Adam, you know, was tempted by Eve. And Eve was tempted by
Satan. Satan came as a snake. And Adam and Eve were the, in the original garden
of Eden. And in the garden of Eden, you know, everything was wonderful. You
know. And they had lots of f..., you know, fruits and fruit to eat. And they
could play around over there. Enjoy. And God just told them do not eat this one
fruit from this tree. So, Satan came along as a snake. And Satan told Eve. He
said that, the, this is story in the Bib..., biblical tradition. So, he says,
you know, why don't you eat that fruit? She says, no. No. No. God has told I do
not eat it. But no. Why? It is a delicious fruit. You know why God has told do
not eat it. She says no. Why? Because if you eat it, you will become God. Such a
delicious fruit. It is so powerful. You will become God. And He does not want
competition. Oh, really? If I eat it, I will become God? He said yes. Go and eat
it immediately. So, then, Eve went and told Adam. And when they told Adam. Then,
Adam said no. No. God has told do not eat. We should not eat it. We should be
obeident. She says, no. I want to eat it. And then, they both went and ate it.
And after that, it is said that they started living, became conscious. You
know. They were unclothed at that time. But before that, they did not even
realise that they were unclothed. But they became, oh, conscious. Oh. Oh. Oh.
And when they became conscious that way. Then, God came back. And when God came
to know about it, He was displeased by the divo..., disobeidence. By the
defiance. And that is how the fall from Eden. Eden is the primeval pristine
garden. You know. From its fell.

So, now, this story is not exactly literal. You know. In one sense, all of us
are Adam. You know, there is a palindrome, "Madam, I'm Adam". So, actually,
everyone of us is Adam. You know. Everyone of us defied the Supreme Lord. So,
this story is symbolic. It illustrates how by going against the will of God, the
soul falls. So, there are various explanations of the soul, you know, h..., has
a desire to enjoy. You know. Soul is happy in the spiritual world with Krishna.
But still, if the soul has not explored life separate from Krishna. That is why
the soul desires to enjoy separate from Krishna. And that is how the soul comes
here to the material world. Or soul, so..., sometimes may desire to serve in a
way that is not possible, you know, in the spiritual world. That is by, say,
creation. And so, the soul becomes Brahma in this world. And when the soul
becomes Brahma, soul tries to enjoy o..., soul does not have the necessary
desire to enjoy separate from God. But because this is an area of maya, after
coming here, soul starts getting lower desires. And then, from Brahmaji's
position, the soul starts going downwards. So, there are, m..., explanations
like this. So, the soul has free will. Prabhupada will explain free will means,
it has to be free. And the very meaning of free will is that there has to be an
arena for exercise that free will. If there is no arena for the exercise of free
will, then there is no meaning to free will. So, m..., the arena for exercise of
free will is the spiritual world. Where we can freely choose to serve Krishna.
But if we choose not to serve Krishna. If we choose to do something else. Then,
there has to be an arena for that, also. And that arena is the material world.
So, m..., m..., you know, even in this world, we see that, logic does not, m...,
necessarily lead to any con..., absolute conclusion. Especially, with respect to
behaviors. You know. You know. Even in this world, when we see a boy falls in
love with a girl. Then, it is not that there are logical reasons why the, why
the boy and girl fall in love with each other. And, you know, even when people
fall out. You know. People fall in love. And they fall out of love, also. So, if
they fall out. Sometimes, that reach to the, they break out. If they are dating.
Then, they may break up. If they are having their marriage. And there is
serious problems, they may have divorce. So, now, it is not that there may be
some specific ev..., events. Some specific behaviors. Which lead to the
disruption of the relationship. But it is not an exact science. You know.
Because of this. This. This. This. This happened. The relationships and emotions
in general are not precise. And that is why a person has to actually, for
sustaining the relationships, one has to become actually emotionally, you know,
sharp. One has to be emotionally, you know, alert. So, has to be, reciprocate
properly with others. And maintain relationships in that way. The point is that,
actually, you know, you know, why the soul chose to li..., li..., a, go apart
from Krishna, you know, we understand the soul has free will. And free will
means that the soul can use the free will whichever way the soul wants. So, the
soul can choose to go away from Krishna. And Krishna allows the soul to do that.
So, that is how the soul becomes born in this world.

        sarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ
        sarge yānti ...

All living beings are born into illusion in this way. Now, one may wonder. Is this
illusion permanent? Is this illusion irreversible? Is it that we have to always
be in material existence? No. We can become purified. And we can become
liberated. And again, and again, Krishna will talk about that. In the Eighth
Chapter again, we will see that now, it will come up. But then, the question may
come up. Ok. If I was there in, i..., if we go back to the spiritual world, what
is the guarantee that we will not fall back? So, this is very beautifully
analysed by Baladeva Vidyabhushana in hi..., his commentary to the Govinda
Bha..., you know, Govin..., commentary Govinda Bhashya. Which is a commentary on
the Vedanta Sutra. In the last, you know, you know, aphorism. Last Sutra of the
Vedanta Sutra is "anavriti shabdat". You know. So, "anavriti", "hi". This is of
course explained differently by different acharyas. Srila Prabhupada explains
"anavriti shabdat" as by sound vibration. "anavriti", "hi". There will be
uncovering of consciousness that will happen. So, "avarana" is covering.
"anavriti", "hi" is uncovering of consciousness as happen by sound. So,
"anavriti", hi" can also mean something different. Krishna will, talks for
example:

        punar āvartino ’rjuna

So, "punar āvartino" is to come back here again. So, you know, those, there are,
most living entities come back to this material world. But "anavriti".
"anavriti" means will not come back. So, "shabdat" means so say the scriptures.
So, "anavriti shabdat". Baladeva Vidyabhushana explains that this means that the
scriptures declare that there will be no return over here. The living entity
will not return to material existence. So, he says, when the living entity
attains librations. The living entity will not return back to material
existence. Why? Because of multiple reasons. He says, one reason is, among the
many reasons. First of all, it is a scriptural promise. "shabdat". "shab...",
scripture is saying. As sripture is giving the Absolute Truth in the world of
God. And then, he further says that actually the Lord loves us devotees. And the
Lord is bhakta-vatsala. So, the Lord will ensure that those devotees who have
truly loved Him. And have rejected the pleasures of this world for His sake. You
know. He will never reject them. He will always hold them in a tight embrace.
And keep them forever with Him. And He will never let them fall back into
material existence. And then, further He says that, actually, the devotees love
the Lord. And the devotees have, you know, sacrificed everything for the sake of
the Lord. And once, they have attained the object of love. And the object of
love is so completely satisfying and fulfilling. Why will the soul come? Why
will such a l..., such devotees ever want to come back to the Lord? So, m...,
you know, you know, you know, so, based on, of course, we know, the, originally,
we came because we did not know what was the, you know, reason, you know, what,
we did not know ex..., we did not know about life separate from Krishna. How
horrible it can be. But when we return back to Krishna, it is not that,
constantly, we will remember material existence. But once we are back with
Krishna, we will know that, actua..., if, if at all sometimes the desire comes
up, then immediately, we will have, Krishna will give us the remembrance of the
consequences. And, you know, origi..., all that had been a nightmare. No. I do
not want to go into that again. So, because of having the experience. You know.
Because of s..., the reassurance of the Lord. Because of the nature of the love
of the Lord for the devotee. And because of the nature of the love of the
devotee for the Lord. It can be said that, guaranteed that we will not come
back. So, that is the ultimate liberation. S..., "sarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ". So,
although, all of us are deluded. All of us can ultimately be liberated. And once
we are liberated. We will not come back again to this world. Now, Krishna says
that, ok, all living beings are born into illusion. How can they become free
from illusion? He says. He will describe that in that next verse. 7.28:

        yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ
        janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām
        te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā
        bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

"yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ". That when the "pāpaṁ", for those people. "pāpaṁ"
has ended. And "janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām". They have performed "puṇya" for a
"janānāṁ". Those people. They have performed "puṇya". And when have they
performed "puṇya"? Prabhupada explains this as well as previous lives.
Considerable "puṇya", they have performed. "te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā". They will
become free from "moha". The "moha" of "dvandva". And then, "bhajante māṁ
dṛḍha-vratāḥ". They will start worshipping me determinedly. So, what is the
point of this verse? We have to understand it in the flow. So, first, Krishna
said that, you know, in 14 to 18, said, if you know Me, you can become
liberated. Then, in 25, says, not everyone knows Me. But Krishna says, I am not
under illusion. The living entities are under illusion. So, how can they come
out of illusion? So, Krishna is telling over here, if they give up s...,
"pāpaṁ". And they do "puṇya". Then, they will come to the plat..., po...,
position of where they can do My bhakti steadily. "dṛḍha-vratāḥ". Determinedly.
You know. You know. So, here, Krishna is talking about how one can become a
serious, steady devotee. So, for that, we have to give up sinful activities. And
we have to do, you know, pious activities. Now, in principle, devotional service
can be started from any mode. You know. Even a person who is a drunkard. Person.
They, the devotee may be doing in kirtan. And the person is drunk. And then, and
a drunken stupendous person start dancing. At that time, also starts singing.
So, that person is also performing devotional service. In some way. Chanting the
holy names. Hearing the holy names. But that person who is in a drunken stage.
Who is a state. Who is in a mode of ignorance. That person cannot every day make
up. And chant Hare Krishna in Mangala Aarti. No. If one has to do that.
"bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ". So, a little bit "bhajan". Now, Krishna has used
the word "bhajan" earlier.

        catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ

In 7.16. Four kinds of people come to Me. He has said that. But it is, the point
is that not all these four kinds of people, they will be steady. And that is why
Krishna says, among them:

        teṣāṁ jñānī nitya-yukta
        eka-bhaktir viśiṣyate

in 7.17, He says, among these, the "jñānī" is the best. Because this "jñānī",
you know, you know, will steadily, you know, keep practicing. Because he is not
motivated by anything material. But he is motivated by our, mo..., on the
platform of knowledge. So, Krishna is telling that, if one wants to become
steady, one has to become free from sin. And one has to do piety. So, you know,
as devotees, we know. There are the regulative principles. And when you break
those principles, we commit sinful activities. We commit sinful activities that
leads to consequences. Which we have to avoid. These consequences, you know, you
know, you know, you know, when we avoid them, then we move forward. And, you
know, we m..., render devotional ser..., we practice devotional service by that.

        te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

So, actually, the "dvandva-moha" is always there. But as "dvandva-moha" is far,
far crippling when it is in ignorance or passion. You know. In ignorance, the
"dvandva-moha", the duality is that, one does not like anything which is
connected with goodness or transcendence. One just likes that which is connected
with ignorance. So, one likes to smoke. One likes to drink. One may like to take
drugs. Do violence. In goodness, also, there is "dvandva". That this is good.
And this is bad. But at "dvandva" of goodness is much, much closer to reality
than is it "dvandva" of, you know, ignorance. So, duality is always there within
three modes. You know. And ultimately, when we can, can, come to transcendence.
Then, undergoes completely. And that is when we attain liberation. So, Krishna
is telling over here. When one keeps doing piety. Keeps avoiding sin. Then,
gradually, the effect of the lower modes decreases. And the effect of the lower
modes decreases. And the, one becomes situated more and more in goodness. And
then, eventually, from goodness, one can come to transcendence. And from, and in
tran..., one may, one is in the stage of goodness. Transcendence. One can
practice bhakti steadily. "dṛḍha-vratāḥ". So, Krishna is not talking about
initiating bhakti over. That He has talked about 7.16, already. He is talking
about, you know, installing oneself in bhakti, steadily. So, for that, one needs
to give up sinful activities. And we will also see in our spiritual life that to
the extent we succumb to sin, to that extent, our bhakti will be unsteady.
Actually, the succumbing to sim itsel..., sin itself is a break in bhakti. But
along with that, also, when we succumb to sin. Before that, there is temptation.
And after that, there is lamentation. And they also say, it is like we are going
on this level of consciousness. And whenever there is sin. It is like a fall.
But before the fall, there is, you know, there is, you know, temptation. Oh,
should I do it? Should I do it? Sh..., shou..., should I do it? Should I, should
I do it?  I want to do it. No, I will not do it. I will do it. You know. That
whole agitation is there. And then, after do it, also. You know. Ok. I did it.
Why did I, why did I do that? I should not have done that. And I am so fallen.
Why did I? So, there is lamentation. And then, what happens? We go a little bit.
And again. Then, same temptation. Then, lamentation. So, this keeps us going.
Keeps our consc..., it does not allow us, consciusness to stay steady. What to
speak of go upwards steadily? It has. It just, we keep falling down. So, when we
start avoiding sinful activities determinedly, we will see, we will let the
process of bhakti work. It is like bhakti. You see, if we consider heart to be
like a wood. Then, the wood has to be lit. For that, some flame comes from
elsewhere. And lits the, so, a, like that. You know. Our heart is illumined with
bhakti. When we come in contact with a bhakta. So, whenever we associate with
devotees who are serious practitioners of bhakti. Then, in their association, we
also get bhakti. Our heart becomes illumined. But, you know, you know, you know,
if the wood is wet. You know. You know. Then, the contact does not really
cack..., con..., you know, cause the wood to catch fire. Maybe, a little bit,
part of the wood that is dry may catch fire. But if the wood is to steadily
catch fire, then that wood has to be first dried. And then, further fall of
water on that wood has to be avoided. Similarly, when our heart is in Tama Guna.
That is like the wood is wet. And when the wood is wet, we cannot really make
much, you know, spiritu..., steady spiritual practice. That is why these two
things, giving up sin and, you know, doing piety. That helps our heart to come
to goodness. And then, bhakti can go forward steadily. So, bhakti can be started
in any mode. But for bhakti to be sustained, goodness is important. And,
therein, we can do "dṛḍha-vratāḥ" bhakti.  Steady devotional service. You know.
You know. You know. You know. So, that is why Prabhupada quotes in this verse
that for sustaining devotional service, for giving up sin. And for giving,
starting to do, m..., good activities, what is needed? It is:

        mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimukteḥ

We have to serve the great souls. And:

        tamo-dvāraṁ yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam

We have to give up the, I, you know, association of n..., n..., non-devotees.
Materialistic people. You know. Those who are attached to ma..., material
enjoyment. And we have to associate with those who are great devotees. And by
that, we can make steady spiritual advancement. Now, Krishna will introduce two
more term. You know. Two more verses. You know. We, In which we will introduce
some terms. So:

        jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya
        mām āśritya yatanti ye
        te brahma tad viduḥ kṛtsnam
        adhyātmaṁ karma cākhilam

So, "jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya". H..., so, those who understand the miseries of
material existence, which "jarā" and "maraṇa". Old age. And d..., d..., death.
They "may...", they "mokṣāya". To get liberation from that. What do they do?
"mām āśritya". They take shelter of Me. "yatanti ye". And they start t...,
doing. They start endeavoring. So, what, what will happen eventually to them?
What was the ha..., the c..., situation? "te brahma tad viduḥ kṛtsnam". They
actually, you know, you know, they are actually "te brahma". Krishna is saying
they are "brahma". And they know everything. "adhyātmaṁ karma cākhilam". They
know everything about transcendental activities. So, Krishna has introduced two
words over here. "brahma". And "adhyātmaṁ". And this, Arjuna will ask in the,
what does it mean? Arjuna will ask in the next verse about this. So, here, you
know, this is actually another category of a devotee. So, Krishna has talked
about, you know, different kinds of devotees who surrender to, come to Him. So,
let us look at this. Hmm, hmm, so, Krishna has talked about four kinds of people
who approach Him. So, actually, this, four, He has talked about in 7.16. But as
for an article say. We will say that, there are three poin..., you know, so,
7.16 talk..., was:

        ārto jijñāsur arthārthī

They are "sakama" devotees. They come for some material purpose. Then:

        teṣāṁ jñānī nitya-yukta

Was 7.17, 18, 19. That is the "jnana-mishra" devotee. Of course, 19, other
three ca..., other three can also become, you know, "jñānavān". So,
this "jnana-mishra". The person who has jnana. And then, that person starts
practicing bhakti. Now, in 7.20. This particular verse, it, 7.29, actually. This
is "moksha-kami" bhakta. Now, the "moksha-kami" means one who is aspiring for
liberation. And we will discuss in 8.12. Krishna will talk about the
"yoga-mishra" bhakta. So, what is this "mishra-bhakti"? We will discuss a little
later. But the important point here is that, you know, Krishna is talking about
different categories of devotees. So, there are f..., f..., six different
categories of devotees. You know. Sorry, five different categories of devotees.
Which are being talked about. So, two "sakama". And tawo "moksha-kami". The
"moksha-kami" can be "jnana-mishra". That means the person wants liberation, but
is coming primarily the intellectual conception. Or the person may be
"yoga-mishra". That person will be coming from a, you know, you know, bodily, a,
b..., a, from the background of yogic practice. So, but they all come to "mām
āśritya". They come and surrender to Krishna. Any by that, they make spiritual
advancement. So, now, Krishna will introduce one more term over here. So, you
know, one more, us, one more, you know, set of terms in this verse:

        sādhibhūtādhidaivaṁ māṁ
        sādhiyajñaṁ ca ye viduḥ
        prayāṇa-kāle ’pi ca māṁ
        te vidur yukta-cetasaḥ

So, Krishna introduces three terms over here f..., again. "sa-adhib...".
"adhib...". "sa-adhib...", "adhibhūta". "adhidaivam". And "adhiyajñam". So, what
these words are will be que..., a question of Arjuna in the next Chapter. And,
you know, Krishna will answer, also, briefly. And then, He will, Krishna ask...,
you know, you know, mention the further importing.

        prayāṇa-kāle ’pi ca māṁ

That those who understand Me to be "adhibhūta". "adhidaivam". "adhiyajñam". Such
people, you know, they will be well-situated even at the time of "prayāṇa-kāle".
So, "prayāṇa-kāle" was referred earlier in 2.72.

        eṣā brāhmī sthitiḥ pārtha
        naināṁ prāpya vimuhyati
        sthitvāsyām anta-kāle ’pi
        brahma-nirvāṇam ṛcchati

If the k..., you know, person can be like this in "anta-kāle", the person will
attain "brahma-nirvāṇam". So, here, also, "anta-kāle" and "prayāṇa-kāle" are
same thing. So, Krishna, you know, so, Krish..., He is saying those who know Me
to be the ultimate truth, you know, they will be "yukta-cetasaḥ". They will be
well-situated even at the time of "prayāṇa-kāle". And the application is, by
that, they will attain Me. So, essentially, in this section, from twenty-fi...,
is, five, to 30, what has Krishna told? Krishna has said that His position is
supreme. He is not revealed to everyone. But if somebody wants to, you know,
come to know Him, then, you know, you know, they have to practice dev..., steady
devotional service. Steady devotional service, when they practice, you know, by
giv..., and they give up sinful activities. Do steady pious activities. And
become determined in devotional service. By that, they will understand all these
things. They will understand Brahma. They will under..., understand "adhyātmaṁ".
And ult..., and most importantly, they will understand Krishna as the ultimate
reality. As "adhibhūta". "adhidaivam". And "adhiyajñam". And such people, they
will be well-situated at the time of death. And ultimately, they will attain
liberation. So, in this way, in the Seventh Chapter, "Knowledge of the
Absolute". So, it has three sections. First, how the Absolute pervades and
underlies even everything. Then, how everybody is ultimately, you know, whatever
they are doing, it is in some relations with the Absolute. Defying. Obeying. Or
serving something connected with the Absolute. But when we surrender to the
Absolute. When we understand the Absolute Truth as the Absolute Truth. When we
understand Krishna to be the Absolute Truth. Then, we attain supreme
auspiciousness. We attain absolute auspiciousness. "yukta-cetasaḥ". That is the
overview of the Chapter.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
