Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Q-Y7UfObik
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=XIjQJMSqp3DrOE6KIzRiBCgDg_h8MTU0ODQ4ODYwMkAxNTQ4NDAyMjAy&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_094_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_08_Text_08_to_13_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=4Q-Y7UfObik&event=video_description

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. So, welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We
are in the Eighth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. We completed l..., 8.7. Which is
the second section of the Eighth Chapter. So, let us have a look at the overview
of the Second Chapter before we move ahead. You know. So, i..., in verses one
and two, Arjuna asks, you know, questions. Seven questions. Out of which, six
questions are answered in the next two verses itself. Then, verses five to eight
answer Arjuna's seventh question. That is how to remember Krishna at the time of
death? And then, the remaining chapter talks about remembrance of Krishna
through various means. So, remembrance by yoga-mishra bhakti is talked about
from nine to thirteen. Then, fourteen to fifteen talks about remembrance by
shuddha-bhakti. Then, sixteen to twenty-two, you know, talks about remembrance
by comparing natures of material and spiritual worlds. You know. And then,
lastly, twenty-three to twenty-eight explains how remembrance by bhakti-yoga is
easier than remembrance by ashtanga yoga. So, overall, this chapter, you know,
focuses on the topic of remembrance of Krishna. And especially, remembrance of
Krishna at the time of death. So, when we are, we are considering remembrance of
Krishna. So, you know, the co..., focus is now on, you know, you know,
remembrance o..., of Krishna. But the method is under discussion. So, the method
can be either bhakti-yoga which was introduced by Krishna in the Seventh Chapter
in a systematic way. You know. There were pointers towards bhakti-yoga earlier.
But not so much directly. 2.61, "mat-paraḥ". Or "mayi sarvāṇi karmāṇi" in 3.30.
Like that, there are verses. You know. "man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ" in 4.10.
"bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ" in, you know, you know, 5.29. "yo māṁ paśyati
sarvatra", 6.30. Then, "yoginām api sarveṣāṁ". 6.47. So, there were pointers
towards bhakti-yoga. That Krishna is the ultimate object of meditation and
devotion. And action. So, that was talked about. But, you know, the systematic
process of bhakti-yoga, you know, was talked about in the Seventh Chapter. "mayy
āsakta-manāḥ" was 7.1. And then, after that, we had prapa..., a, "mām", "mām eva
ye prapadyante". The concept of surrender was talked for the first time in the
Bhagavad Gita. Surrender to Krishna was talked for the first time. In 7.14. And
then, after that, you know, you know, again, how different people surrender.
"jñānavān māṁ prapadyate". That was developed from sixteen to nine..., a,
nineteen. And then, finally, again:

        sādhibhūtādhidaivaṁ māṁ
        sādhiyajñaṁ ca ye viduḥ

In 7.30. How Krishna is the ultimate reality. And to know Him at the time of
death is the ultimate perfection of life. That was talked about. So, the Seventh
Chapter brings the focus on bhakti-yoga. You know. Not in a detailed way. But by
focusing on Krishna in a more direct way than it has happened till now. And
saying that, it is Krishna who can liberate. It is Krishna one, to whom we have
to surrender. So, prior to this, in the Sixth Chapter, Krishna has talked about
ashtanga yoga. So, the whole process of ashtanga yoga culminated in, in the
point of becoming attached to Krishna. "yoginām api sarveṣāṁ". That among all
yogis, the topmost is one who thinks about Me. And then, Krishna given
alternative trajectory to that summit. You know. That was "mayy āsakta-manāḥ".
How to become "āsakta-manāḥ"? "shrunu". Hear about it. So then, seven, Krishna
ord..., outlines bhakti-yoga. So, Sixth Chapter has talked about jnani yo...,
ashtanga yoga as a means. And the perfection is to become, fix the mind on
Krishna. You know. And then, Krishna has also talked about how bhakti-yoga is a
means by which we can get the mind fixed on Krishna. So, Seventh Chapter was
like a cycle. So, you know, it was said that, 7.1 was, you know, you know, "mayy
āsakta-manāḥ". That fix the mind on Me. And the 7.30, the last verse of the
Seventh Chapter was how actually:

        sādhibhūtādhidaivaṁ māṁ
        sādhiyajñaṁ ca ye viduḥ

That Krishna is the ultimate reality. He is the "adhibhūta". He is the
"adhidaivam". He is the "adhiyajñam". So, naturally, when we understand He is
the ultimate reality, then, when the mind will be fixed on Him. So, Seventh
Chapter talked about fixing the mind on Krishna through bhakti-yoga. Now, Eight
Chapter introduces th..., you know, some additional terms. But they are not
elaborated. Then, it f..., focuses on the theme of remembering Krishna at the
time of death. And then, it ana..., explores the two paths, explores and
compares the two paths that were given in the Sixth and the Seventh Chapter. So,
Sixth Chapter gave the path of ashtanga yoga. Seventh Chapter gave the pa...,
path of bhakti-yoga. So, Eighth Chapter will contrast these two chapters. And
will explain how bhakti-yoga is the easier way to fix the mind on Krishna. B...,
both at the time of death as well as during one's lifetime. So, right now, we
are in the section of fixing the mind on Krishna. So, let us look at this now.
You know. 8.8. So:

        abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena
        cetasā nānya-gāminā
        paramaṁ puruṣaṁ divyaṁ
        yāti pārthānucintayan

So, "abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena". By engaging in the practice of yoga. Now, all these
three words, "abhyāsa", "yoga", "yuktena", they are non-specific. These are, you
know, "abhyāsa" can be in bhakti-yoga. It can be in ashtanga yoga. It can be in
jnana yoga. "abhyāsa" can be in various path. And then, "cetasā nānya-gāminā".
The essential point of this "abhyāsa" is, you know, let the con..., "cetasā".
The consciousness. "nānya-gāminā". Let it not go anywhere else. If one can do
this, then what will happen? "paramaṁ puruṣaṁ divyaṁ". One will attain the
supreme "puruṣaṁ". Who is divine. Who is transcendental. And "yāti
pārthānucintayan". So, oh, Partha, one will attain that. One will achieve that
supreme person because of "anucintayan". Because of s..., steady contemplation.
So, "cintayan" itself is contemplation. "anucintayan" is s..., s..., steady
contemplation. So, here, Krishna is assuri..., reassuring that by contemplation
on Kr..., the Absolute Truth, on the Sup..., by contemplation on the Supreme
Person, one will attain the Supreme Person. By keeping the concentration
foc..., consciousness focused. Concentrated. One will attain the Supreme Person.
Now, those, the most striking feature of this verse is that Krishna is referring
to the "paramaṁ puruṣaṁ" in the third person. You know. So, you know, that He is
saying that "paramaṁ puruṣaṁ divyaṁ" is referring, not to Himself. He is saying
that, third person. Now, why does Krishna doe..., do this? There are, you know,
different places where Krishna will do this repeatedly in the Bhagavad Gita.
And we have to look at the context to understand this. When Krishna describes a
particular path, He describes it from the perspective of the seeker. That is
several, on several occasions. So, when He is describing the path of ashtanga
yogi. From the perspective of the ashtanga yogi seeker, then at that time, you
know, the ashtanga yogi does not know that Krishna is the Absolute Truth. The
ashtanga yogi, you know, is starting the meditation. And he is turning inwards.
For pratyahara. Starting out the external s..., world. And then, trying to
discover the inner reality. So, at that time, you know, the yogi may discover
that the inner reali..., ultimate inner reality is personal. So, "paramaṁ
puruṣaṁ". But may have not yet discovered the identity of that ultimate reality.
See, by introspection. And by meditation. One can progressively move forwards
towards the ultimate reality. But it is only by revelation that we can
specifically understand the ultimate reality. By introspection means, by our own
thought. By meditation. By systematic contemplation. What will happen is? One
can understand. You know. I am not the body. I am the soul. One can understand
that there is God. One may even be able to understand that, that, that ultimate
tru..., truth is a person. But that, a..., Absolute Truth is a bluish,
black-complexioned cowherd boy. Who wears a peacock feather. And plays a flute.
And stands a three-fold bending form. This cannot be revealed merely b..., it
cannot be understood, known, just by introspection. Or by meditation. For that,
actually, there has to be revelation that is cru..., come through. By our own
analysis, we can understand the existence of God. We can even understand the,
you know, personality that the, of God. That means, not the specific
personality. But the concept that God is a person. But beyond that point that
God is a person, who exactly God is? What His identity is? That requires
revelation. So, when Krishna is talking here, from the point of view of the
seeker. Who does not, at this stage, know who is the Absolute Truth.

So, He focuses on talking about, you know, a..., "paramaṁ puruṣaṁ divyaṁ". So,
by the practice of "abhyāsa-yoga", you know, one will attain the "paramaṁ
puruṣaṁ". Now, Krishna, if we put two and two together. You know. If there are
these eight verses there. In 8.4, Krishna has said that, one who remembers Me,
will attain Me. And then, 8.6, again, He has said that, actually, one who fixes
the mind on Me, will come back to Me. You know. Why you? Therefore, you should
fix your mind on Me. Constantly. Krishna has said that. So, when Krishna has
said this, essentially, the point is that, you know, Krishna is, you know, made
it clear from the flow of the Gita that the "paramaṁ puruṣaṁ" is He. And that
will become clear in this section, also. But from the point of view of ashtanga
yogi. Ashtanga yogi does not know that the Absolute Truth is Krishna. So, Ar...,
ashtan..., the, ashtanga yogi is focusing on "paramaṁ puruṣaṁ". Attain the
"paramaṁ puruṣaṁ". And then, you know, Prabhupada says that at this stage:

"The devotee can constantly think of the object of worship, the Supreme Lord, in
any of His features – Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Rāma, etc. – by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. "

Now, it is interesting. What Srila Prabhupada says over here is. You know. By,
he is, chant Hare Krishna. And think of Rama. Think of Narayana. Even, how is
this possible? You know. If we chant Hare Krishna. You know. When we think of
Krishna and Radharani. How can we, by chanting Hare Krishna, we think of, you
know, some other form of the Lord? Actually, we have to understand that, there
is the universal and the confidential aspect of bhakti. The universal aspect of
bhakti is the purification. That it brings about. You know. That it helps us
to become free from our material attachments. From our material desires. From
our material identity. And that is something which is universal for everyone.
And then, after that, so, it is like, we have discussed earlier, there is a
y-axis. There is negative side. There is a positive side. So, negative side
is, involves material, a, desires. Material relationships. Material activities.
From there, one comes to the zero point. And from there, one goes to the
positive side. So, when one is moving along the, you know, up, up from the
negative towards the positive. The universal aspect is that everybody has to go
along this journey. Everybody has to become free from material conceptions. And
material fascinations. So, once one has done that, then in the positive y-axis,
there can be slightly different trajectories. You know. One devotee can go to
Vaikuntha. One can go to Ayodhya. One can go to, you know, Goloka Vrindavan. And
Goloka Vrindavan, also, one can go to Dwarka. Another can go to Vrindavan. That
can be different. So, then, slight differences in the trajectory in the y-axis.
But still, you know, the point is there is a common aspect. So, you know, by
chanting Hare Krishna even if our eventual svarupa is different. Still, we can
become purified. And we can move onwards. You know. Sometimes, the devotees
think that maybe I am attra..., I am attracted to Lord Rama most. Should I chant
Hare Krishna? Maybe, I should not join ISKCON. You know. Maybe, I should find
out some institution that teaches Rama bhakti. You know. Actually speaking,
first, we should not prematurely imagine what is my svarupa in the spiritual
world. You know. First of all, we have to give up our attachment to our
"pararupa". "pararupa" is the, "para" is others. Outer. So, or other. So, we
have got our, m..., material body. And we identify with that very strongly right
now. So, you know, right now, we have to give up our material identification
with that particular, you know, material form that we have. And we may have some
attraction to Lord Rama. We may have some attraction to Narasimha. If we have
been brought up in a culture where we had attraction to specific, you know,
where, forms. Where, you know, we may have heard, you know, Narasimha
Ashtottaras. Or we may have heard Rama songs. And because of that, we may have
become attracted to them from the childhood. So, now, you know, you know, our
attraction may be more cultural than spiritual. Cultural means, because of the
culture that we are brought up in, we have that attraction. It may not be so
spiritual. Because it is not necessary at the level of the soul. You know. The
soul is attracted to Krishna. So, of course, you know, we are fortunate that we
were brought up in a place where we were hearing, you know, songs about Rama.
And not maybe songs, or Michael Jackson. Or whatever. So, you know, it is,
anyway, we are attracted to Krishna. That is good. And we can utilise that to
increase our contemplation on the Lord. So, anyway, we can do that. Kr...,
increased contemplation on the Lord. That is very good. But beyond that, once we
have done that. Once we have contemplated on the Lord. You know. Then we will
become purified gradually. And e..., after we go beyond the negative axis, we
come to the positive. Then, eventually, our spi..., attraction to the specific
form that we are in, the, you know, that, we want, that is our eternal svarupa.
We will naturally become attracted to that. So, there may be a devotee who
practices Krishna Consciousness within ISKCON. But eventually feels that, a
greater attraction to Lord Rama. And then, that person may decide that, no, I
want to, you know, hear more pastimes on Lord Rama. Chant and, you know, focus
on Lord Rama's worship. Go to the holy places of Lord Rama. So, if one feels
like that, one can surely do like that. There is, you know, nothing wrong in
that. But we should not mistake the cultural to be spiritual. 

So, at our stage, we focus on chanting Hare Krishna. We focus on practicing the
process of Krishna Consciousness as has given to us by Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Because even if our svarupa is in, you know, say, Vrin..., in Ayodhya. Still,
right now, we are in Kali Yuga. And Kali, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the
maha-vadanya yuga avatar for this Kali Yuga. And the Brahma Tarak Nama, the holy
name that will liberate us, in this Kali Yuga, is the Hare Krishna maha mantra.
Therefore, we chant the Hare Krishna maha mantra. And eventually, we will go to
the level where we will become purified of everything material. And then, that
which is naturally spiritual will start getting activated. So, eventually, when
we are purified of our material designations. And material conceptions. Then,
the spiritual attraction to, acc..., to the particular form of the Lord with
whom we are related in our svarupa will become manifest. So, that is why, at our
stage, you know, by chanting Hare Krishna, we can develop attraction to
whichever form we want. You know. Whichever form, you know, may, we may
eventually be attracted to. So, we do not have to bother about that right now.
That is why, chant Hare Krishna. So, "paramaṁ puruṣaṁ". "yāti". We will attain
the "paramaṁ puruṣaṁ". You know, now, after this, the second section starts
where Krishna talks about attain, the third section of this chapter rather. It
starts, talks about how attaining reme..., remembering Krishna at the time of
death. Remembrance by, you know, the proce..., process of yoga-mishra bhakti.
So, now, there can be different kinds of bhakti. So, there is kevala bhakti.
Kevala bhakti means pure devotional service. The kevala means only. There is
nothing, but bhakti in that. You know. That is kevala bhakti. Now, apar..., so,
here, we can have a look at it. So, this is based on Visvanatha Chakravarti
Thakura's pro..., purpor..., a, commentary on the Bhagavad Gita. You know. So,
you know, you know, you know, what is the destination of different people, he is
talking about. So, first, let us focus, right now, not on the destination. On
one of the types of bhakti. So, look at the title is here. There is kevala
bhaktas. Then, there is pradhani-bhuta bhaktas. And then, there are guni-bhuta
bhaktas. So, kevala bhaktas are those who have pure devotion to the Supreme
Lord. They have nothing, but devotion. Kevala. Only devotion. Then,
pradhani-bhuta. So, pradhani-bhuta. Pradhani means principle. Pradhani-bhuta
bhaktas means they have some other comm..., you know, other things, also, in
their bhakti. There may be yoga. There may be jnana. But, you know, you know,
primarily, it is bhakti. So, bhakti is more than fifty percent. That is called
as pradhani-bhuta bhakta. And then, there is guni-bhuta bhakti. Guni-bhuta
bhaktas are those who, you know, are actually having bhakti. But the bhakti is
less than, you know, fifty percent. So, that, the inf..., now, gunas, actually,
the other processes. Jnana. Yoga. Karma. They are influenced by the modes.
Whereas bhakti is essentially transcendental. So, you know, when we use, when we
do jnana. We are using the intellect. And the intellect is material. When we do
yoga, we are concentrating the mind. The mind is material. When we doing karma,
we are using the body. The body is material. Bhakti may also involve the
intellect, the body, and the mind. But bhakti is cent..., is centered, is the
heart. And the heart essentially is the seat of emotions. That is the soul. So,
the soul is spiritual. So, so, bhakti alone is transcendental. Of course, we, as
sadhakas, may not be transcendental. And the bhakti that we may be performing
right now may be within the modes. Maybe goodness. Passion. Ignorance. But, you
know, you know, the bhakti in principle is transcendental. So, guni-bhuta bhakti
means that bhakti which is mixed with material, wi..., with something material.
So, in the guni-bhuta bhakti and the pradhani-bhuta bhakti, there will be some
mishra. This is, the, both are mishra bhakti. But there is a movement upwards
from guni-bhuta is, the bhakti is less than fifty percent. Then, pradhani-bhuta,
the bhakti is more than fifty percent. The kevala bhakti means, bhakti is
hundred percent. So, there is an upward movement gradually. You know. So, while
one is having this upward movement, you know, the progression will involve
purification.

        jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

As Rupa Gosvami says in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. Jnana and karma, one removes it.
The avram, one removes of that. Then, they become purely directed. They are not
impurely directed because of, you know, self-centered materialistic conceptions.
You know. "anāvṛtam". "avran...". Removed. That is what the word is used. In
the definition of bhakti, by Rupa Goswami:

        anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ
        jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam
        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

So, this is "uttamā", "bhaktir". So, this, one moves to the "uttamā", "bhaktir".
The same as kevala bhakti. So, one moves toward "uttamā" or kevala bhakti.
Gradually from downwards to upwards. So, you know, you know, here, here, Krishna
is talking about mishra-bhakti. So, both guni-bhuta and pradhani-bhuta, they
are, you know, mishra-bhaktis. Mishra-bhaktas. So, when there is mishra-bhakti,
at that time, what is the nature of mishra-bhakti? That there is some
contamination of yoga. Or there is some contamination of jnana. Or there, or
there can be karma, also. So, you know, you know, the other path of
transcendence, when one has some inclination towards them. And the some residue
of that is there. You know. In the process of bhakti. You know. Then, that will
be p..., pradhani-bhuta. Now, on the other hand, if that alone, that is largely
there, then that will be guni-bhuta. So, now, you know, th..., th..., Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura also explains what will be the destinations that different
peop..., yogis will attain. Different transcendentalists will attain. So, let us
look at it once again. Now, look at the other part of it. So, he explains kevala
bhaktas. What will be their destination? They will attain Goloka Vrindavan. GV
can be Gaudiya Vaishnavism. It can be Goloka Vrindavan, also. So, here, it is
Goloka Vrindavan. So, it, it, they attain, they develop prema. Pure love for
Krishna. And they attain Goloka Vrindavan. You know. You know. Those who have
pradhani-bhuta. They will attain Vaikuntha in shanta-rati. Now, we are talking
about, you know, not a transition. If to, even if the end of their journey, you
know, the en..., end of their spiritual journey. They do not become kevala
bhaktas. They stay pradhani-bhuta bhaktas, only. That means they continue their
attachment to yoga or karma. Or jnan..., you know, you know, yoga or jnana.
Then, then because of the presence of these other things, they will go to
Vaikuntha. Hmm, and then, he says, guni-bhuta bhaktas, they will go to
Brahmajyoti. That means if the other parts are, you know, disproportionately
high. Then, the personal conception is not what they are focusing on. And that
is why, they, they will attain the impersonal conception. You know. You know.
Now, on the other hand, if there are just people who are not practicing the
other parts, you know, by, not practicing bhakti at all. Actually, it is, you
know, just jnana yoga. Dhyana yoga. Karma yoga. That is what they are
practicing. Then, even through these paths, they can eventually attain
perfection. But that perfection will be brahmajyoti. But when will they get the
brahmajyoti? When they add bhakti in their sadhana. Without bhakti, no other
process can give its result. Bhakti is essential. But the proportion of bhakti
will vary among different seekers. And depending on the proportion of bhakti,
the destination will also vary. So, here, we are talking about yoga-mishra
bhaktas. So, those who are practicing bhakti. The, sorry, those who are
practicing the process of ashtanga yoga primarily. But they are also
incorporating the bhakti element in it. So, Krishna has talked about
incorporating the bhakti element, even in the Sixth Chapter. You know. He has
talked about in 6.14. When He says, you know, the, that, the yogi should fix
the mind on Me.

        praśāntātmā vigata-bhīr
        brahmacāri-vrate sthitaḥ
        manaḥ saṁyamya mac-citto
        yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

So, Krishna has told about how the yogi should go to the jungle. Se..., you
know, secluded place. And then, sit erect.

        samaṁ kāya-śiro-grīvaṁ

All the head and the whole body should be, you know, in one line. And then:

        nāsikāgraṁ svaṁ

Look at the tip of the nose. But after that, what? Once, one has become
peaceful. Like that. Then:

        manaḥ saṁyamya mac-citto

Bring the mind under control. Fi..., fix it, consciousness on Me. And then:

        yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

Then, this way, become devoted to Me. So, Krishna will talk about the same
conception. He will elaborate on this. Ov..., you know, on that point of how the
yogis may fix the mind on Krishna. Now, we have to understand here one important
point. That the, though the yogis may fix the mind on Krishna. Th..., you know,
Krishna may be the object of their meditation. But Krishna may not be the
objective of their meditation. You know. What is the difference between object
and objective? Object means what they are thinking about. Objective means what
they wish to achieve. So, Krishna should not just be the object. But the
objective of our meditation, also. So, when Krishna is both. Then, we will
attain the ultimate perfection. So, the, the oth..., the yogis in the other
paths. The yogis or the seekers on the other paths. For them, Kr..., they may
also fix their mind on Krishna. But their objective may be something else. They
think that, ok, Krishna is a tool for meditation. And after that, we have to go.
And we have to, you know, you know, ultimately, meditate on the Supreme Lord.
On the, we hav..., ultimately attain the Impersonal Brahman. So, those who
think like this, they are mistaken. You know. They, they, they will not, they
deprive themselves of the ultimate result. So, here, Krishna will talk about
those who, you know, are cu..., having Krishna as the object right now. So, if
they are get the association of devotees. If they are fortunate, then they will
understand that Krishna is not just the object. But the objective, also. They
may, they do not think that, ok, Krishna is something I meditate on. So that
ultimately, I can attain the Brahman. So, now, is this offensive? Not
necessarily. If they deride the form of Krishna. If they minimise and blaspheme
the form of Krishna. And they criti..., criticise the process of devotional
service. You know. Then, that becomes offensive. If they do not con..., they
consider this is my path. And I want to go here. That is fine. But if they
consider this is the best path. And this is the supreme path. And not only that,
they say, those who meditate on Krishna are less intelligent. And Krishna's form
is transitional. And ultimately, Krishna's form is maya. And one has to go
beyond maya. Then, there is an illusion. You know. That is an illusion. And that
can lead to, you know, that can lead to, you know, unfortunate result. That,
Krishna will talk about in 9.11 and 12.

        moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo

Whatever they try to achieve, they will be, m..., fail miserably in that. So,
let us look at the verses now. So, we start over, now, here, the yogis are
meditating on the Supreme Lord by contemplating His attributes. So, these
attributes can be contemplated on by devotees, also. And by yogis, also. So,
let us look at these attributes:

        kaviṁ purāṇam anuśāsitāram
        aṇor aṇīyāṁsam anusmared yaḥ
        sarvasya dhātāram acintya-rūpam
        āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt

So, "kaviṁ purāṇam". "kaviṁ". "kaviṁ" means one who knows everything. So,
Krishna has already talked about this in seven point, hmm, hmm, hmm, 26. When He
has said that:

        vedāhaṁ samatītāni
        vartamānāni cārjuna

So, here, when Krishna is describing from the point of view of the yogi, He is
not saying, I am all this. He is saying, this is how the yogis meditate on the
Absolute Truth. Now, of course, a few verses little later, He will reveal, how
actually, what they are meditating on is Me only. But here, He is not revealing
that. So, "kaviṁ purāṇam anuśāsitāram". So, "purāṇam". "purāṇam" is. So, this
person is "kaviṁ". Krishna knows everything. From the yogi turns inwards. And
meditates. Krishna knows everything. Past. Present. And future. You know. You
know. He is all-knowing. So, actually, that makes us humble. That makes us safe,
also. You know. We cannot b..., m..., parade that I am a great which Lord
Krishna. Because Krishna knows all our faults. But Krishna is there to protect
us. So, that can make us safe, also. He. "purāṇam". He is the oldest person. You
know. When this, old, also, we see that, wisdom is associated with age. You
know. Somebody says, oh, this doctor has 30 years of experience. Oh, He is very
experienced doctor. Oh, "sarva", "kaviṁ purāṇam". So, he is wise. Because he is
experienced. Now, of course, in this world, it may happen that somebo..., a
doctor may have of 30 years of experience. We will be happy with that. But if
some doctor says, I have 90 years of experience. Then, how old are you? You must
be hundred and twenty. And too old, maybe, maybe, maybe, senile now. You know.
You will not be able to do things properly. So, what happens is, that person has
become too old. Then, things will not work out. But Krishna says, you know, they
may lose control over their faculties. Krishna says, I am "purāṇam". But still,
I am "anuśāsitāram". You know. Of course, He is not referring to Krishna over
here. That Absolute Truth is "anuśāsitāram". Still, very much in control. He is
the controller of everything. Everything is under His "śāsana". "anuśāsitāram".
"kaviṁ purāṇam anuśāsitāram". So, you know, He is the wisest. He is the oldest.
And He is the strongest. So, "anuśāsitāram". Actually, everything is under
control of Krishna. Now, sometimes, we say that, nothing mav..., moves, not a
blade of grass moves without the will of the Lord. We have to understand it is
not the will. It is the sanction. You know. It is not that Krishna wants bad
things to happen. It is not that Krishna wants terrorists to, you know, to blow
up, you know, buildings. And kill innocent people. They want to do it. And
Krishna allows them to do it. So, "anuśāsitāram". But ultimately, He is in
control. And paradoxically, normally speaking, if we think that somebody is in
control. Then, we will think that that person must be giant. You know.
Huge-bodied person to be able to control everything. But He is "aṇor aṇīyāṁsam".
"aṇor aṇīyāṁsam". He is smaller than the smallest. He is so small. So tiny.
"aṇor aṇīyāṁsam". Actually, Krishna is present in our heart. Now, we may wonder,
He is in the heart. So, what about those living beings which do not have a
heart. You know. We may say that, there are microbes. Their bodies are not so
well-divided that they can, they have a system for, you know, they have an organ
specifically which can be called like a heart. So, then, where is Krishna
situated? Actually, we have to understand that, you know, the heart is in one
sense talked about as the center of, you know, center of cognition and emotion.
And that is why, and that is why Krishna is present.

So, in an appropriate place, in that metabolical structure, Krishna only
present. The point of talking that Krishna is in the heart is the, that, Krishna
is a, the intimate partner. The constant companion. The unfailing friend of the
soul. And wherever that soul goes, Krishna goes with that soul. So, when the
soul is in a microscopic body, Krishna will be in an appropriate position. And
in an appropriate size over there. So, not only is Krishna present in the micro,
microbes' body as the Supersoul. He is also present as the Supersoul within, in
an atom.

        aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham-

So, in this way, Krishna is greater than the greatest. And He is smaller than
the smallest. 

        mahato mahīyān
        aṇor aṇīyān

How is that possible? Actually, Krishna is greater than the greatest as
Mahavishnu. The whole universe has come out of Him. So, He is greater than the
greatest. At the same time, He is smaller than the smallest. As a, the
"Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu". As the Paramatma, He is even present within the atoms.
So, "anusmared yaḥ". So, when one contemplates on that Absolute Truth. On such,
"anusmared". So, here, we see the contemplation, you know, is int..., is
interesting. It is not just on, you know, Krishna is playing with Yashoda Mayi.
And Yashoda Mayi is running after Krishna. Krishna is saying I did not steal
butter. Do not catch me. He is not medita... medit..., the yogis are not
focusing on Krishna's pastimes. That is what bhaktas will do. But even bhaktas
need to understand Krishna "tattvataḥ". As Krishna told in 4.9. So, therefore,
first, "tattvataḥ" understanding. It is important for devotees to contemplate on
these qualities. "anusmaret". So, it is not just "smaret". Not just ar...,
random, arbitrary kind of remembrance. "anusmaret". Understand the position of
Krishna properly. Then, "sarvasya dhātāram acintya-rūpam". You know. So,
"sarvasya dhātāram". So, "dhātā" is the maintainer. "sarvasya dhātā". Krishna is
the maintainer of everyone. How is He the maintainer of everyone? We may say
that I am maintaining myself. That is my job that is maintaining me. And maybe,
it is my bank balance that is maintaining me. I am maintaining my family. We say
like that. Yes. This is true at one level. But that is not the ultimate level.
You know. We, with our work and with our money, we cannot maintain either fa...,
family or ourselves if, you know, Krishna does not provide the background
arrangement. You know. If there is no rains. Then, what will the bank, what will
the currency notes do? Actually, the grains have to come by the arrangement of
Krishna through nature. And even after the grains come, it is, we have to be
able to digest the food. You know. We have the, we may have all the money in the
world. But if we lose our digestive faculty, then how will we be able to
maintain ourselves? We may have to begin with some intravenous food. Or
something like that. So, you know, you know, even the most wealthy people in the
world will eventually have to die. Therefore, actually, it is not our efforts
alone that maintain. It is Krishna who ultimately maintains. So, "sarvasya
dhātāram". And, you know, how can somebody, who can be smaller than the
smallest, He is the Supreme Controller? And He is the maintainer of everyone,
also? How is that possible? Actually, this is "acintya". So, His, His form, His
"acintya-rūpam". So, it is significant that even while talking about how the
yogi is meditating on the Supreme Lord. On the ultimate truth, the u..., the
ultimate point is used. "rūpam". "rūpam" is form. "acintya-rūpam". That
actually, it is the form that is talked about. This indicates that, you know,
the yogis, also, are med..., we should meditate on the Absolute Truth in a, as a
person. As one with form. "acintya-rūpam". You know. The Third Canto of Srimad
Bhagavatam, you know, you know, generally, sankhya and yoga are connected. You
know. In the six system of philosophy that are there. You know. They are groups.
There is Mimamsa. And Vedanta. There is Yo..., you know, you know, you know, you
know, there is, hmm, Nyaya. And Vaisheshika. And Sankhya. Yoga. So, Sankhya and
Yoga, their continuum is that, one analyses the material elements. One sees, ok,
these material elements are temporary. Then, after that, you know, one goes
beyond the ma..., matter to spirit. So, this is, this progression from Sankhya
to Yoga is talked about in Third Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam. Where Kapila Deva
describes how the yogi meditates on, after analysing the properties of material
nature, the yogi meditates on, you know, you know, bo..., that which lies beyond
material nature. And that is the Supreme Lord. And there are many beautiful
verses in the Third Canto. In that section of Kapila's teachings from to, 24th
to 31th chapters. Where, you know, he talks about the beautiful form of the 
Lord. And how the yogi meditates on each limb of the form of the Lord.

So, "acintya-rūpam". So, "anusmaret". How should one remember? One should
remember that this form of the Lord is "acintya". So, it is interesting again if
it is "acintya". How can we do "anusmared yaḥ"? We do "anusmared yaḥ" based on
scripture. We cannot understand the forms of the Lord completely. But we can
understand partially. That is what Prabhupada says in the purport over here.
That, "acint...", hmm. So, hmm:

"Acintya means that which is beyond this material world,"

Sorry.

"that which is beyond this material world, that which our argument, logic and
philosophical speculation cannot touch, that which is inconceivable."

So, Prabhupada makes the previous point that:

"He pervades this material world and yet is beyond it."

You know, He is within. And He is out, without, also.

"We cannot comprehend even this material world, which is insigniﬁcant compared
to the spiritual world – so how can we comprehend what is beyond?"

You know.

"Therefore intelligent persons, avoiding useless argument and speculation,
should accept what is stated in scriptures"

"and follow the principles they set down."

So, first, accept what scriptures say. And then, follow. And then:

"This will lead one to understanding."

So, when we talk about the inconceivable. You know. Confirmation comes by
conformation. Conformation means understanding. What is scripture saying? I, is
it actually true? That confirmation will come by conformation. Conformation
means, when we conform according to the, conform to the scriptural standards
that are given. The scriptures give us certain teachings. And then, they give us
certain practices. This is how we should act. This is we should live. When we do
that, then, gradually, by that, we will become purified. And thereby, we come to
the level where we understand. You know. Seriously. Deeply. And we realise for
ourselves. So, th..., the inconceivable just does, just because the Absolute
Truth is in..., inconceivable, does not mean that we should not try to
understand it. We have to understand that I cannot understand by my own efforts.
But then, you know, after that, we have to move forward. And then, we understand
based on scripture. We follow scripture. And by that, a higher spiritual
perception awakens. And through that spiritual perception, we understand the
ultimate reality. So, now, Kri..., after describing these various atti..., last,
let us look at this last point. "āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt". So, this
"āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt" is a line which comes several times within the
Upanishads, also. You know. So, "āditya-varṇaṁ". So, the con..., you know, it is
luminous li..., "āditya" is sun. Luminous like the sun. And "tamasaḥ parastāt".
It is beyond darkness. So, becau..., beyond material existence. "tamasaḥ"
refers, in general, to material existence.

        tamaso mā jyotir gamaya

is a famous Upanishadic verse. So, go beyond darkness to light. You know.
"āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt". Therefore, you know, go beyond matter to
spirit. That is the point which is being talked about over here. You know. Now,
you know, the, you know, yogi should meditate, a, kya..., and meditating on the
form. And meditating on the appre..., attributes. All this is "tamasaḥ
parastāt". This is not like meditation on, you know, the, you know, qualities of
a mundane person. People may think about a sport star. Or a movie star. This is
not like that. This, this person is "āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt". He is, he
is, you know, effulgent like the sun. And he is completely beyond the darkness
of material existence. You know. When the yogi meditates like this. What happens
eventually, let us describe in the next verse. How that process of yoga takes
one forward.

        prayāṇa-kāle manasācalena
        bhaktyā yukto yoga-balena caiva
        bhruvor madhye prāṇam āveśya samyak
        sa taṁ paraṁ puruṣam upaiti divyam

So, "prayāṇa-kāle". At the time of death. "manasācalena". "manasā". "acalena".
One keeps the mind "acalena". So, the mind is, mind is, Krishna has talked about
earlier. And Arjuna has also said that the mind is "cañcala". So:

        cañcalatvāt sthitiṁ sthirām

        cañcalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa

Arjuna has talked about this twice in 6.33 and 34. So, here, He says yes, by,
you know, you know, "prayāṇa-kāle manasācalena". Make the mind "ācalena". How is
that possible? "bhaktyā yukto yoga-balena caiva". "bhaktyā yukto yoga-balena
caiva". So, with bhakti. And by the "balena" of yoga. So, "yoga-balena caiva".
Actually, why the "yoga-balena" is required? Because one cannot make the mind
"acalena" easily. One has to actually practice. One has to systematically,
determinately practice. "yoga-balena". So, when we have lifelong practice by
"yoga-balena", then the mind will become "ācalena". The mind is going to be
"cañcalaṁ". It will go here. It will go there. It will go there. But then, we
have to ultimately make the, you know, m..., mind "ācalena". And how that will
happen? By "yoga-balena". So, you know, many times, people think of meditation
as a break from hard work. They think, oh, I did a lot of hard work now. I got
my job. I got my family. I got all these responsibilities. Complications.
Obligations. Agitations. And all I want from meditation is for relaxation. I
think, I just, you know, like, but then you come and, you come, maybe come to
a temple. And see devotees. Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare. Hey, are you relaxing? You seem
disturbed away. But where is the relaxation over here? And we may feel what is
happening? New people come in, has to see, it does not seem to be relaxing to
me. Actually, and even when we are practicing, we may feel that, hey, will this
chanting really give me relaxation? So, we have to understand that, bhakti will
give us relaxation. But that relaxation comes after purification and
pacification. Now, pacification means the mind becomes peaceful. How the mind
becomes peaceful? When it becomes purified. When it becomes, see, what ma...,
agitates the mind is lust, anger, greed, envy, pride and illusion. So, when
these go away, then the mind will become peaceful. It will become, you know,
steady. So, "ācalena". So, the mind becomes "cañcalaṁ". Because of kama, krodha,
lobha. All these things. And, you know, by the practice of chanting Hare
Krishna, what we are doing is, we are making the mind purified. Then, it will
become peaceful. We cannot expect peacefulness. You know. We cannot expect the
mind to become purifie..., you know, pacified without becoming purified. That
sort of pacification will not last for long. So, for steady pacification, we
need to apply ourselves to purification. So, we should not approach our chanting
with the attitude that this is a break from medit..., whe..., break from hard
work. Actually, controlling the mind and purifying the mind is hard work. So,
you know, the more we expect meditation to be a break from hard work. The more
meditation will become hard work. Why? Because w..., our expectation will be
frustrated. We will think, you know, I want to do meditation to relax. But then,
I am not able to relax. I will, I, with the relax attitude, I go, then I do not
endeavor to fix the mind on Krishna. And when I do not endeavor to fix the mind
on Krishna. Then, I do not anything, experience anything sublime. You know. My
meditation, you know, does not lead to any spiritual experience. I cannot
contact Krishna. When I cannot contact Krishna, then what happens? I cannot
really re..., you know, relish Krishna Consciousness. So, meditation, actually,
rejuvenates us. It rebuilds us internally. It strengthens us spiritually. It
cleanses us emotionally. But all that happens when we, you know, you know,
experience Krishna. But when when we are not concentrating the mind, we cannot
experience Krishna. And when we cannot experience Krishna, then meditation
starts feeling like a boredom. It starts feeling like a burden. Why am I
chanting? Nothing is happening, is, I am uttering the song. So, then, we have to
do it as a core. It becomes a difficul demanding core. It becomes even more hard
work. So, the more we expect meditation to be a break from hard work, the more
meditation becomes hard work. Instead, if we accep..., approach meditation as a
rewarding challenge. Not as a break. Mere break. But we approach it as a
rewarding challenges. It is a challenge. It is going to involve hard work. But
the result is going to be, you know, be wonderful. My mind will become pure. My
mind will become truly, you know, deeply peaceful. That is what I want. So, let
me apply myself. So, "yoga-balena caiva". Prabhupada writes in the purport that
one will not be able to fix the mind on Krishna just by chance. We have to
practice. "yoga-balena".

Now, different yogis can use different, you know, methods of yoga for
controlling the mind. But there has to be the practice of some kind of yoga. And
in a few verses later, Krishna will that, bhakti yoga is the best. So, here, He
is saying, "yoga-balena". By the practice of yoga. And then, "bhaktyā yukto".
So, Krishna is, you know, telling. You know. Krishna is here talking about the,
you know, ashtanga yogi who is trying to attain perfection. Who is trying to
cultivate remembrance of Krishna. So, we have to see the connection. See, you
know, Krishna told in 8.7.

        tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu
        mām anusmara yudhya ca

So, always remember Me. And do your prescribed duty. Now, how can one always
remember Krishna? Krishna is giving two pathways. One is the pathway of ashtanga
yoga. Of yoga-mishra bhakti. And the other is the path of suddha-bhakti. Kevala
bhakti. You know. So, here, He is telling that even the ashtanga yogi, when the
yogi has done practice of yoga. Eventually, one has to use "bhaktyā yukto". Yes,
I have to fix the mind. There is that Absolute Truth. That Absolute Truth's
mercy only. As we discussed earlier, hmm, one of the limbs of ashtanga yoga, in
the yamas, niyamas, you know, sublimbs, is "ishvara pranidhana". "ishvara
pranidhana" is surrender to the Ishvara. That, so, "bhaktyā yukto". So, one
needs bhakti is it talked about. And then, "bhruvor madhye prāṇam āveśya
samyak". So, "samyak". One gets the "prāṇam" situated in the "bhruvor".
"bhruvor" or "madhye". "bhruvor" or "madhye" means, you know, in the eyebrows.
In the space between the eyebrows. "bhruvor madhye prāṇam āveśya samyak". So,
one gets the "prāṇam" to rise. And one gets the "prāṇam" within the brow. And
then, such a person, again, Krishna is referring to Himself in the third person.
This yogi. "sa taṁ paraṁ puruṣam upaiti divyam". That person will attain the
"divyam", "paraṁ puruṣam". So, Krishna is using the same words. "paraṁ puruṣam",
"divyam" was used earlier. And Krishna is using practically same words over
here. "paraṁ puruṣam", "divyam", "upaiti". Such a person will attain that
Supreme Person. You know. You know. The yogi will attain, you know, the ultimate
destination. The ult..., supreme person. So, now, what is this point of "prāṇam
āveśya", "bhruvor madhye"? That get the "prāṇam" to be situated in the
"bhruvoḥ". In-between the eyebrows. So, here, you know, we will discuss a little
bit about the technicalities of ashtanga yoga. We will not go too much into that
direction. Because it is a whole universe of understanding in itself. So, you
know, you know, hmm, let us look at this here. Hmm. Hmm. So, there are various
chakras in the body. So, you know, this seem, this will seem to be a complicated
picture. Focus on one point at this point. You will see here these places where
you see lotus-like flowers. As they move upwards. Upwards. So, actually, these,
what do they represent? They represent the location of the chakra. So, here,
when the chakra, now, what is the chakra exactly? Actually, the "prāṇa-vāyu".
The "prāṇa-vāyu" is situated, you know, at a particular place. And the whole
pur..., you know, in the body. Now, the "prāṇa-vāyu", it has a cen..., it has a
particular center. So, the, as we discussed, there are these five, you know, you
know, you know, there is "apāna". "vyā...". "prāṇa", "apāna", "vyāna", "samāna",
"udāna". That the five different airs. You know. They are, they do different
functions within the body. And, you know, their center is at a particular point
of the body. So, that is called the location of the "prāṇa". So, that location
of the "prāṇa", you know, you know, can be lo..., elevated. So, the "prāṇa" may
be at the lower part of the body. So, in the way of analysing the path of yoga,
the lower the location of the "prāṇa", the, it is considered, lower is the
consciousness. The lesser is the spiritual evolution of the yogi. And as the
"prāṇa" move upwards. Upwards. Upwards. By the process of, you know, yo...,
practice of ashtanga yoga, then the yogi is considered to become elevated.

So, in the Upanishads, also, it is said that, actually, when the "prāṇa" is in
the lower parts of the body, then the soul, when the soul, when the person dies,
the soul wants to exit. So, whichever is the hole that is the closer, the soul
will go out of that. So, if the soul goes out of on other lower holes, then it
is said that the soul will go to a, it indicates that the soul is going to a
lower destination. That means one of the lower species. Or lower planets. And
the soul comes out of the higher holes, you know, the sou..., if the "prāṇa" is
upwards. Then, that provides a facility for the soul to come out of on other
upper, higher holes. And, you know, you know, the exact relation between soul
and "prāṇa" location is subtle here. We will not go into the technicalities of
that. Actually, you know, the essential point is that, the soul and the subtle
body are very attached to each other. And the "prāṇa" is intimately connected
with the subtle body. We discussed this earlier, how, you know, our emotions get
affected by our breathing. You know. So, if we brea..., breath, we are angry, we
will start breathing faster. If we start, you know, deliberately breathing
slowly, our emotions some extent become calmer. Now, this is just a simple
indication. You know. But, you know, a, so, there i..., there are this, the
soul is connected to subtle body. You know. So, if we, this is the gross body.
This is the soul. The subtle body is the link between the soul and the gross
body. Now, the link between the subtle body and the gross body is formed of many
things. One of them is the "prāṇa". So, when the, now, this, when the person
dies, at that time, the gross body falls. And then, the subtle body, along with
the soul, goes to the next body. Now, in Vedanta-sutra, you know, it is
described that the "prāṇa" also goes. The Upanishads describe this. And
Vedanta-sutra confirms this. "prāṇa" also goes with the subtle body to the next
body. So, when this happens, so, at that time, the location of the "prāṇa" is
important. Now, Krishna will tell at the end of the Bhagavad Gita. As devotees,
we should not start ser..., wondering. Where is my "prāṇa"? You know. Is it
upwards or downwards? Krishna says:

        naite sṛtī pārtha jānan
        yogī muhyati kaścana

He will say at the end of this chapter that one who is practicing, you know, you
know, you know, bhakti yoga did not, does not have to bother about these things.
But we are now talking about a part of ashta..., ashtanga yoga. You know. So,
you know, the chakra refers to, so, these are the locations within the body.
These, these are called like the centers of power. Centers of energy. Energy
fields. Chakra. So, these are different chakras which are there in the body. And
the "prāṇa" is located in one of the chakras. So, the whole process of ashtanga
yoga, it is also called as kundalini yoga, the purpose of that pro..., you know,
process is to lift up the "prāṇa". So that the soul moves from one of the lower
chakras towards the upper chak..., upper chakras. So, here, we will see that
there is the Muladhara Chakra. Then, above that, that the Svadisthana Chakra.
Then, after that, there is the Manipura Chakra here. Then, here, you will see
the Anahata Chakra. Then, there is the Vishudha Chakra. Then, there is the Ajna
Chakra. You will see these bands also over here in green, blue, you know,
different colors like that. Then, there is the Sahasrara Chakra. So, actually,
the idea is the "prāṇa" should be moved upwards like this. Upward. Upward.
Upward. Ultimately, to the, you know, head. So, Krishna is telling over here in
this verse, the ashtanga yogi who is elevated, what should do? "bhruvor madhye
prāṇam āveśya samyak". So, "bhruvor madhye". In-between the eyebrows, that means
in the Ajna Chakra. So, when one attains, the, when one gets the "prāṇa", the
Ajna Chakra. Then, the, one becomes very situated for getting perfection. So, in
fact, the most serious yogis, most advanced yogis, they do not wait for the soul
to leave the body through one of the holes. And t..., and try, then t..., try to
get ri..., out of one of the upper holes. Actually, what they do is, by the
power of the their yoga, they can put the hole at the, you know, soul. You know,
they can put the "prāṇa". Not the soul. The "prāṇa". At the top of the head. And
then, when they want to leave the body by the power of yoga, then the sou...,
when the soul emerges. Tuck. Actually, the skull breaks apart. Not many yogis
can do that now. The skull breaks apart. And soul, when it goes out, like that.
You know. Tuck. The soul goes directly to the upper destination. That is. The
soul attains liberation. That is the understanding in the path of yoga. So,
Krishna is telling that the yoga, by "yoga-balena", by "bhaktyā yukto". What
should be done? The "prāṇa" should be gradually brought upward. And should be
put on the, you know, A..., Ajna Chakra. That is in-between the "bhruvor
madhye". When that is done, then one will attain a, attain a corresponding
destination. What will be the corresponding destination? You know. That, the,
one will attain, you know, "paraṁ puruṣam", "divyam". So, after one also does
remembrance of Krishna. Bha..., so, bhak..., one has bhakti. And one makes the
mind "ācalena". So, now, here, let us look at the remaining part of the figure
over here. You know. Here, we will see two names over here. There is, Muladhara
Chakra is there. And also, Bhumandala is mentioned. So, Svadhisthana. Bhuvarloka
and Antariksa are mentioned. So, what is this referring to actually? This refers
to that if the "prāṇa" is at this particular level, then the person will attain
this particular destination.

So, one who has the "prāṇa" at the over here, that person will attain Tapoloka.
One who goes out from here, that person will, Sahasrara, Satyaloka. The loka is
the abode of Brahma. So, actually, now, it is not necessary that this will be
destination. Because the yogis, "prāṇa" may not stay at this level. It may be at
this level. But from here, it may be moving upwards, also. So, if, you know, so,
basically, there is a correspondence between our inner level of consciousness.
And the outer level in the cosmic hierarchy. These are correspondence between
the two. And that correspondence is what is pointed about over here. So, Krishna
is telling over here what we should do. What the yogi should do. "prāṇam,
"mad...", "āveśya samyak". So, fix the mind on, m..., fix the, you know, get the
"prāṇa" in the center of the, you know, eyebrows. Then, Krishna says, now, I
will explain this process to you.

        yad akṣaraṁ veda-vido vadanti
        viśanti yad yatayo vīta-rāgāḥ
        yad icchanto brahma-caryaṁ caranti
        tat te padaṁ saṅgraheṇa pravakṣye

So, "saṅgraheṇa pravakṣye". In brief, I will explain. Krishna is telling.
"saṅ...", hmm, "saṅgraheṇa" is in brief. Or in summary. "pravakṣye", I will
explain. So, what will He explain? That "yad akṣaraṁ veda-vido vadanti".
"akṣaraṁ" refers to Brahma. So, one utters the Brahma, the, so, "akṣaraṁ" refers
to, not Brahma. It refers, here, to "oma". The "akṣar...". "akṣar...". The
letter "om". So, one chants "om". And then, "veda-vido vadanti". So, "vadanti".
That person chants "akṣaraṁ". One chants the "om". And then, "veda-vido". Such a
person actually knowing the Vedas is not ignorant. And then, "viśanti". That
person enters into. Where does that person enter? You know. "tat te padaṁ". One
will attain that ultimate destination. "viśanti yad yatayo vīta-rāgāḥ".
"yatayo". The great sages. "vīta-rāgāḥ". They are freed from attachment. And to,
"viśanti", to attain that destination, what they do? "yad icchanto". Desiring
it. "brahma-caryaṁ caranti". One practices "brahma-caryaṁ". You know. So, in
this way, what Krishna is telling over here is that one should practice
"brahma-caryaṁ". And one should chant the, you know, syllable "om". One should
know the Vedas. One should be renounced, free from attachment. When one doe...,
when one has these preliminary qualifications, then one can practice the process
of yoga and attain perfection. And that process, I will explain briefly.
Krishna will explain that in the next two verses briefly. But we will see that
the demands of the process of yoga are quite a bit. You know. We have to be free
from detachment. Practice "brahma-caryaṁ". We know the Vedas. Be renounc..., be
renounced. And then, you know, chant the "om" mantra. So, Krishna has told in
the previous verse that if one can do it at "prayāṇa-kāle", then will attain the
"paraṁ puruṣam". So, how can one b..., be able to do it at "prayāṇa-kāle"? By
"yoga-balena". So, what is, how does that "yoga-balena" come? By the s...,
strength of yogic practice come? That is described in this and the next verses
now. Now, Prabhupada says that, it is best for us to chant Hare Krishna. That is
taught by recommended process for this Yuga. We, let us look at the recommended
process here. So, now, Krishna will talk about w..., where He says
"saṅmarheṇ...", you know, saṅgraheṇa pravakṣye". Briefly, I will explain. So,
He explains it over here.

        sarva-dvārāṇi saṁyamya
        mano hṛdi nirudhya ca
        mūrdhny ādhāyātmanaḥ prāṇam
        āsthito yoga-dhāraṇām

So, "sarva-dvārāṇi saṁyamya". So, "dvārā", here, refers to the senses. The
senses are like the doors. Of, for the soul to, its con..., for its
consciousness to go out. And for the external objects to come in and affect the
consciousness. So, "sarva-dvārāṇi saṁyamya". One brings the "dvārā"s under
control. "saṁyamya". And after one does that, "mano hṛdi nirudhya ca". One gets
the mind to fix on the heart. Now, we have discussed earlier. What is the
difference between the mind and the heart? You know. The heart does not refer to
the biological organ that pumps blood. Heart refers to the seat of emotion. And
the seat of emotion is the soul. So, fix the mind on the heart means,
concentrate on atma-tattva. That fix the mind, you know, our mind is here, the,
considered to be the object that directs our thoughts. So, wherever our mind is,
that is where our thoughts are. So, fix the mind on the heart. That means fix
the mind on that which is our innermost reality. That is the atma. "mūrdhny
ādhāyātmanaḥ prāṇam". So, and then, we get the "prāṇam". "ādhāyātmanaḥ".
Movement is in the air. In the head. Then, what will happen? "āsthito". One is
situated like this. "yoga-dhāraṇām". One will attain yo..., this is yogic
situation. So, Krishna is talking here about the practice of yoga. And He is
saying that. He is talking first about the stage of pratyahara. "sarva-dvārāṇi
saṁyamya". We remember? Among the ten, eight stages. The Yama. Niyama. Asana.
Pranayama. The fifth is Pratyahara. So, "sarva-dvārāṇi saṁyamya" refers to
Pratyahara. And then, after that, there is Dhya..., you know, Dharana. Dhyana.
Samadhi. There is a s..., pro..., progressive stages as we move forward. So,
Krishna is talking about "dhāraṇām". "yoga-dhāraṇām". So, one will prepare for
that ultimate attainment of samadhi by doing pratyahara. And then, turning
inwards. So, first, shut out the senses. You know. The, Krishna is talking about
the external physical world. "sarva-dvārāṇi saṁyamya". And then, inwards, He
talks about. "mano hṛdi nirudhya ca". Fix the mind on the "dhya". On the
atma-tattva. And then, raise the "prāṇam". You know. You know. "prāṇam" to the
"ādhāyātma". To the "mūrdhny". That means the head area. And "y...", "āsthito
yoga-dhāraṇām". One becomes situated in yoga in this way. Then, after that, what
happens? Krishna tells in the ne..., next verse. So:

        oṁ ity ekākṣaraṁ brahma
        vyāharan mām anusmaran
        yaḥ prayāti tyajan dehaṁ
        sa yāti paramāṁ gatim

So, "oṁ ity ekākṣaraṁ brahma". So, "oṁ" is considered to be "ekākṣaraṁ". The one
syllable. That i..., one chants that. You know. One, and then, "vyāharan".
"vyāharan" means vibrating that. And then, along with that, Krishna says, "mām
anusmaran". So, what has to be done? You know. Krishna has earlier talked about
"bhaktyā yukto". Bhakti is to be there. So, bhakti is for whom? That is for the
Supreme Lord. So, one can chant the name "oṁ". "ma...", chant the sound "oma".
But along with that, one has to remember the, you know, personal Absolute. This
is very clearly indicating how the process of bhakti has to be there along with
the process of yoga. Along the process of yoga. And bhakti essentially means
fixing the mind on Bhagavan. So, "mām anusmaran". So, Krishna has talked about,
a, remembering Him in the, you know, you know, fifth verse. When He talked about
"anta-kāle ca mām eva". So, that was the goal. To fix the mind on Him. And what
is the way? Ok. One can practice this whole process of yoga. Do "yoga-dhāraṇām".
Come to "yoga-dhāraṇām". "mūrdhny ādhāyātmanaḥ prāṇam". Get the "prāṇam" over
here. Do all this. But ultimately, at the end, what one has to do "mām
anusmaran", One can utter "oṁ". One can practice "brahma-caryaṁ". All these are
fine. But "mām anusmaran". One has to fix the mind. Or one has to remember
Krishna. And then, "yaḥ prayāti tyajan dehaṁ". So, when one leaves the body in
this way. "sa yāti paramāṁ gatim". That person will attain the supreme
destination. "paramāṁ gatim". The ultimate destination. What is that ultimate
destination? That, actually, Krishna has mentioned earlier. "paraṁ puruṣam".
"divyam". One will attain the Supreme Person. So, that is, of course, the
ultimate goal. So, here, the point is, what will the yoga-mishra bhakta attain?
The person will attain whatever will depend on, as we discussed, what is the
conception. If the bhakti is the pri..., you know, if the bhakti is a
predominant attai..., element, one will attain Vaikuntha. If bhakti is not a
predominant element, then one, pra..., you know, that person may attain
brahmajyoti. But either way, for attaining success, one needs to have, you know,
contemplation on the Lord. That is "mām anusmaran". One should remember the
Lord. Only then, one will be able to attain this destination. So, now, Krishna
has talked ab..., one way. How one can attain, one can remember Him at the time
of death through the process of yoga mishra bhakti. Now, after this, Krishna
from 8.14, 8.15, you know, 16, Krishna will talk briefly about how one can come
to think about Him in an alternative way through the process of devotional
service. That we will discuss in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
