Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yLgYnBm_LA0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&redir_token=ag-Yq92XG7VqXEjiGk09_5dqRex8MTU0ODQ4ODQyMUAxNTQ4NDAyMDIx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_088_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_07_Text_02_to_07_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=yLgYnBm_LA0

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are in the bhakti section of the Bhagavad Gita. Chapter 7 to 12. Bhagavad Gita
can be divided into three sections. Karma. Bhakti. And Jnana. So, actually, you
know, the full Bhagavad Gita talks about bhakti. But the first six chapters talk
about how, from karma, one can gradually rise to the level of bhakti. And the
last six chapters talk about how, from jnana, one can co..., rise to the level
of bhakti. The middle six chapters focus on bhakti, entirely. You know. So, now,
the Seventh Chapter is "Knowledge of the Absolute". We discussed 7.1 which talks
about how one can by hearing, eventually, come to the level of "mayy
āsakta-manāḥ". So, the first, you know, section, from verses f..., 1 to
Krish..., you know, 12, talks about knowing Krishna fully as the source of the
material and spiritual energies. A source of everything, ultimately. So, you
know, knowing Krishna's glory. And in that, the first section, verses 1 to 3
talk about the glory of kn..., knowing about Krishna. You know. Glory of
knowledge of Krishna. So, let us look at this once again. So, it is the
subsection that we are going through. So, know Krishna in full. That is the
first section. Verses 1 to 12. Within that, the subsection that we are going
through is glory of knowledge about Krishna. That is 1 to 3. And then, we will
have 4 to 7 talking about how Krishna is the source of everything. Material and
spiritual. So, let us look at the verses.

        jñānaṁ te ’haṁ sa-vijñānam
        idaṁ vakṣyāmy aśeṣataḥ
        yaj jñātvā neha bhūyo ’nyaj
        jñātavyam avaśiṣyate

So, "jñānaṁ te ’haṁ sa-vijñānam". So, knowledge and realisation. Both together.
"sa-vijñānam". So, "jñānam" and "vijñānam" are referred to in various places in
the Bhagavad Gita. This combination together. In the Sixth Chapter, we saw
"jñānam", "vijñānam" coming together once in:

        jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā

That was 6.8. And before that, "jñānam" and "vijñānam", this combination has
been together once again in the section where Krishna talks, h..., you know, you
know, how lust is the destroyer of knowledge and realisation. So, that is in
3.41.

        tasmāt tvam indriyāṇy ādau
        niyamya bharatarṣabha
        pāpmānaṁ prajahi hy enaṁ
        jñāna-vijñāna-nāśanam

So, "jñāna" and "vijñāna". This combination comes repeatedly. And this will come
once again in the Ninth Chapter, also. You know, ni..., in 9.1:

        idaṁ tu te guhya-tamaṁ
        pravakṣyāmy anasūyave
        jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ
        yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt

So, "jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ". So, Krishna will talk about this in multiple
places. And not everywhere the meanings are the same. Although, there are
simi..., there is similarity in the sense of the usage. So, generally, "jñāna"
refers to theoretical. And "vijñāna" refers to realisational or
transformational, hmm, knowledge. Hmm. You know. Here, Prabhupada uses, is, is
th..., i..., the, the slightly different sense. Here, Prabhupada says, "jñānam"
refers to phenomenal knowledge. And "vijñānam" refers to "numinous knowledge".
Now, what is phenomena and numina? These are actually very philosophical terms.
To understand these terms, we have to recognise that philosophy in itself is the
search for a deeper reality that is beyond the normal. What is normal
perceptua..., perceptual? What is? You know. We perceive it. So, phenomena
refers to things as they appear to us. And numina refers to things as they
actually are independent of our sense perception. Now, what is the difference
between the two? See, one of the fundamental insights, while studying spiritual
knowledge is that, actually, not just spiritual knowledge. Studying any s..., 
knowledge in a, studying the world through any methodology in a serious way. One
of the points which comes up is that things are deeper than what they appear to
be. You know. Reality is not as it appears to our eyes. So, even in, you know,
western history, in the his..., western intellectual history, as well, of
course, in Vedic history, the idea has always been that, you know, the way
things appear. And the way, the things actually are, there is a difference. So,
now, the question comes up. We access the world through our senses. So, you
know, if we put aside our sense perception. Then, how can we know things h...,
as they actually are? So, ev..., actually, this is a debate even within western
philosophy. You know. You know. Western philosophy. There is empiricism and
rationalism. So, empiricism refers to, empiricism refers to direct perception.
Empirical knowledge we say. That is an analogy which is acquired through direct
sense perception. And rationalism refers to that which is acquired through
reasoning. So, empiricism and rationalism. These are the two branches of, you
know, western intellectual thought which have come out. And among the two, you
know, both have also had conflicts. Now, in one sense, empiricism is pratyaksha.
And rationalism is anumana. So, now, science originally started with empiric,
from empirical to rational. That means, empirical, Newton observed a fruit.
Now, most people who observed the fruit. What would they do? They just pick
the, about the fruit. Eat and forget about the whole thing. Good the fruit fell
down and I was there. But a thinker, like Newton, he thought, ok, why did this
fruit fall down? And then, after that, one moves to rational. And one tries to,
rationality means we try to s..., you know, s..., cons..., come up with a
logical framework of, you know, conceptua..., conceptual understanding which
helps us make sense of the world around us. So, "jñānaṁ te ’haṁ sa-vijñānam".
So, actually, "jñānaṁ" means things as they are. And "vijñānam", the way
Prabhupada talks about "numina" as things they actually are. Now, that would
roughly correlate, roughly, not accurately, roughly correlate with the western
idea, rationalistic idea that actually, beyond how things appear, there is a
framework. Which we need to understand.

So, the different acharyas give different meanings of "jñānaṁ" and "vijñānam".
M..., some, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura, for example, acharyas like him, they
say that "jñānaṁ" refers to the aishvarya. And "vijñānam" refers to the
madhurya. The greatness of God. And the sweetness of God. So, the different
acharyas can give different explanations of this. Like this. But the, anyway,
the important point is not that, you know, you know, what the specific terms
refer to. The important point is that Krishna is telling that there are two
aspects to this knowledge. And both, I will give you. "idaṁ vakṣyāmy aśeṣataḥ".
"aśeṣataḥ". That means I will hold nothing back from you. "yaj jñātvā neha bhūyo
’nyaj". Having acquired this knowledge. "jñātavyam avaśiṣyate". Nothing will
remain to be known. This is quite a gold claim. You know, having acquired this
knowledge, there is nothing more for you to know. How could ma..., anyone make
such a claim? There is nothing more for anyone to know. Actually, that claim is
based on the understanding that ultimately, everything is spiritual reality. And
when it comes from Krishna, it is spiritual. When we know the essential
principles. We know everything in the sense of knowing the principles. The
details are endless. And the details can never be known. We can contrast this
statement in the Bhagavad Gita, you know, there, there is nothing more to be
known with Krishna Himself telling in the Tenth Chapter that actually, you know:

        prādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha
        nāsty anto vistarasya me

In the Tenth Chapter when describing His "vibhūti"s, Krishna will say that I
will only tell you a, you know, a sample of my glories. My opulences. Because my
glories are endless. And Krishna, Arjuna will also say that, I cannot know, I,
actually, I cannot know your full glories. He says, even, actually, what to
speak of me? Even the devatas. Or the assoc..., a, nobody can:

        na hi te bhagavan vyaktiṁ
        vidur devā na dānavāḥ

Nobody can know you. So, when, you know, when both Krishna, Arjuna has said that
Krishna's glories are unknow..., are entirely unknowa..., are not completely
knowable by anyone. Then, what to sp..., Krishna mean, when He says that you
will know everything. You will know everything. You know. There is nothing left.
That this is talking about principles. Not about details. So, generally, the
Upanishads talk about tattva-traya. Tattva-traya is the three Absolute Truths.
What are the three Absolute Truths? Not three Absolute Truths. Three fundamental
truths of reality. There is jiva. Jagat. And Jagadish. Tattva-Traya, it is
called. So, jiva is the, so, it is consciousness, material nature, and the
ultimate causative principle. You know. So, jiva. Jagat. And Jagadish. It, jiva
is consciousness. Jagat is material nature. Nature. Or matter. As might be used,
as might be the word used in modern philosophical parlance. And then, there is
Jagadish. There is the Absolute Truth. So, m..., that may be called as ultimate
causative principle. Or some other similar word which will be non-specific about
what the nature of that Absolute Tr.., Truth is. So, Krishna is telling over
here, as far as the these principles are concerned, you will understand those
principles completely. And then, there will be nothing more for you to know in
terms of principles. Although, of course, in terms of details, the amount of
knowledge is that one can get is ultimately endless. So, "jñātavyam avaśiṣyate".
There is nothing more to be known. So, now, let us move forward. When we,
Krishna talks one more point about this. "jñātavyam avaśiṣyate". There is
nothing more. Then, you know, you know, we also say that the Bhagavad Gita is
like the graduated level of knowledge. And the Bhagavatam is the postgraduate.
And the Chaitanya Charitamrita is the doctoral level of knowledge. So, again,
the question comes up. What does it mean? You know. If Krishna is telling over
here that there is nothing more to be known. Then, how can we say that
Bhagavatam is a higher knowledge? And Bhag..., you know, and Chaitanya
Charitamrita is still higher knowledge? Actually, there is a progression. To
understand the progression, let us look at the, hmm, hmm, let us look at a few
things here. So, Gita talks about the progression in the Bhagavad Gita,
Bhagavatam, Chaitanya Charitamrita. Which that. The Gita talks about God's
identity. The Bhagavatam talks about God's, you know, activity. And Chaitanya
Charitamrita talks about God's mentality. That means the Bhagavad Gita helps us
understand who is God. So, who is God? You know. Is the Absolute Truth a person
or impersonal? If the Absolute Truth is a person, who is that person? So, Gita
helps us understand who is God. Then, now, in the Bhagavad Gita, you know,
Krishna's pastimes are talked about briefly. 

        janma karma ca me divyam

The glory of those pastimes are talked about. But His specific pastimes are not
explained in detail. So, His activities are described in the Bhagavatam. God's
activity comes in the Bhagavatam. And beyond that is God's heart. God's mind.
You know. What does God think? What does God desire? What does God like or does
not like? So, that is described in the whittling Chaitanya Charitamrita. So,
Krishna feels that He has, He is bereaved that the devotees have missed out.
That the devotees are, you know, that His gopis are relishing a greater nectar
than what He is getting. And therefore, He feels that I have to taste the love
of the gopis. Especially of Radharani. And therefore, Krishna, taking on the
mood of Radharani comes as Caitanya Mahaprabhu. So, this sort of esoteric
seeker, esoteric, you know, insights about the heart of the Lord are described
in the Chaitanya Charitamrita. So, when we tell, say, that there is nothing more
to be known. That essentially, it again talks in terms of principles. But the
details about Krishna are infinite. The, in terms of principles. You know, the
personal, the, the f..., truth that the Absolute Truth is a person. The truth
that Absolute Truth can be attained by bhakti. You know. Truth that, you know,
actually, the Absolute Truth is bhakta-vatsala, bhakta-vatsala. So, there is,
there are fundamental principle truths that are, you know, outlined in the
Bhagavad Gita. But as far as the details are concerned, the details are endless.
And the, it is not that the details are unimportant. Details also illumine
Krishna's glories. And they make remembrance of Krishna more relishable. But the
details come later. What comes initially is the, what comes initially is the
incre..., incremental principles. That means the fundamental principles that
increment our understanding about Krishna gradually. So:

        yaj jñātvā neha bhūyo ’nyaj
        jñātavyam avaśiṣyate

There is nothing more to be known. Now, the acharyas described, we, we, if we
consider "jñānaṁ" and "vijñānam" to be aishvarya and madhurya. Then, Chapter
Seven and Eight give us aishvarya jnana. And Chapter Nine gives us madhurya
jnana. Madhurya Jnana. And both together, Chapters Ten to Twelwe, you know,
gives us that. So:

        jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ

Both of them together are present in Chapters Ten and Twelwe. So, we will see
how this happens. How Krishna's sweetness, now, madhurya jnana does not
necessarily, here, we have to understand, then the words again can mean
differently. Madhurya jnana do..., is not necessarily the same as madhurya-rasa
jnana. "madhurya-rasa" is a specific, a conjugal rasa. There are five rasas. And
among them, madhurya is one of the rasas. So, madhurya jnana is not the same as
madhurya-rasa jnana. madhurya-rasa jnana specifically refers to the, you know,
a, not, the, you know, the knowledge of Krishna's conjugal pastimes. Madhurya
jnana in general refer to Krishna's sweetness. As contrasted with His greatness.
So, yes, for i..., you know, madhurya jnana, even Krishna being tied up by
mother Yashoda. That is also madhurya jnana. You know. So, Krishna giving up
His greatness. So that He will be, K..., He fights with His gopas. And He is
defeated by them. That is also madhurya jnana. It is not "madhurya-rasa". But it
is madhurya jnana. So, the Bhagavad Gita may not talk directly much about
"madhurya-rasa". But in the Ninth Chapter, His bhakta-vatsalya, His, you know,
hunger for love. And how devotion is His appetiser. All these things are talked
about. And how He always protects His devotees. So, in that sense, madhurya
jnana is given. And in Tenth, Eleventh, Twelth, both come up. The aishvarya as
well as the madhurya aspect come up. Now, hmm, so, how is the Gita complete? We
discussed this little bit. Complete principles are given. Complete details can
never be given even about to any specific subject. What to speak of the Absolute
Truth? So, tattva-traya is jagad, jiva and jagadisha. Matter. Spirit. And
controller. These three. 'M'. 'S'. 'C'. Matter. Spirit. And controller. These
three are tattva-traya. And the basic outline about, you know, what they are.
And how they interact. That is talked about in this chapter. So, in that sense,
this chapter gives complete knowledge to us. Now, hmm, Prabhupada explains this.
Right at the start of his purport:

"Complete knowledge includes knowledge of the phenomenal world, the spirit
behind it, and the source of both of them. This is transcendental knowledge."

This is transcendental knowledge. What this means is, now, it is interesting,
how can, you know, tr..., we would think that transcendental knowledge would
mean knowledge about the transcendental world. But if, th..., the knowledge is
about the material world, about the phenomenal world, then how can that be
called transcendental knowledge? You know. So, transcendental knowledge does not
necessarily mean only knowledge about the transcendental world. You know. It
also means knowledge that directs our consciousness towards transcendence. So,
the knowledge that is there, if the, if we can see this world and its connection
with the transcendental Absolute Truth. Then, even that knowledge will be called
as transcendental knowledge. Because this, that knowledge is, is, is directing
us towards transcendence. So, you know, or any knowledge which helps us remember
Krishna. And helps us direct our consciousness towards Krishna. You know.
Hel..., helps us, you know, to s..., reveals to us the connection of everything
with Krishna. Helps us to see things in a transcendental light. And in that
sense, it is transcendental knowledge. And Prabhupada also explains in what
sense, you know, we know everything. It is not that we have to know all the
details. Prabhupada quotes the Bha..., you know, the Up..., Ved..., Mudan...,
"Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad". There, it said, in 1.3:

        kasminn u bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavatīti

That means, once when one knows that Absolute Truth. Then, everything else
becomes known. So, this is 7.2. We know Hi..., the Absolute Truth completely. 
So, now, 7.3:

        manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu
        kaścid yatati siddhaye
        yatatām api siddhānāṁ
        kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

So, "manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu". "sahasra" is hundred. Sa..., sorry. "sata" is
hundred. "sahasra" is thousand. So, somebody may say, "sahasra sat pranam".
Hundred pranam. We may say, hun..., hundreds and thousands of obeisances at your
lotus feet. Now, actually, we may say, if "sahasra sat koti dandavat pranam".
But we, we often, when the, meet a person, we are being lazy to offer even one
pranam. So, there is no need to have exaggeration like that to try to, you know,
express our reg..., re..., respects. Even Prabhu..., Pra..., please accept
my humble obeisances. Dandavat Pranam. That is good enough. There is no need for
"sahasra sat koti dandavat pranam" at your holy lotus feet. Sometimes, we use
words in such a way that, you know, if we have that kind of reverence, that is
different. But sometimes, you know, the import of words gets lost when we use it
without a, a, without the appropriate feeling behind those due words. So, here,
Krishna is saying that "sahasreṣu". That among thusands of people:

        manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu
        kaścid yatati siddhaye

Very few endeavor for perfection. "siddhaye". "yatati siddhaye". "siddhaye" is
perfection. "yatati" is endeavor. Very few endeavor for perfection. And then:

        yatatām api siddhānāṁ

Among those who endeavor for perfection:

        kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

Very few actually know me in truth. You know. So, in that sense, what Krishna is
telling over here is that He is down, highlighting the rarity of knowledge about
Him. Why is this knowledge rare? Because, first of all, you know, most people
are caught up in the animal propensities of eating, sleeping, mating and
defending. So, there are materialistic people who are caught, it, up in that.
And unfortunately, there are religious people also get caught up in these
things. How is that? Most religious people, they practice religion as a means
for dharma. You know. As a dharma, artha, kama. Who karma-kanda level. The
specific categories of dharma, artha, kama may not be there in the, in the, say,
Abrahamic religions. You know. These names might not be there. But the pre...,
conception is the same. That actually God's blessings upon us are there when we
get the good things of life. And what are the good things of life? Often, people
think largely in the mater..., in materialistic terms. I get this. I get that. I
get all these materialist things. Then, I am happy. So, "manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu".
"sahasreṣu". That among thousands of people, most people are caught up in, you
know, eating, sleeping, mating, defending. So, even people who are religious,
they use their religion for pursuing eating, sleeping, mating and defending.
And, you know, there is a popular chant to Hanuman Ji. You know:

        Tum to ho Baal brahmachari mujhe de do ek naari

So, the chant is that you are our celibate. But please give me a woman. So, this
is, you know, completely at a karma-kanda level. So, of course, you know,
choosing a, an appropriate spouse. You know. Compatible spouse is a, a, is
essential for a good life. Even in, you know, for a r..., spiritual seeker,
also. If there is incompatible, that is, you know, then that can be a problem.
And in that sense, for a devotee, to pray for an appropriate spou..., of, for
a compatible spouse. Materially and spiritually compatible spouse. It is not at
all wrong. But the point is that most people's desires get stuck at that level
itself. You know, know. So, in s..., in sanskrit, there is the word dharmapatni.
So, now, the, it is, for people in the purpose is, the patni is for dharma. You
know. One has the spouse. So that one can follow dharma. But people think dharma
is for the patni. That means that, they practice the dharma so that they can get
a spouse. So, the purpose of dharma is, say, k..., dharma is for artha and kama.
No. Actually, ultimately, dharma, artha, kama are all to be practiced so that
one can get moksha. Apavarga. One goes beyond material, well, things. So, you
know, there are people have this conception of, you know, soulmate. You know.
There is, the concept of reincarnation has also been included in movies and
novels. And they are, they romanticise it. You know. The, the p..., there are,
there is a couple who cannot unite in one life. And they reincarnate both. And
then, they reinca..., they reunite in the next life. And this is how the romance
is successful. That is how they depict that. And sometimes, there are these
p..., people who claim to have mystic seers. And then, you show them their, they
see their hands. Or see them tarots. And they say, oh, th..., is this peop...,
person your soulmate or not your soulmate? So, actually, this kind of, you know,
so, o..., of romanticisation of reincarnation is very triviali..., trivial. You
know. Our focus should not be on the, when we are studying reincarnation. The
focus should not be on the mate part. The focus should be on the soul part. That
means, it is not who is my mate. But what is my soul. That should be the
question. So, if I am, just continue on life after life, who am I actually? And
what is my eternal relationship? So, m..., the essential point is, m..., that
the ultimate soulmate of the soul is Krishna. You know. It is we, it is, it is
with Krishna who have we eternal relationship. Whether we may be in a male body
or female body, that does not matter. The eternal relationship of every soul is
with Krishna. So, of course, the word mate involves certain connotations which
we cannot apply to Krishna. But the point is, in terms of a relationship, the
eternal relationship of the soul is with Krishna. And for that, we should focus
on the soul part. Not the mate part. You know. Now, you know, most people, they
may use dharma also for artha. So, the "siddhaye". Here, "siddhaye" refers to
perfection in terms of liberation. In terms of attainment of transcendence. So,
very few people endeavor for transcendence. And "yatatām api siddhānāṁ". And
even among those who endeavor for transcendence, "kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ".
Few actually know me. This is interesting. That even among those striving for
liberation, they are themselves very few. But among them, also, they can have
different conceptions. They can think Brahman is the Absolute Truth. They can
think, you know, that the Paramatma is the Absolute Truth. But to understand
Bhagavan in, as the Absolute Truth in his g..., glo..., in His beauty and glory.
In His complete majesty. And His complete sweetness. That is extremely rare. So,
that is "kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ". Very few people know Me in truth. So, by,
by underscoring that how rare knowledge about Him is, you know, Krishna attracts
Arjuna's attention.

Just like any people like, are attracted to breaking news. Why? Because they
think I should get to hear the news before anybody else gets to hear. Then, I
will tell everyone the news. So, people want the latest news. People do not
want, they want "taaza khabar". You know. Latest news. People do not want old
news. Why? Because the idea is I want to know something which others do not
know. So, Krishna is telling, this is something which I am telling you. Very,
very few people know this. So, why that? He is attracting Arjuna. Please
understand this. And then, now, Prabhupada makes a very interesting argument
that now the mayavadi scholars say, the impersonalists say that actually bhakti
is for less intelligent people. They try to make a simplistic division among the
various paths. That actually, karma is for the hardworking people. You know.
There are these different yogas. Karma-yoga. Jnana-yoga. Ashtanga-yoga.
Bhakti-yoga. So, they say, karma is for the hardworking people. Karma-yoga.
Ashtanga-yoga is for the people who like to do austerities. Bhakti-yoga is for
the sentimental people. And jnana-yoga is for the intellectual people. Now,
actually speaking, even people who are not intellectual, they like to think of
themselves as intellectual. They like to think about themselves, oh, I am very
great. I am a very great scholar. So because they like to think like that, so,
what happens is, karma-yoga, people, oh, ok. Even if somebody does karma-yoga,
yeah, it is for hardworking people. Yes. I am a hardworking person. People like
that. Most people think that I should do jnana-yoga because I am an
intellectual. And people start looking down at bhakti. Yeah. Sentiment. Who wants
to be sentimental? Although, sentiments are the ornaments of our heart and our
life, sentiments are what make life worth living. But bhakti is not just
sentimentality. Bhakti is actually guided, enriched, purified sentiments. So,
Prabhupada says that, ok, they say, bhakti is for eas..., s..., sentimental
people. It is easy. Jnana. Karma. Sentiments. They guide. Yeah. They say that
anybody can have sentiments. You know. But intellectual. That is difficult. You
know. Austerity. That is difficult. Hard work. That is difficult. So, say that
bhakti is for less intelligent people, it is easy path. But Prabhupada argues
that if bhakti is for the easy, bhakti is easy path, then why would anyone
choose a difficult path? It is easy path. Follow it. Everybody should follow it.
Why do you, if, if, if imagine there is a, one has to climb up on a mountain.
And the goal is to reach the term, the top of the mountain. And then, one path
which is very difficult. And another path which is easy. So, why would anyone
want to choose a difficult path? Everybody would want to choose the easy path.
But, you know, you know, people choose the difficult path, you know, because
actually, Prabhupada says, bhakti is not easy. When one thinks I can do whatever
I want in the jurisdi..., in the name of bhakti, that kind of bhakti might be
easy. But when one actually follows bhakti according to scriptures, then that
kind of bhakti is not easy.

        śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-
        pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā
        aikāntikī harer bhaktir
        utpātāyaiva kalpate

So, here, he is quoting from "Bhakti-ras....", "rasāmṛta-sindhu".
"śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-". You know. "śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-". Means other things
like this. "pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā". So, "pañcarātra-vidhiṁ" means that, you
know, a, means, basically, there are different categories of scripture. "śruti"
is the Vedas including Upanishads. "smṛti", you know, is generic Vedic
scriptures which are, h..., coming from tradition. And among them, the examples
are given, "Purāṇas" and "Pañcarātra". So, if without their "vidhiṁ", one
practices bhakti. "aikāntikī harer bhaktir". If one does "aikāntikī, "bhaktir",
then what happens? "utpātāyaiva". "utpātā" means simply disruption in society is
created. So, then, Prabhupada also quotes that real knowledge about Krishna. Why
is it rare? Because it comes by revelation. It does not come merely by, you
know, recollection or reconstruction. So, what does it mean? You know. Real
knowledge about Krishna does not come merely by reconstruction or recollection.
You know. Or even by reflection. See, what does it mean? I just think, and
think, and think. And I understand Krishna. It does not work like that. M...,
recollection means. I think I will remember. Oh, maybe, I was in the spiritual
world. Who was I at that time? Just think. Think. Think. And I get to know my
svarupa. Reconstruction means that people, you know, our dreams are mostly
reconstructed. You know. That means, we see something. Maybe, we see a mountain.
And we see a gold somewhere. And we reconstruct the two together. And make it
into a, you know, make it into a golden mountain. So, actually, me..., our
memories are remarkably, you know, unreliable. Although, we may think that I saw
something in my childhood. But actually, what we remember is very little. Often,
we forget many things. So, you know, know, Krishna's, remembrance of Krishna is
actually revelation. And in that sense, it is very rare. So, now, after
describing how l..., rare knowledge about Krishna is. Now, Krishna will start
describing what that knowledge of, His glories, knowledge about the Absolute.
So, 7.4 to 7 is how Krishna is the source of material and spiritual worlds. Let
us look at the fourth verse.

        bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ
        khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca
        ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me
        bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

So, "bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ". So, here, Krishna is describing the seven
elements. "bhūmiḥ" is earth. "āpaḥ" is water. "analaḥ" is fire. "vāyuḥ" is air.
"khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca". Ether. Mind. Intelligence. And ego. These are
"aṣṭadhā". "aṣṭadhā". "aṣṭadhā" is eight. "bhinnā prakṛtir". These are my
separated energies. So, what does it mean separated energies? Now, Prabhupada
would give a simple example for separated energies. Just like, he would say
that, you know, you know, a milk comes from a cow. So, the milk is the energy of
the cow. But it is not that wherever the milk is present, the cow has to be
present. So, the milk is separate from the cow. Now, Prabhupada would say that,
you know, I speak. And then, my speech is put in a recording. And then, the
recording is available for people to hear. So, then, the recording, is it same
as Krishna or different from Krishna? It is, actually, you know, sorry, not
Pr..., a, of, same of Prabhupada or different from Prabhupada? It is
Prabhupada's voice. So, in that sense, it is the energy of Prabhupada. But, you
know, Prabhupada may not be present at a particular place. The recording may
present. So, in that sense, it is separated energy. And then, you know, you
know, he will also give an example for how separated energy can have a different
nature. You know. This is one of the perplexities in the hi..., in the, you
know, Vedanta. And it is generally there in all religions. Anybody who has
thought about God, they feel this question that God is good. Whereas this world
is filled with evil. So, why has this world filled with evil come from God? How
and why has it come from? So, once Prabhupada was asked this question. You know.
If God is good. Why is there so much evil in this world? So, Prabhupada,
sometimes, gave answer which just joilted people out of their complacency.
Prabhupada says, so, this quest..., person who was asking this question was a
young lady. So, Prabhupada told her, you know, you are beautiful. But why is
your stool ugly? Just, she just had no answer to that. So, Prabhupada said,
because it is your separated energy. It is your separated energy. So, the idea
is that which is separated, you know, may come from a source. But it may not
have the qualities of the source. So, here, "bhinnā", "me", "prakṛtir aṣṭadhā".
So, "bhinnā", now, it, you know, Prabhupada gives a special insight. None of the
previous acharyas talked about "bhinnā" in that sense. He says, the eight
separated divisions. So, the adjective, "bhin...", "bhinnā" can be applied to,
you know, "prakṛtir". Or it can be applied to "aṣṭadhā". So, this can be the
separated energy. Or the eight separate categories of the "prakṛtir aṣṭadhā".
Whichever is. So, Prabhupada applies it as, you know, eight, the se..., the
separated energies. These are separated energy of Krishna. These eight are
separated energies of Krishna. And now, Prabhupada goes into quite a
philosophical section over here. He says how are these mess..., the separated
energies. He t..., a, quotes from scripture called Pañc..., Pa...,
Sātvata-tantra. That is one of tantra, Pañcarātra scripture, tantra. That is why
the word "tantra" comes over here. And then, he describes how:

        viṣṇos tu trīṇi rūpāṇi
        puruṣākhyāny atho viduḥ
        ekaṁ tu mahataḥ sraṣṭṛ
        dvitīyaṁ tv aṇḍa-saṁsthitam
        tṛtīyaṁ sarva-bhūta-sthaṁ
        tāni jñātvā vimucyate

So, "viṣṇos tu trīṇi rūpāṇi". There are three forms of Lord Vishnu, it said.
"puruṣākhyāny atho viduḥ". Know that there are these three. What are these
three? "ekaṁ tu mahataḥ sraṣṭṛ". One is the "mahat-tattva". "dvitīyaṁ tv
aṇḍa-saṁsthitam". The second is that which is situated in the "aṇḍa". There is a
Brahman. The, so, first refers to "Mahā-viṣṇu". So, f..., it is from his, you
know, bodily powers that actually the substratum of all material existence, the
"mahat-tattva" comes out. "dvitīyaṁ tv aṇḍa-saṁsthitam". Second refers to the
"Garbhodaka-śāyī Viṣṇu". Which, who enters into the brahmanda. And from his
navel, the lotus is born. And then, Brahmaji appears. "tṛtīyaṁ
sarva-bhūta-sthaṁ". So, that refers to, "sarva-bhūta-sthaṁ" refers to the
"Kṣīrodaka-śāyī Viṣṇu". Who is present in all living beings as the Supersoul.
"tāni jñātvā vimucyate". One who knows all these, that person becomes, that
person attains liberation. "tāni jñātvā vimucyate". So, now, Prabhupada explains
how actually, the material world is a temporary manifestation of one of the
energies of the Lord. So, the Lord's glory is so great that He has many
energies. That among them, one of His energies is material energy. And that
material energy has a temporary manifestation. That is the material world. Then,
he also explains that, that how limited the jurisdiction of material science is.
So, material science comprises these ten items. And nothing more. All these ten
items, Prabhupada says that, earth, water, fire, air, ether. And within which,
these are called five gigantic creation of the gross creations. Within which,
the five sense objects are included in the manifestations of physical sound,
touch, form, taste and smell. So, these are the jurisdiction of material
science. How is that? "bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ". So, these, the, Prabhupada uses
the word gi..., gigantic creations. That will be used in 13.6. Hmm.
"mahā-bhūtāny". "mahā-bhūtāny". "mahā-bhūt" refers to earth, water, fire, air,
ether. Hmm. So, Prabhupada, you know, translates that as gigantic creations. Or
gross creations. Now, modern science does not talk much about the mind,
intelligence or ego. And does not talk about the soul, also. You know. They are,
you know, it is not, it does not analyse deeply enough to conceive of these
things. So, its scope focuses largely on gross matter. And that is why its
picture of reality is incomplete. Its picture of reality is incomplete. So, to
get a complete understanding, we should not, much, these are gross matter. But
gross matter. Plus subtle matter. Plus soul. You know. All three are understood.
Then, one's understanding becomes complete. Hmm. So, then, Prabhupada quotes
about sankhya. This kind of analysis is of the analysis of sankhya. But he says,
all sankhyas, those who study sankhya, they try to analyse material nature. And
he says, all that they are analyzing, actually, remains within the scope of the
external energy of Lord Vishnu. Of Lord Krishna. So, sankhya philosophers,
they generally do not, they d..., analyse this world in 24 elements. But beyond
those 24 elements, is the higher reality. Which they do not reach out to,
ultimately. So, in that sense, their analysis is incomplete. Then, now, let us
go to the next world. Now, Krishna will talk about the spiritual energy.

        apareyam itas tv anyāṁ
        prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām
        jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho
        yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

So, "apareyam itas". Apart from this, there is another. So, this was, "apareyam"
is, this was inferior energy. This is "aparā". So, "aparā" and "parām" are
categories. "aparā" refers to lower or inferior. "parām" refers to superior or
higher. "apareyam itas". So, apart from this inferior, there is "anyāṁ". "anyāṁ"
is another. What is that? "prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām". That is my "parām
prakṛtiṁ". That is my superior energy. And then, "jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho". The
other living entities. And "mahā-bāho" refers to, Oh, K..., Arjuna, you are
mighty-armed. So, what is, what are these living entities doing? "yayedaṁ
dhāryate jagat". So, they are maintaining the world. How do they maintain the
world? You know. So, this is used actually in a slightly sarcastic sense. That
the living entities are maintaining the world in the sense that the prisoners
are maintaining the prison. You know. If there is no n..., prison that they
would not be, you know, there would not be any need to maintain the prison. So,
in a sense here, they say, "yayedaṁ dhāryate" means, it is maintained for them.
Because they are there, so, it is maintained. You know, just like because the
prisoners are there, so, the prison has to be there. Of course, we all know from
our entity experiential point of view. It is not we who are maintaining the
world. You know. We are not causing the rains to fall. The sun to rise. We
cannot cause all, cause this. So, obviously, we are not made the maintainers.
When Krishna is referring over here, He is not referring to we being as the
maintainers. So, it is in this sense. "yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat". We are
maintaining. Hmm. So, now, now, now, somebody may say, no, no, actually, this
refers to that w..., the living entities are maintaining the world. So, are the
living entities themselves the Absolute Truth? So, if that were the case, then
why would these living entities have to surrender to the Absolute Truth? Have to
beg for the s..., mercy of the Absolute Truth? Now, if we are the maintainers of
the jail, then we do not have to be trapped in the jail. We do not have to
ask Him, oh, please release me from the jail. We are the maintainers of the
jail. We can go out of at anytime. But we cannot do that. And that is why we
cannot say this in the literal sense that we are the maintainers. We are the,
you know, that Supreme Being who is maintaining the world. And Prabhupada quotes
a verse from the Bhagavatam, 10.87.30, this, one of the concluding sections of
the Bhagavatam. So, this is the verse.

        aparimitā dhruvās tanu-bhṛto yadi sarva-gatās
        tarhi na śāsyateti niyamo dhruva netarathā
        ajani ca yan-mayaṁ tad avimucya niyantṛ bhavet
        samam anujānatāṁ yad amataṁ mata-duṣṭatayā

"mata-duṣṭatayā". "mata-duṣṭatayā" means that is a faulty, and, and fault,
faulty and polluted opinion. "mata-duṣṭatayā". What is that? That "aparimitā
dhruvās tanu-bhṛto yadi sarva-gatās". "sarva-gatās" is all-pervading. If
"aparimitā" is unlimited or eternal. So, you know, actually, so, so,
"sarva-gatās" says, you know, so, "tanu-bhṛto", those who are embodied, if they
were all-pervading. If they were eternal as jiva, oh, my dear Lord. Then, they
would not be under your control. You know. They would not have to beg for mercy
from you so that they will become liberated. The very fact that they have to beg
for such mercy means that they are not the infinite living beings. They are
finite living beings. And that is, so, they are subordinate. Hmm. Then,
Prabhupada talks about the, so, that means basically there are two energies.
There is matter. And there is spirit. So, matter has these eight categories.
Earth. Water. Fire. Air. Ether. And spirit is, actually, Krishna will say now,
here, He is talking about the soul. Within soul, there is, soul, in spirit,
there is soul. And Supreme Lord. So, He will talk about the sou..., Himself in
the next verse. Now, Krishna is here talking about how He is the source of
everything. Hmm. Hmm. So, in, continuing the discussion, there are two, these
two are My energies.

        etad-yonīni bhūtāni
        sarvāṇīty upadhāraya
        ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ
        prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā

So, "etad-yonīni bhūtāni". All these living being. "sarvāṇīty upadhāraya". All
of them. "ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ". I am the souce of it all. Everything.
"prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā". I am the, "prabhavaḥ" means the origin. And
"pralayaḥ" is that, it does, a, annihilation. The shelter of the annihilation.
So, everything that exists in this world is a combination of matter and spirit.
And ultimately, all of it comes from Me. Both these living being..., and
"etad-yonīni bhūtāni". These are the "yonīni" of everything that we see. So, for
example, we may see a computer screen. So, that computer screen is made of
matter. Not just ordinary matter. But matter that has been acted upon by a soul.
So, if we look at everything in this world. Whatever we see is a combination of
this. There is matter, spirit, and, or the two combination of both. You know. In
various ways. So, Krishna says, He is giving a reasoning here to search of how
ultimately everything comes from Him. So, these two energies come from Him. And
everything that we see i..., comes from these two energies. And their
combination. Therefore, everything ultimately comes from Him. And He says, in
this way, I am the beginning of everything. And I am the end of everything,
also. "prabhavaḥ". And "pralayaḥ". "prabhavaḥ" is the origin. And "pralayaḥ" is
the end. And the beginning. And the end of everything. Why does Krishna talk
about, a, you know, the beginning and the end over here? See, equi..., with, the
subject is the glory of Krishna. And the glory of Krishna is that, He is
all-pervading. He is, you know, all-pervading. Not just in terms of space. You
know. Not that He is, not just that He exists everywhere. Not just in terms of
time that He exists at all times. That is a..., definitely there. But He is
all-pervading also in the sense that nothing exists, but Him. That, you know, He
is supreme. His glory is that, ultimately, He is the only existence. That does
not mean that we do not exist. But we exist as His energies. So, we have, we
come from Him. And we are meant for His service and His pleasure. So, in that
sense, it is all pervasive. Pervasive. This all exists. But it is all connected
with the Absolute Truth. And in that sense, it is all the manifestation of the
Absolute Truth. So, Prabhupada says that, spirit is the basic field of creation.
And, you know, matter is created by spirit. Spirit is the basic field of
creation means, actually, spirit is what? Activates creation. And that is why he
makes it, clarifies that matter is created by spirit. And then, you know, the
cause of the universe is the big soul. Krishna. And Krish..., and Prabhupada, he
says, cause of this big soul is the Supersoul.

"And Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme, is the cause of both the big and small souls."

So, Prabhupada gives the example over here, a ch..., small child may create a
toy. A big child, a person may create a to..., skyscraper. But ultimately,
everything that we have is a combination of matter and spirit. So, the body that
we have, hmm, is crea..., i..., is actually present, because, and activated
because of the soul. So, that Supreme soul, He, He is the cr..., He is the
activator. He is the maintainer. And He is the end resul...., end destination of
the whole universe. So, with, when we talk about the Supersoul. Supersoul can be
understood in three ways. The Supersoul is the, the "Kṣīrodaka-śāyī Viṣṇu" is
the Supersoul of the v..., body of the living entity. The "Garbhodaka-śāyī
Viṣṇu," is the Supersoul of the universe. And the "Mahā-viṣṇu" is the Supersoul
of the mahat-tattva. Mahat-tattva. And Prabhupada quotes the famous quo...,
"Kaṭha Upaniṣad" verse. "Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām". So:

        eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān

There is one special living entity who is, you know, different from all the
other living entities. Who are also conscious. And who are also eternal. And
what is the speciality of this entity? That en..., this entity is actually "eko
bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān". He is the maintainer of everyone. So, in this
world, everything comes from Krishna. Everything returns to Krishna. There are
phases of expansions. Sometimes, some per..., person may have a collapsible
stick. So, that person is walking along. That person has a collapsible stick.
Sometimes, some sannyasis also have collapsible danda. So, you know, because
nowadays, when traveling in planes, you know, they do not allow the wo...,
normal danda to be taken. So, collapsible danda. That means, it is sma..., big.
Then, when you want to shut it down. Tuck. Tuck. Tuck. Tuck. It becomes so
small. You can just put it in the pocket. And take it, also. So, like that, the
creation unfolds from Krishna. That crea..., unfolding of the creation is talked
about in Third Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam. You know. Several places, actually,
it is talked about. You know, h..., from one element, the other element emerges.
Like that. It moves, the emergence moves on. But ultimately, everything comes
from Krishna. That is the eternal truth. Now, and then, "matt...". Then, Krishna
talks about something else over here.

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat
        kiñcid asti dhanañ-jaya
        mayi sarvam idaṁ protaṁ
        sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva

So, "mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat". So, Krishna is telling. You know. Superior to Me.
"parataraṁ". So, there is, better than Me. Greater than Me. Higher than Me.
"parataraṁ". So, "taram" is an intermediate superlative. "taram" is an
intermediate superlative. That means, good, better, and best. Yukta.
"yukta-taram". And "yukta-tamah". So, "taram" is intermediate. Better. That
level. So, there is no truth. "parataraṁ". Than Me. "nānyat". Apart from Me,
there is no truth higher than Me. You know. "kiñcid asti dhanañ-jaya". There is
no possibility on this. Krishna says. I am the highest truth. And now, Krishna,
the Supreme Truth, that creation makes us think that He is ok. He is, He is the
king who exists above everything else. And He is, looks down from above to all
of us. No. "mayi sarvam idaṁ protaṁ". "sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva". So, actually, there
are two aspects to God's glory. There is His transcendence. And there is
immanence. Transcendence refers to how He exists in the spiritual world separated
from everyone and everything. And He exists there eternally. And His immanence
refers to how He pervades all of it. So, transcendence means, so, God is beyond
matter. Immanence means God is within matter. So, the Bhagavad Gita explains
that Go..., there is the both aspects to God. There is His transcendence, also.
And there is immanence, also. So, His transcendence aspect is talked about, is,
there is no truth higher than Me. He, and we will talk about this transcendence
aspect several times in the Bhagavad Gita. For example, when Krishna says:

        bhūtānām īśvaro ’pi san

        ajo ’pi sann avyayātmā

That, when He talks in 4.6. Have, I come in an eternal, imperishable body. I am
the Lord of all living beings. Even when I come in the material world, I am not
contaminated by that. When Krishna talks about:

        paras tasmāt tu bhāvo ’nyo

That beyond this material world, the spiritual world. That is talking about
transcendental aspect. And then, this chapter will talk about His immanence
aspect. How He pervades all of reality, also. So, is God transcendent or
immanent? Is God separate from matter? Or is God within matter? Actually, it is
both. God is transcendent. And immanent. He is present within matter. But he is
not contained by matter. He is not limited to matter. He extends beyond matter
to the ultimate reality.

        kiñcid asti dhanañ-jaya

Actually, there is no truth higher than Him. Krishna is the highest truth. But
that does not mean, just because He is highest, does not mean He is far away. He
is also right within us. He is accessible to us. He pervades all of creation. In
fact, you know, how He pervades, how is immanent, that will be described in the
next series of verses, from 8 to 11. You know, but here, when we will discuss
that in our next class. But here, "sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva". There is a, a, there is
important metaphor that, you know, you know, just as, you know, we, when we,
there is a necklace. Say, where there is this kunti mala. You know, what we see
primarily is the beads. If there is nice jewel necklace. What we see will be the
beads. But within the beads, it is going through the beads is the thread. And
what is that thread? That thread, Krishna is saying, I am that thread. So,
whatever we see in this world, that is the, you know, various phenomena. We see,
you know, various attracted to things in this world. But underlying them,
unifying them, you know, thread of truth is Krishna. So, this metaphor is to, is
to un..., it, convey how Krishna is underlying, unifying within even the
material world. How He is immanent within the world. Now, the acharayas,
especially Baladeva Vidyabhushana in his Vedanta-sutra commentary, raises this
issue. And also, it comes up various other places. When Krishna is telling there
is no truth higher than Me. Then, who, what is Krishna referring to? The
maya..., m..., the mayavadis have i..., have the idea that the form is not the
highest truth. Beyond the form, there is the impersonal reality. That is the
highest truth. That is their idea. But then, Krishna is telling over here that,
actually, Krishna is saying "mattaḥ". He says Me. You know. You know. Apart from
Me, there is no higher truth. What does it mean? You know. When Krishna is
saying Me. He is, refers to Me. We cannot go about convoluted, twisted
interpretation. When the Prime Minister says obey me. Oh, that means that, you
know, there is, you know, there is some other official who is a higher than the
Prime Minister. Who is acting to the Prime Minister. And it is that person we
should obey. Not the Prime Minister. Nothing like that.

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat

Krishna is telling that there is no truth higher than Me. So, the, Krishna is,
you know, if you want to follow the Bhagavad Gita, we cannot just impose our
philosophy on the Gita. We have to see what the Gita actually is saying. And the
Gita is very clearly saying that we have to surrender to Krishna. And Krishna
alone.

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat

There is no truth higher than Krishna. So, let us look at the purport. So,
Prabhupada says that:

"There is a common controversy over whether the Supreme Absolute Truth is
personal or impersonal."

And he says, the, you know, per..., it is very, co..., it is confirmed in the
Bhagavad Gita, in every step. And that, He is a person. How is it confirmed?
Krishna is using "mattaḥ" over here. And then, Prabhupada talks about, also,
the:

        īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

So, "īśvaraḥ paramaḥ". The Supreme Controller. The Supreme Truth. H..., so, that
also confirms the point that is the Abs..., Supreme Truth is a person.
"sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ". And then, Prabhupada quotes from the "Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad", 3.10 over here.

        tato yad uttara-taraṁ tad arūpam anāmayam/ ya etad vidur amṛtās te bhavanti athetare duḥkham evāpiyanti

So, actually, this verse, c..., significant point of this verse is that, now,
verse, the quotation, the point is "arūpam". That, actually, there is no form.
Prabhupada emphasises the point that, actually, you know, you know, we have to
look at the context. You know. The, you know, so, the verse itself means that:

“In the material world Brahmā, the primeval living entity within the universe,
is understood to be the supreme amongst the demigods, human beings and lower
animals. But beyond Brahmā there is the Transcendence, who has no material form
and is free from all material contaminations. Anyone who can know Him also
becomes transcendental, but those who do not know Him suffer the miseries of the
material world.”

So, Prabhupada says that, actually, we cannot just, just, so, the maya...,
impersonalists stress the world. "arūpam". But Prabhupada says, we have to look
at the full context. And this 2, this is 3.10. And before that, it is 3.8 and
9. The same "Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad". And what is it saying about that Absolute
Truth?

        vedāham etaṁ puruṣaṁ mahāntam
        āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt
        tam eva viditvāti mṛtyum eti
        nānyaḥ panthā vidyate ’yanāya

        yasmāt paraṁ nāparam asti kiñcid
        yasmān nāṇīyo no jyāyo ’sti kiñcit
        vṛkṣa iva stabdho divi tiṣṭhaty ekas
        tenedaṁ pūrṇaṁ puruṣeṇa sarvam

"tenedaṁ pūrṇaṁ puruṣeṇa sarvam". It is a long verse. The important long
verse. The point is that, it is "puruṣaṁ". Hmm. So, actually, it is very
categorical. The first line starts with the word "puruṣaṁ" here. And then, after
that, sorry, you know, you know, first line starts with the word "puruṣaṁ".
"vedāham etaṁ puruṣaṁ mahāntam". I know that Absolute Truth. And then, again,
"tenedaṁ pūrṇaṁ puruṣeṇa sarvam". So, just th..., the prior, you know, verse,
two verses, eight, two prior quotations, two, 8 and 9, what is said? The word
"puruṣaṁ" is used. So, when the word "puruṣaṁ" is used, how can we say that
what has been referred to is something non-personal? Something formless?
"puruṣaṁ" refers clearly to a person. So, what is this quotation actually
saying? "vedāham etaṁ puruṣaṁ mahāntam". I know that great Absolute Truth. What
is the characteristic? "āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt". His complexion is such
that He can take us beyond the darkness of material existence. So, "tamasaḥ
parastāt". Prabhupada translates that beyond the conceptions of darkness.
"tamasaḥ parastāt". "tam eva viditvāti mṛtyum eti". By knowing Him, one can
attain liberation. One can go beyond the cycle of birth and death. "nānyaḥ
panthā vidyate ’yanāya". And there is no other path apart from this to attain
liberation. And then, further describing the position of that Absolute Truth.
"yasmāt paraṁ nāparam asti kiñcid". That apart from Him, there is no greater
truth. "yasmān nāṇīyo no jyāyo ’sti kiñcit". Actually, this Absolute Truth is
so paradoxical that on one side, there is nothing greater than Him. And on the
other side, there is nothing smaller than Him, also. How can there be nothing
smaller than this, Him? Because this is a, "Mahā-viṣṇu" is greater than the
greatest. And as "Kṣīrodaka-śāyī Viṣṇu", present in the Supersoul, present even
within the atoms. And present within the heart of even microscopic living
beings. So, therefore, you know, actually, He is smaller than the smallest,
also. "yasmān", "paraṁ", "nāṇīyo no jyāyo ’sti kiñcit". So, the point is the
Lord has inconceivable operative...., attributes. Greater than the greatest.
Smaller than the smallest. "vṛkṣa iva stabdho divi tiṣṭhaty ekas". So, the
example is interestingly given over here that this is a tree situated in one
place. But from that one place, the tree radiates its energy everywhere.
Similarly, "tenedaṁ pūrṇaṁ puruṣeṇa sarvam". This Absolute Truth pervades its
energies everywhere. So, Prabhupada is quoting this point which we talked about
how the Upanishads also confirm the Absolute Truth is a person. The Absolute
Truth is not impersonal. The Absolute Truth is a person. So, "vedāham etaṁ
puruṣaṁ mahāntam". And that "puruṣaṁ" is Krishna. So, in this way, the Fifth
Cha..., Seventh Chapter, the first part establishes how Krishna is the source
of all energies. Material and spiritual. And how ultimately everything is
sustained by Krishna. There is no truth higher than Him. And He pervades
everything just as a necklace is pervaded by a thread. So, His pervasion is not
just passive. His pervasion is ac..., unifying. It is active. So, the immanence
how Krishna pervades the crea..., material matter will be discussed from 8 to
11. Which we will discuss in our next class.

Thank you very much. Srimad Bhagavad Gita ki jaya. Hare Krishna. 
