Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ykeIX8F3KE
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=7ykeIX8F3KE&redir_token=W6YI-nl8TtbzwBG-t6ZgyK5Yxq18MTU0ODQ4ODgwMkAxNTQ4NDAyNDAy&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_101_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_09_Text_22_to_28_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We will
discuss the Ninth Chapter. So, we have been discussing about demigod worship
briefly in the Seventh Chapter. And in the last two verses we have discussed
about it. Now, Krishna will contrast demigod worship with pure devotional
service. So, to understand this contrast, let us look at, briefly, at the
overview of the chapter first. So, you know, the Ninth Chapter is covering a
wide variety of topics. Let us look at these topics here. And then, we
understand what is happening in this chapter, primarily. So, yah. So, we have,
the first three verses are talking about developing kevala bhakti by knowledge
about Krishna. Then, four to ten talked about Krishna's inconceivable
relationship with the world. Then, eleven to nineteen discussed about those who
understand Krishna in various ways. First was the mayavadis. The impersonalists.
Then, the kevala bhaktas. That is "satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ". Then, we discussed
thr..., these three categories of people in fifteenth verse. And then, sixteen
to nineteen was Krish..., Vishvarupa upasana. Now, we are in the section of
kevala bhakti is far superior to demigod worship. So, let us look at Kri..., you
know, these verses. So, famous verse. 9.22.

        ananyāś cintayanto māṁ
        ye janāḥ paryupāsate
        teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ
        yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham

So, "ananyāś cintayanto māṁ". One who fixes the mind. "ananyāḥ". "cintayanto".
"ye janāḥ paryupāsate". Those who does worship. "janāḥ paryupāsate". So, those
who does worship. Me. "māṁ". "teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ". Those who are constantly
absorbed in devotion to Me. For them, "yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham". "yoga-kṣemaṁ".
So, I protect what they have. And I provide what they lack. "vahāmy aham". This
is a very important verse. Which illustrates the personal intervention. And the
personal care. That the Lord takes of those who approach Him personally. And
devotionally. We see the principle which Krishna has talked about in 4.11.

        ye yathā māṁ prapadyante
        tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

That as all people surrender to Me, I reward accordingly. So, here, Krishna is
continuing elaborating on that principle by telling that, you know, if somebody
approaches Him with pure devotion. He reciprocates also, accordingly. He takes
it as His responsibility to take care of them. And not just His responsibility.
But His personal responsibility. "vahāmy aham". So, there are many beautiful
stories of the great acharyas. And how the Lord personally intervene in their
lives. Their Lord may have, as a deity come in their dream. Or the Lord may have
manifested some supernatural phenomena to protect them. Or maybe, we are
primarily discussing the philosophy over here. So, we will not go into stories.
In fact, this whole verse itself. You know. This verse, 9.22 and later on, you
know, 9.30-31, where Krishna talks about His protection of everyone. And esp...,
you know, especially His devotees.

        kaunteya pratijānīhi
        na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

He tells in 31. These two verses are, you know, very reassuring.
Faith-building. Inspiring. For devotees. And, you know, we can meditate on them.
Contemplate on them. And see how they are actually connected with, you know,
how, they are connected with, or rather, demonstrated by many of the pastimes of
the Lord. But let us focus on the principles over here. So, "ananyāś cintayanto
māṁ". So, Krishna is telling that, He is giving His expectations. And those
expectations, we should not think that this is like a business arrangement. And
why is Krishna making such stiff demands? You know. Here, Krishna is saying, you
have to fix your min..., you have to do "cintayantaḥ" of Me. "ananyāḥ". Then,
only, I will do this for you. "yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham". See, the point is, not,
this is not a business arrangement. The point here is that, it is a
reciprocation. And the "ananyāḥ", "cintayantaḥ" is not a, you know, is not a,
h..., obligation. Or a restriction that we have to follow with resentment. When
Krishna says, "ananyāḥ", "cintayantaḥ". "ananyāś cintayanto". "ananyāḥ",
"cintayantaḥ" results naturally, you know, when one, you know, you know, fixes
the mind on Him. That "ananyāḥ", "cintayantaḥ" happens naturally when the mind
is fixed on the Supreme Lord. Because at that time, h..., one naturally, you
know, you know, loves, one loves Him. When one loves him, natur..., naturally
fixes the mind on Him. So, what Krishna is talking about essentially is not a,
you know, busine..., He is, here, Krishna is not saying that I will be security
agent. You know. Like some people hire some security. I want a bodyguard. So, I
will pay you this much. You guard me. This is not. This is a borned of love
Krishna is talking about. And the "ananyāḥ", "cintayantaḥ" is the demonstration
of that love. So, when Kri..., Krishna is saying, those who love Me. What
happens to them? Naturally, I love them. Of course, Krishna loves all living
beings. And even the whole creation of the material world is an expression of
His love for all living beings. Because through this material world, He is
giving an opportunity to play out their errant desires. And to reform
themselves. And come back to Him for eternal happiness. So, Krishna cares for
everyone. And loves everyone. But His love for His devotees is special. Those
who love Him. He naturally reciprocates with them. So, you know, ka..., "ananyāś
cintayanto māṁ." Now, we may think that constantly thinking of Kri..., Krishna
is very difficult. So, we have to understand that it is a discipline. It is a
practice. And as we practice more and more. The wonderful thing about thinking
about Krishna is that, the more we think about Him, the more we become purified
by thinking about Him. And when we are purified. Naturally, you know, Krishna's
all-attractiveness becomes manifest to us. And we fall in love with Him. And
then, thinking about Him becomes natural for us. It becomes perpetual. It
becomes habitual. And it becomes, you know, joyful for us. Blissful for us. So,
you know, you know, thinking about Krishna is a consciously chosen cultivation.
It is a sadhana for us at our sadhaka stage. But then, for the, at the sa...,
this stage, it i..., is a spontaneous, you know, you know, you know, instinctive
sort of decision that happens. That as soon as the devotee does not have to
think about anything else, immediately, the mind will go back to Krisna. So, for
us, these sort of verses, you know, the, they demonstrate how much is the
intimate loving relationship between the Lord and the devotees. And the purer
the devotion, the greater is the reciprocation of the Lord. Because the Lord is
reciprocating with the love of the devotee. You know. You know. You know. Now,
what is Krishna promising over here?

        yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham

So, now, in India, there is a, the life insurance corporation. And they have
the, appropriated this part of this verse. "yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham". We will
protect what you have, provide what you lack. Now, actually, life insurance,
most of the times, it does not ensure our life. You know. After we die, somebody
else gets the money that we have earned. Or we have zi..., invested in
insurance. So, actually, nobody can ensure life in this world. At the material
level. At the material level, ultimately, there is death. And real life
insurance is the insurance that we will attain eternal life. And that insurance
is provided by Krishna. But Krishna is telling over here that My blessings are
not just at the spiritual level. You know. We cannot really different...,
separate. You know. This is, once we start, you know, you know, caring for
somebody, we, you know, if a devotee is caring for some other sou..., person.
Somebody is becoming a devotee. Or a devotee friend. We do not think. Oh. This
is the body. I will not care for your body. This is soul. I will care for your
soul. No. We care for the complete person. So, similarly, Krishna also cares
for, you know, His d..., for the devotee as complete persons. Now, of course, He
will care more for the soul. Naturally, because the soul is the real person. But
Krishna takes care of the, you know, material needs, also. When that is
required. So, Krishna is telling over here two things. I protect what you have.
And I provide what you lack. In this world, you know, these are the two main
fears that people have. One is that if I have something, it may be stolen away
from me. So, if somebody is wealthy, the fear is, I have got wealth. But what if
some thieves come, break in and steal away. Nowadays, we have internet banks.
So, people may have lot of money. But what if somebody steals my security code.
And steals my password. And then, just in one, you know, key button, my bank
account can be completely swindled. So, people have fears like that. So, what we
have, we fear that we may lose. And, you know, we may also fear that, you know,
what I need I may not get. Or I may not have. So, if in the future, I fall sick.
And then, I do not have wealth insurance. Then, how will I live? So, these are
genuine fears. Which people have. So, these two fears that what we have may be
taken away. And what we need may not be available for us. They are the fears
which normally plague us. Everyone. So, now, Krishna is telling over here, I
will take care of this. So, "yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham". Now, the word "yoga" and
"kṣemaṁ" in this context, "y...", "yo...", "yoga". Normally, we use the word
"yoga" in terms of connection. When we connect with the Lord. We discussed
another meaning of the word "yoga" in 9.5. "paśya me yogam aiśvaram". "paśya
me". Just see what "yogam aiśvaram". The, you know, mystical opulence of Mine.
So, that is, "yoga" essentially means connection. So, co..., the connection that
Krishna extends to us, that is also "yogam aiśvaram". So, both ways, it is
"yogam aiśvaram". And here, "yoga-kṣemaṁ" that Prabhupada translates "yoga" as
requirement. "kṣemaṁ" as protection. So, what it essentially means is that when
we want to live in this world, we have to stay connected. So, for living, you
know, properly, at the material level. And for pursuing pur..., spiritual life.
We need certain things. So, Krishna says, whatever is required for the "yoga", I
will provide that. And "kṣemaṁ". "kṣemaṁ" means protection. I will protect,
also. So, provision and protection are the two assurances of Krishna. You know.

Now, you know, what Krishna is essentially promising in this verse is when we
take care of the wise of life, He will take care of the house of life. When we
take care of the wise of life properly. That means, why am I living? I am living
for the sake of serving Krishna. When we take care of the wise of life, Krishna
will take care of the house of life. Krishna will make sure, work out the
details for us. How things will work out. Now, this does not mean that we become
impractical. And we make a m..., utopian, you know, a, about Prabhupada that it
is said that his eyes were high up in the sky. He, and that is where his
consciousness was. That is where his head was. But his feet were firmly on the
ground. You know. When Prabhupada, you know, spread Krishna Consciousness. It
was step by step. One thing at a time. One thing at a time. That is how Srila
Prabhupada spread Krishna Consciousness systematically. So, similarly, we can
also have, you know, take, you know, Krishna, you know, you know, practice our
Krishna Consciousness. And do our services. You know. With faith in Krishna's
protection. And provision. So, a devotee does not demand Krishna's protection.
Or provision. A devotee naturally serves Krishna. And Krishna reciprocates by
providing. So, Srila Prabhupada would give the example of how he just went with
forty rupees. And that time, forty rupees were not even convertible into
dollars. Because the money was, you know, you know, you know, being there, not
so many Americans in, Indians in America. And that is why the rupee was not
convertible at that time. And Prabhupada, actually, brought those forty rupees
back to India. And when he was going from the airport to, you know, the place
where he was staying. In Chapivara Junction. The temple. You know. Where he had
been staying earlier. And where he was g..., returning. At that time, he gave
that money to the rikshavala. And that, Prabhupada has felt, the rikshavala has
taken the amount disproportionately. But it was night and because nobody whom
Prabhupada could call to stop. And Prabhupada said, he is cheating, he is
cheating us. So, point was that, Prabhupada practically took that money. And
brought it back. So, he did not use the money, also. So, still, he was able to
build a worldwide mission. How is that? It is "yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham".
Krishna is providing. So, now, is this provision only for Krishna's pure
devotees? You know. Not necessarily. We have to understand, now, Kri...,
Caitanya Mahaprabhu said that, Śrīvāsa Thakura, there is the famous pastime that
Śrīvāsa Thakura, he is just, you know, you know, he had a house. He was a
householder. And Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked him. How do you maintain yourself?
So, he said, just, I just clap three times. I clap three times. And he says,
within three time, within the clap of three, whatever I need, it gets provided.
If that does not happen, then, he says, I am ready to drown in the Ganga. He was 
so confident that whatever is required and provided. And Caitanya Mahaprabhu
said that even the goddess of fortunate has to, becomes poverty-stricken, has to
go out begging. You will be provided for. So, you know, Caitanya Mahaprabhu was
so pleased. Of course, this is a rhetorical statement. Because the goddess of
fortune can never become poverty-stricken. Again, the point is that the Lord
will provide for those who devote themselves to Him. Now, this does not mean
that we do not think in practical terms. But the point is, we do not think only
in practical terms. Certainly, we have to think practically, if we are doing
something new. Then, whether I have the, you know, financial support. Whether
it is, you know, whether it is going to work out or not. We have to evaluate the
pros and cons. Do a SWOT analysis. Strength. Weaknesses. Opportunities. Threats.
All that is basic which we will to do.

But beyond that, a devotee does not think only in practical terms. Because
ultimately our faith is in Krishna. And Krishna can work in miraculous ways. So,
"yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham". I will protect. And I will provide. And this verse,
apart from its overall inspiring message is also to be seen in terms of the
context of the previous verse. In the previous verse, previous two verses, 20
and 21, Krishna has talked about those who, who do karma-kanda. And go to
heavens. So, they accumulate a lot of "puṇyam". But that stockpile of "puṇyam"
does not last for them. And for them, there is nobody providing. They may go to
"surendra-lokam". But after "puṇyam" gets over. They fall back. "kṣīṇe puṇye
martya-lokaṁ viśanti". Krishna says, this does not happen to His devotees. So,
here, Krishna is again revealing Hi..., His personal intervention. And personal
role more as the Bhagavad Gita is progressing. In the, you know, S..., Second
Chapter, Krishna, He, while talking about the path of spirituality in general,
in 2.40, said:

        nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti
        pratyavāyo na vidyate

That whatever one aspires for, that will, you know, whatever one endeavors and
achieves in the spiritual path, that will stay forever. There is no loss. Or
there is no diminution. So, now, Krishna is revealing that how, for His devotee,
this principle is not just some law. Or, or some impersonal law acting. It is
Krishna personally intervening. Kishna says I will ensure that for my, for my
devotees, there will be no loss. Or nor diminution. Now, that applies
for, specifically for spiritual credits. But Krishna is telling over here, this
is all wrong. He says, I take care of them. I protect. And I provide. So,
devotees do not demand from the Lord. The devotees simply want to serve the
Lord. And they focus primarily on the service. When Srila Prabhupada went to
America, he was not primarily thinking how will I earn a living over here. How
will I manage my finances? He was thinking how can I preach? How can I share
Krishna's message? And then, as a, as a, we could say, almost an afterthought.
Or as a matter of duty. He will say. Yes, I also have to arrange for some way to
maintain myself. Prabhupada was not utopian. You know. He had struggled to live
in India. In, in, he struggled in the sense that for main..., for sur..., good
amount of time, for a year or two, he was living practically homeless after he
took sannyasa. And even before when he took sannyasa. Before he was vanaprastha.
He was living in Delhi. You know. Moving from house to house. Staying at
different well-wishers' pl..., houses for few days. And moving so fast that even
his mail could not catch up. Because his addresses were constantly changing. So,
Srila Prabhupada was aware of the practical difficulties. But the same time,
Prabhupada was not, you know, you know, co..., consumed. Or exhausted. Or
dejected by those practical difficulties. Because he saw beyond that. You know.
Hand of Krishna. And protection of Krishna. And the empowerment of Krishna. So,
we can also meditate. You know. We, we have the why. Yes, I am here to serve
Krishna. And the house will work out. And actually, when we try doing something
adventurous for Krishna. Not foolhardy. You know. But something adventurous.
Something challenging. Then, we will find that Krishna does help us. And that
Krishna empowers us. When we just feel that things are not working out.
Everything is going to fall apart. And then, Krishna reveals. This is how I will
make things work out. And in this way, Krishna protects and provides for His
devotees. So, Prabhupada talks about "yoga" and "kṣemaṁ". Here, primarily, in,
you know, you know, you know, devotional terms. In terms of the relationship
between the ordinary devotee.

"his only desire is to achieve the association of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Such a devotee undoubtedly approaches the Lord without difﬁculty. This
is called yoga."

So, you know, what is this talking about? You know. That when we want to
appraise the Lord. We need purity. We need mercy. So, Krishna says, I will
provide that. So, there is a pro..., that is the provision aspect. "yoga" is the
provision for the sake of connection. And then: 

"By the mercy of the Lord, such a devotee never comes back to this material
condition of life."

And:

"Kṣema refers to the merciful protection of the Lord."

So, that never falling back is the protection. And with both of these combined,
the devotee marches ahead in Krishna, you know, in, you know, journey towards
Krishna. Now, Krishna will talk about the demigod worshippers. What happ...,
what, how are they contrasted with His pure devotees? One thing He said is, that
is eternal. You know. That is temporary. Whereas this is, I will personally
preserve it. But He futher develops the contrast.
        
        ye ’py anya-devatā-bhaktā
        yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ
        te ’pi mām eva kaunteya
        yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam

"ye ’py anya-devatā-bhaktā". Those who are the devotees of other devatas.
"anya-devatā-bhaktā". You know. What happens to them? "yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ".
They worship faithfully. "śraddhayānvitāḥ". "te ’pi mām eva kaunteya". Oh,
"kaunteya". They are also "yajante". "mām eva". They are worshipping Me, only.
But it is "avidhi-pūrvakam". It is improperly. It is in the wrong way. So,
"vidhi-pūrvakam", "vidhi" is scriptural rules and regulation. So, you know,
"avidhi-pūrvakam" is improperly. So, you know, Krishna is saying over here, you
kno, you know, very con..., important point to understand about, you know, you
know, demigod worship. He says, those who are worshipping the devatas are also
worshipping Me. "ye ’py anya-devatā-bhaktā". "anya-devatā-bhaktā". So, it is
cl..., there is, clear, Krishna is clearly differentiating. Yes, there are other
devatas. And those who worship the other devatas. "yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ".
They worship with "śraddha". Now, "śraddhayānvitāḥ", that word that is used over
here is almost identical to the word that was used by Krishna in the Seventh
Chapter. In Seventh Chapter, twentieth verse Krishna talks about de..., you
know, demigod worship. Starting from twentieth to twenty-third verse. And there,
he describes, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, that:

        sa tayā śraddhayā yuktas
        tasyārādhanam īhate
        labhate ca tataḥ kāmān
        mayaiva vihitān hi tān

So, there, also, the word "śraddha" was used.

        yo yo yāṁ yāṁ tanuṁ bhaktaḥ
        śraddhayārcitum icchati
        tasya tasyācalāṁ śraddhāṁ
        tām eva vidadhāmy aham

So, in 21 and 22, Krishna talked about "śraddha" in Seventh Chapter, also. By
Krishna is talking about "śraddha" here, also. So, in Seventh Chapter, Krishna 
said is, I, who give them "śraddha". And by which, they become elevated. So, we
have discussed earlier, also, this point that, you know, you know, you know,
now, like a princess has gone, left home and gone away. And the father wants to
get the prince back home. But the fath..., prince is not ready to come. So, at
least, the father, who is a king, gets this prince back into the kingdom by
getting Him to work, you know, with a minister. So, Krishna is telling that, you
know, those who worship the other Gods, also worship Me. Just like somebody who
is serving the minister is also serving the king. But "avidhi-pūrvakam".
"avidhi-pūrvakam" means, actually, that person who is the king, does not, you
know, that person, who is the ser..., who is a prince does not need to serve a
minister. That person can be with the father. And be there with, you know, be
happily and lovingly. Serve the father. That would be far better. So, but
unfortunately, then, people do not do that. So, "avidhi-pūrvakam". So, the, now,
some, the, now, there is, there are many Gita commentators who translate this
verse. And they, you know, own some popular hindu websites, also. This verse is
translated. And the last part, "avidhi-pūrvakam" is removed entirely. So, what
they put is that those who worship the other Gods also worship Me. Now, this is
what is called as a misrepresentation of the Gita's message, is graphic example.
Because it is correct what they are saying. But it is not complete. And in fact,
it is so viciously inco..., it is so misleadingly inco..., we could say
viciously incomplete. That the most, the essential thrust of the verse is lost.
So, yes, they also worship Me. "te ’pi mām eva kaunteya". They also worship Me.
Certainly. But how? "yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam". Now, we may say that, what is
the emphasis of the verse? Is it that they are also worshipping Me? Or that they
are worshipping Me improperly? What is the emphasis? Now, to understand that, we
have to look at the context. Now, many people want to have the idea that, oh,
all God, you know, you know, do not have conflict between people who worship
different Gods. So, just assume that all Gods are one. And whichever God you are
worshipping, you are the worshipping the same Absolute Truth ultimately. Well,
that may b..., we may want to, you know, believe certain thing out of sentiment.
But is it the reality? Is worshipping the God, any God the same as worshipping
Krishna? You know. If we look at the Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavad Gita does not say
that. Bhagavad Gita talks about "anya-devatā". And talks about "mām". And
Krishna is, the, talked about this earlier, also. He has talked about how those
who worship devatas are less intelligent. "alpa-medhasām". In 7.23, He says. And
He says that, they do not go back to, later on, destination. But they stay on
material world. And they go to devatas. So, it is not that they all reach the
same desitnation. So, now, if you want to understand what is the emphasis of
this verse. "avidhi-pūrvakam". Is that the emphasis? Or "mām eva"? They worship
Me, only. Which is the emphasis? Actually, you know, both are important in it.
But relatively speaking, it is "avidhi-pūrvakam". That is what Krishna is
stressing. So, how do we understand that? Let us look at the next verse for
this. But before we move forward, Prabhupada gives another example which needs
clarification. Prabhupada says that, this is like bribing. You know.

"The ofﬁcers and directors are engaged as representatives of the government, and
to offer some bribe to the ofﬁcers and directors is illegal. This is stated here
as avidhi-pūrvakam."

So, you know, now, what are we trying to say over here? Actually, we, we will
say, bribe is illegal. And bribe should never be given. You know. But is demigod
worship illegal? Actually, it is given in the Vedas, only. You know. When it is
given in the Vedas. You know. And it is, you know, you know, a part of the Vedic
culture. It is definitely legal. So, why should it be compared to something
illegal like bribing? The point which Srila Prabhupada is making is how is it
improper? Demigod worship is not illegal from the point of view of the Vedic
culture. It is also part of Vedic culture. Vedic culture has multi-level
worship. So, for those who are in the lower modes, they have corresponding, you
know, forms of worship. Which will attract them. And elevate them gradually. But
the ultimate goal of Vedic worship is to take a person to the level of
transcendence. And at transcendence, one just s..., serves the Lord out of pure
love. And one has no other desire. So, "avidhi-pūrvakam". When Srila Prabhupada
explains, he is explaining it from the perspective, the ultimate goal. You know.
When Krishna, in 18.66, will say:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

So, He has only given the various dharmas, will, th..., natu..., comprise the
Vedic culture. But then, He is telling, focus on "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". Just
s..., surrender unto Me. So, you know, you know, so:

        svabhāva-raktasya

        jugupsitaṁ

Vyasadeva also is chastised, mildly by Narada Muni. When he says that, actually,
"svabhāva-raktasya", people are, by nature, materialistic. And you have sanction
that materialism in the name of religio..., reli..., religiosity. And the result
of that will be that people will continue on their materialism. And think that
you are sanctio..., think that they are doing it according to your will. In your
name. And they have not, get elevated. You know. So, this is "jugupsitaṁ".
"jugupsitaṁ" actually means reprehensible. Abominable. Regrettable. It is a very
strong contr..., con..., co..., strong, you know, str..., word to use for a guru
while chastising a disciple as exalted as Vyasadeva. So, the point here is that
there is the Vedic progressive perspective in which demigod worship is good. But
from the transcendental perspective, anything short of devotional service is
cheating. And, you know, "Bhāgavatam" calls anything short of pure devotional
service as "kaitava-dharma". As cheating religion. And that is what is being
emphasised in this verse, also. In Prabhupada's explanation of
"avidhi-pūrvakam". So, whatever we want, we can worship these dev..., devatas
and get it. Or we can worship Krishna, also. And Krishna will provide it to us.
Because Krishna is the ultimate Lord of all devatas. And that is what Krishna
will talk about in the next verse. So, look at the, let us look at the next
verse here.

        ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ
        bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca
        na tu mām abhijānanti
        tattvenātaś cyavanti te

So, "ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ". Krishna is telling, of, for all the "yajñā"s, I am
the "bhoktā". And I am the "prabhuḥ". I am the master. And I am the enjoyer. And
"na tu mām abhijānanti". Those who do not understand this. "tattvenātaś cyavanti
te". "tattvena". In reality. "ataḥ". Therefore. "cyavanti te". So, those who do
not understand Me properly in truth, they will fall down. So, again, the point
of this verse is, fall. So, if we look at what is happening, 20-21 has told that
those who worship the devatas, like sur..., they do "puṇyam". And go to
"surendra-lokam". Like they worship Indra, go to Indra. Through karma-kanda.
They will fall back. Then 22nd said, on the other hand, for those who worship
Me, I will protect them forever. Then, 23rd says that those who are worshipping
the other Gods are also worshipping Me. But it is "avidhi-pūrvakam". And what is
the result of worshipping other Gods? You know. Krishna is telling the general
principle in this verse. So, actually, He has told in 23rd verse that those who
are worshipping other Gods are also worshipping Him. But improperly. And He has
already told that the results of worshipping theother Gods and worshipping Him
is not the same. Now, why is it not the same? Somebody may say that, actually,
the, those who are worshipping other Gods are also worshipping Him. Then, why
don't both get the same results? Because of ignorance. So, they do not know
about Krishna's transcendental position. If we do not know Krishna's position.
If we do not love Krishna. Then, we cannot return back to Krishna. Because that
is not what we are seek..., seeking or desiring. We will get ultimately what we
desire. Of course, along with what we derv..., deserve. But our desire is
important. So, Krishna is telling the general principle that anyone who does not
understand His position, they would not get that eternal result. So, He will not
intervene in their lives. Because that is not what they want. So, if we see the
emphasis is on "avidhi-pūrvakam" in the previous verse. Why? Because Krishna is
telling that that is the reason why they are not getting the eternal result
which is available for those who worship Him. So, you know, Krishna is telling
over here. What we should we understand? Understand that He is the "bhoktā". And
the "prabhur". Now, Krishna has talked about the same point in another context
in 5.29.

        bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ
        sarva-loka-maheśvaram
        suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati    

So, He says, "bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ". That one who understands I am the
"bhoktā" of all the "yajña"s. So, Krishna is telling the same point over here.

        ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ
        bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca

I am the "bhoktā". I am the "prabhur". And one who does not understand this.
Such a person falls away. "tattvenātaś cyavanti te". "cyavanti te". You know.
So, here, the point which Krishna is making is, ignorance of His position. And
His, Krishna is telling, My position is not some, you know, generic
all-pervading Brahman that accommodates all the devatas. No. He is saying that
"ahaṁ". I. And, you know, I have been understood as the enjoyer. And as the
master. And if we do not understand it, the we fall away. So, Krishna is using
the "tattvena". Those who, Krishna has also used the word "tattvataḥ" in 4.9. In
truth. We have to understand Krishna in truth. Then, we can return back to Him.
So, you know, here, Prabhupada also quotes from 3.9 in the Bhagavad Gita. Where:

        yajñārthāt karmaṇo ’nyatra

That ultimately all work was done for sake of "yajña". Otherwise:

        loko ’yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ

So, ab..., bandh..., it will cause bondage. So, similarly, "tattvenātaś cyavanti
te". One will fall back. So, you know, fall back, you know, falling back has
already d..., been talked about in 21st verse. What is the falling back? That
ev..., one may be even elevated to heaven. But in heaven, one will fall back to
this world. Because of, you know, the "puṇyam" getting exhausted. Now, so,
Kri..., now, Krishna asks, ok, then what is the, Krishna may get, the question
may come up at this point. Ok. Then, what happens to those who actually worship
the devatas? He says, they fall back. But what do, what is the use of devata,
worship of the devatas? And what is its difference from worshipping You? So,
Krishna will give a summary verse. It is one of the most off quoted verses of
the Bhagavad Gita, Vaishna..., Prabhupada.

        yānti deva-vratā devān
        pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ
        bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā
        yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām

So, "yānti deva-vratā devān". So, those who worship the devatas, they go to the
"devān". That they go, they go, they go, they go to the demigods. "pitṝn yānti
pitṛ-vratāḥ". Those who worship the ancestors go to the ancestors. "bhūtāni
yānti bhūtejyā". That those who worship the, you know, you know, ghosts. They go
to the ghosts. "yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām". So, "yānti deva-vratā devān". So,
Krish..., what is Krishna explaining over here? That, you know, let us look at,
look at this verse. Actually, we could say that, roughly, this verse is talking
about, you know, the point that different paths lead to different destinations.
So, "yānti deva". That those who worship the devatas. They go to the devatas.
So, that, He, Krishna has talked about briefly in the previous verse, also.
"pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ". Those who worship the ancestors go to the ancestors.
So, this verse talks about, it is a very clear and categorical, you know, you
know, contradiction to the popular notion that all paths lead to the same goal.
You know. Now, this verse says that, different paths lead to different
destinations. And all forms of worship are not the same. You know. You know. You
know. You know. So, actually speaking, "yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām". If you want
to come back to Me, you will have to worship Me. We have discussed this
elaborately in our Isopanishad verses about how the different paths do not lead
to the same goal. I will not repeat that over here. But suffice it to say that,
Prabhupada explains the, you know, the, you know, you know, point about how, you
know, this knowledge is not, clear, not, this clear knowledge is not available
so easily. So, what is this?

"The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore distributing sublime information
to the entire human society to the effect that by simply chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mantra one can become perfect in this life and go back home, back to Godhead."

So, most of Srila Prabhupada's purport focuses on the point of "yānti mad-yājino
’pi mām". Those who worship Me, they will attain Me. You know. "yānti mad". You
know. Those who worship Me, will attain Me. Now, you know, you know, you know,
where, is a, Prabhupada talks about the sublime planets.

"people have no information of these sublime planets where Kṛṣṇa and Viṣṇu live,
and because they do not know of them they fall down."

So, we all were in this category. But by Prabhupada's mercy, we have the
opportunity to turn back to Krishna for an eternal life there. So, now, after
describing this, Krishna will contrast devotional service to the devatas. Or
s..., worship of the devatas and His devotional service in another way. In terms
of the simplicity of worship. So, you know, you know:

        trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā
        yajñair iṣṭvā svar-gatiṁ prārthayante

So, when demigods have to be, you know, be worshipped, then "yajñair iṣṭvā".
Elaborate "yajñair" has to be performed. And for "soma" rasa has to be provided.
And through all those sacrifices, then one can, if they are done properly, one
can please the devatas. But, here, Krishna says, as far as worshipping Him is
concerned, it is extremely simple. And that He describes in this verse. You
know. You know. So, He describes.

        patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ
        yo me bhaktyā prayacchati
        tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam
        aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ

So, "patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ". That, you know, you know, what I can, what,
I can, can just offer to something very simple. That a leaf. A flower. A fruit.
Or even simply water. And the, when one offers with "bhaktyā prayacchati". If
one offers Me with the devotion. Then, "tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam". So, that
which is offered. "upahṛtam". "upahṛ" is, you know, a gift. So, "upahṛtam" is
that which is gifted to Me. Offered to Me with love. Then, "aśnāmi
prayatātmanaḥ". I accept it. You know. So, here, Krishna is emphasising how, you
know, He is the two distinct aspects to it. Or, we, two distinct emphasis for
this verse. So, "bhaktyā". "bhaktyā prayacchati". "bhakty-upahṛtam". And
"prayatātmanaḥ". All these point talk about the consciousness from our side.
That, you know, there has to be devotion. There has to be pure heart.
"prayatātmanaḥ" is pure-hearted one. So, if somebody wants to approach Krishna
with the devotion, with love, then, you know, you know, Krishna reciprocate for
such a person by flooding that person with, you know, His mercy. And one aspect
of the mercy that Krishna accepts whatever is offered. Even if it is very
simple. The famous pastime is there. That when Krishna came to Hastinapur.
Sorry. To ma..., in..., in to just Hastinapur as a Shanti Doot. There were these
two cities. Hastinapur and Indraprastha. So, Indraprastha was the capital of the
mo..., Pandavas. And Hastinapur was the capital of the Kauravas. So, after the
Pandavas had been exiled. Then, Indraprastha was also taken over by the
Kauravas. But the Kauravas were ruling in Hastinapur. Hastinapur is, you know,
more or less today's Delhi city. So, you know, after the Pandavas came out of
Vanvas. So, in, Krishna came as Shanti Doot. And at that time, you know, you
know, Duryodhana had an intention of trying to bribe Krishna unto his side. And
to placate Krishna by giving lot of material gifts. And thereby, you know, you
know, take Him, steering Him off the mission of to, brokering peace. You know.
So, he said g..., when, as soon as Krishna arrived. He says. Krishna, I arranged
a big feast for you. And then, Krishna says, I, I am not interested. He says.
Why? I arranged a feast for you. He says, take it. So, He says that, actually,
one person eats it in another person's house in two situations. Is, first is
that if that person is hungry. And second is, if there is affection between the
two people. Krishna says that I am not hungry. And because you are so inimical
to My dear devotees. The Pandavas. There is no affection between them. Between
us. So, I will not eat. And then, what happens? Krishna chooses to go to the
house of Vidura. When He goes to the house of Vidura, what does Vidura do?
Actually, Vidura is not even there at the house. And although Vidura is a
brother. No doubt. A stepbrother. But still, a brother of, you know, you know,
"Dhṛtarāṣṭra", who is the kin..., who is officially the king. Duryodhana is
actually having all the power. Duryo..., "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" is officially the king.
But still, you know, you know, Vidura, despite being connected with the royal
family, is not living in much royal opulence. And that is why when Krishna comes
along, there is practically nothing in his house. And He has come unexpectedly.
And when He has come unexpectedly, at that time, you know, Vidura's wife, she
sees, oh, there is nothing. And she just sees there is some banana peels. She
sees there is these some bananas over there. So, she want..., what should I
offer to Krishna? Krishna has Himself come. So, normally, you know, you know, if
m..., you know, so, devotee. A devotee leaves. If somebody is going to come to
the house, you know, then they want to cook very nicely. An elaborate feast to
offer. So, now, what if the Lord Himself is coming. So, but, unfortunately,
there is nothing. So, how, how, you know, a fruit is a very simple thing to
offer.

So, but Vidura's wife is so excited that when she is offering the fruit, she
takes the fruit. And she, she wants to offer it the best that she can. She wants to
take out the peel. And offer the fruit. But, you know, in excitement, she takes
out the peel. And throws away the fruit. And offers Krishna the peel. And what
does Krishna do? Krishna eats it. Krishna eats it. Now, you know, just to
understand this pastime better. I once tried to eat a banana peel. Now, you
cannot eat it even a little bit more than a fraction. You know. It is just, not
just tasteless. It is very difficult to taste. Tasteless means having no taste.
Difficult to taste means having an unpalatable taste. So, actually, now, Krishna
ate not just one, two, three. Krishna ate so many. And then, finally, Krishna
said, I have been satisfied. And then, Krishna left. And then, Vidura came
rushing back to the house. He said. Oh, I h..., heard Krishna had come to our
house. She says, yes. Yes. Yes. We are so fortunate. Where were you? I was
missing you. You should have come back earlier. He said. No. I did that Krishna
was going to come. And then, so happened. Did you, what, what did you do? Did
you offer Him something? She said yes. There was nothing unfortunately. But the
fruits o..., I offered Him fruits. And He ate a lot of fruits. Just see. The
peels are lying here. And she looked back. And she stared. And Vidura stared.
And they looked at the bananas lying there. They looked at each other. And both
of their minds and hearts were filled with the beautiful form. And the beautiful
heart of Krishna. And tears were, it is streaming down from their eyes. He says:

        duryodhana ko bhoga na khayo, rukho saga vidura ghara khayo
        aise prema pujari radhe-syama syama-syama

So, this is the Lord who does not take an opulent feast at the house of
Duryodhana. But takes, just, not just fruit. But actually, you know, the, you
know, g..., peels of a fruit. So, you know, this is "prema pujari". What Krishna
is looking for is love. And love of, it, through any medium, Krishna accepts
that. So, actually, "patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ". So, this is "phalaṁ". And
there are pastimes for each of these. "patraṁ puṣpaṁ". So, you know, Gajendra,
when he was in great crisis. I have described in the Tenth, Eighth Canto.
He was fighting, fighting, with the crocodile. But he was lo..., losing the
battle. At that time, he just took a flower. And offered to Lord Narayan. He
offered the prayers, of course. That is the exact, that is the point of offering
bhakti. But along with that, what did he offer? Materially, just a simple
flower. And he says, you know, you know, as he offered a flow..., flower, you
know, in a, in a strong. And he says:

        nārāyaṇākhila-guro bhagavan namas te

So, "bhagavan namas te". He offered obeisances in that way. And then, Lord
Narayana, you know, blessed him. Lord Vishnu. So, similarly, we have "patraṁ".
There are many pastimes, of course. At one time, you know, you know, Rukmani was
there. And, you know, basically, she, or was a whole long pastime. But she
offered a tulsi flower. And when she offered a tulsi flower. Tulsi leaf, rather.
Not flower. Tulsi leaf. So, there had been, you know, you know, you know, some
sort of m..., gambling match. In which, they had lost Krishna. And then, they
decided that we will give gold equivalent to Krishna. So, they said Narada Muni,
you know, Narada Muni said that, actually, you know, you know, we put Krishna on
one side of the weighing scale. And we put the, put, you know, gold on the other
side. So, no matter how much gold was put. You know. It was never enough. Never
enough. Never enough. Krishna was always weighing too much. And finally, Krishna
just, put a, put of tulsi over there. And then, su..., actually, the tulsi
became heavier. So, the point is that Krishna is conquered by love. Krishna is,
so, there are many pastimes which illustrate this point. And the essential point
is simply what what pleases the heart, Lord is the devotion of our heart. And
with this devotion, then even if the expression of that devotion is very simple,
it does not matter. It does not matter. Because the expression of that devotion
is what the devo..., what the Lord does not primarily look at. He looks at the
devotion. So, this does not mean that we should not, you know, even if we have
a million dollars, we should offer Krishna a leaf. You know. When there is
devotion in the heart, we will want to offer the best that we can to the Lord.
And that is the meaning of devotion. That whatever we have, we offer the best of
it to the person whom we love. So, but Krishna is telling if we do not have
anything to offer. Then, Krishna will accept even the simplest of things. In the
80th and 81st Chap..., in the 80th, 81st Chapter of the Tenth Canto, there is a
pastime of Sudama. He has offered some, you know, rice. A chipped rice. Which
is a very simple item. But Krishna was delighted with that. So, the simplicity
of devotion, you know, is what is talked about in this verse. Now, Prabhupada
also uses this verse to explain how, actually, the, you know, Krishna does not
mention any flesh or any meat item over here. So, Krishna says that, we cannot
offer these things to Krishna. Because Krishna does not take those things. So,
this verse is not primarily a dietary prescription. But that is also an
important point. It is significant that while Krishna is talking about the
deity, about offering Him anything. He does not mention any of those items. So,
you know, "yo me bhaktyā prayacchati". So, those who offer, when we offer like
this to Krishna. Krishna says, I accept. Now, at this time, the question may
come up. What if le..., we are not in situation where we can offer these things
to Krishna. Because Krishna is not there right now. So, Krishna is present as
the deity, also. And we can offer to the deity. And Krishna will accept through
the deity, also. Wonderful offerings. So, we have Cait..., you know, we have
many pastimes in that connection, also. You know. But whatever benefit is
available to us, you know, by worshipping Krishna directly, that is also
available to worship, through worshipping Krishna, you know, through the deity
form. Then, one may get the question that, but, you know, what if I do not have
devotion? So, one is Krishna's presence for offering. But Krishna presence is,
is ok. The deity is there. What if I do not have devotion? Then, what will
happen? Then, Krishna says, still, you can offer it to Me. You know. Offer to
Me. So, Prabhupada has talked about, you know, elaborately in the purport. We
discussed some of these point. Now, how is Krishna accepting? Prabhupada
explains. Prabhupada quotes from the "Brahma-saṁhitā".
       
        aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛtti-manti

He is, and God, says here. Therefore when:

"Kṛṣṇa’s hearing the devotee’s words of love in offering foodstuffs is wholly
identical with His eating and actually tasting."

So, all His senses are identical and interchangeable. Now, when we say
Krishna's senses are identical and interchangeable. You know. That does not mean
that we treat Krishna impersonally. When Yashoda Mayi is feeding Krishna. She
does not put food in His ears. She puts food in her, in Krishna's mouth. Why?
Because, you know, when we are serving Krishna, we are not concerned with time
to test Krishna's omnipotence. You know. We are not testing. You know. If I put
in the ear, does it go inside? No. Our goal is to serve Krishna in the best
possible way. So, Yashoda Mayi, she does not care. You know. She does not think
about Krishna as God. She thinks Krishna is my beloved child. And if I do not
feed Him, He will become weak and sick. And He may even die. So, when we
consider the pastime, suddenly, Krishna may exhibit omnipotence, also. At any
moment. You know. But, you know, our focus is not on examining Krishna's
omnipotence. Our focus is on rendering the best possible service. But the point
remains that when we are offering the food to the deities. You know. People may
ask. You know. Food remains as it is. Where is the, what has happened? Actually,
it is the devotion that we offered. That has been accepted by Krishna. And, you
know, you know, the mercy that Krishna has given, that has come back through the
prasad. It is, it is a reciprocation of love. You know. Sometimes, you know,
when a rela..., when, say, one relative goes to, you know, meet another
relatives. You know. Say, the two, you know, cousins are there. And one cousin
goes to meet the other family. Other family. So, at that time, the mother may
give some nice food. And some sweets in a box. And this child, it goes to His
uncle's house. And then, he gives the sweets to the uncle and attend the cousin.
And they talk. And maybe stays overnight. He has a sleepover there. And the
next morning, when he is leaving, the aunty, you know, she will d..., what she
will do in, you know, cultured families? They will not le..., let the box go
away empty. So, she will fill the box with some other na..., you know, you know,
some other snack item. Some sweets. And she will give it to him. Now, if
somebody is obsta..., observing simply from the external view, that person may
say, what is, so, the box went inside, went inside the house. Box came outside
of the house. Nothing happened. No. But something, you know, sweet was
reciprocated. Externally, the box seems to be the same. But actually, you know,
the content of the box, you know, was not the same. Now, even if it happens that
the same sweet was offered by the friend. And, by the mother. And the boy took
the same sweet. And then the, the, he is, you know, aunty had also made the same
sweet. She gave that. So, from the external point of view, not only would the
box seem the same. Content may also seem the same. But actually, the content is
not the same. What has happened is, through the, giving of the sweet love was
offered. And through the returning of the sweet. You know. You know. You know.
Same, maybe, the content is the same. But the sweet is different. You know.
Their love is reciprocated. So, like that, you know, when we offer food to
Krishna. We are offering our bhakti to Him. And the prasad is the medium through
which that bhakti is offered. The, when, at the time, it is bhoga. And then,
when Krishna accepts it, the food externally remains the same. But what happens
is, Krishna gives His Kripa. Krishna gives His mercy. And in this way, you know,
there is the reciprocation of love through the medium of food. Now, after that,
Kri..., Krishna, you know, you know, considers the possibility. What if somebody
does not have devotion? Krishna says, it does not matter. Still, you offer to
Me.

        yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi
        yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat
        yat tapasyasi kaunteya
        tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam

So, Krishna is telling generically over here that whatever one does. One can
offer it to Him. "yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi". Whatever we do. Whatever we eat.
Whatever we give away. "juhoṣi dadāsi". Whatever we offer to anyone. Whatever
we are offering. All these things. "yat tapasyasi". "tapasyasi". Whatever
austerities. You know. "tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam". You do this. You offer that to
Me. So, Krishna is not using the word bhakti over here. So, the, what does
that mean? Krishna is saying that, you know, you know, s..., just the principle
of offering to Him is also auspicious. Just the principle of offering to Him is
also auspicious. Now, you know, there are two word points here, absent away.
"bhakti" is also not mentioned. And "aśnāmi" is also not mentioned. So, Krishna
does not say specifically that I will accept it. Now, that does not mean that
Krishna is going to reject it. See, when we offer food to Krishna. And a pure
devotee offers food to Krishna. Is there a difference? Yes. There is a
difference in the quality of devotion. And naturally, accordingly, there will be
difference in the quality of reciprocation. But still, that does not mean that,
everybody who does not have pure devotion is left out of the world of devotion.
Proportionate to our devotion, Krishna reciprocates. So, in that verse, the
emphasis was on "aśnāmi". And accept. And "bhaktyā". But here, the emphasis is
on the principle of offering. Krishna is saying, "tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam". You
offer it to Me. And Krishna is telling, by this, they will, they will get
auspiciousness. You will get purified. And Krishna will describe in the next
verse how, what will be the auspicious result that will come by this kind of
offering. But the broad principle is that "yat karo...". Whatever we do, off...,
f..., we offer it to the Supreme Lord. And when we t..., act in this way, by
that, we make rapid spiritual advancement. And in the next verse, Krishna will
tell us what happens.

        śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ
        mokṣyase karma-bandhanaiḥ
        sannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā
        vimukto mām upaiṣyasi

So, when we offer our activities. And in that way, our life to Krishna.
"śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ". "śubha". "aśubha". "phalaiḥ". So, we become free from
the auspicious and inauspicious results of our work. "mokṣyase". We become free.
"karma-bandhanaiḥ". "karma-bandhanaiḥ". From the bondage of "karma", we will
become free. And when we betas..., become from the bondage of karma. Then,
"sannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā". Such a person is engaged in "sannyāsa-yoga". So, it is
interesting. "sannyāsa" means disconnection. And "yoga" means connection.
"sannyāsa" is renunciation. "yoga" is connection. So, you know,
"sannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā". In the Sixth Chapter, f..., first and second verses,
Krishna has told about, also:

        sa sannyāsī ca yogī ca
        na niragnir na cākriyaḥ

That "sannyāsa" and "yoga" is the same thing. "sannyāsa" is disconnection from
matter. And "yoga" is connection with spirit. So, Krishna is integrating the two
verse over here. "sannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā". Such a person who is offering all the
works to Me, you know, such a person will become free from the auspicious and
inauspicious of this world. See, "puṇyam". And "pāpā". These are the, you know,
two kinds of activities that we can do. And "puṇyam" is better than "pāpā".
Definitely. But still, both are material. And both will keep us within karmic
bondage. So, if we want liberation from karmic bondage, then we should become
free from both. And Krishna says, by doing your work for Me. By offering your
work to Me. You will become free from those both. "śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ",
"mokṣyase". One will become free. And then, what will be the end result? One
will not only stay b..., free from karmic bondage. But "vimukto". "Mukti" is
liberation. But "vimukto" is a special liberation. The ultimate liberation. The
highest liberation. What does highest liberation lead, lead to? "mām upaiṣyasi".
Will attain Me. Will attain Me. "mām upaiṣyasi". You know. So, Krishna is
telling the ult..., you know, this special liberation is, you will return back
to Me. This is a gradual progression that will happen. Now, Prabhupada quotes
the famous verse from "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" of "yuktaṁ vairāgyam". Of
whatever we want. Whatever, you know, whatever, you know, can be used in
Krishna's service. That should be used in Krishna's service. We have discussed
this verse earlier. And then, you know, you know, Prabhupada talks about "mām
upa". Five different kinds of liberations. But one comes to, you know, after one
will go back to the Lord. That is what Prabhupada emphasises in this. And, and
interestingly, Prabhupada quotes a, you know, the verse over here that, you
know:

        vaiṣṇavera kriyā-mudrā vijñeha nā bujhaya

You know. So, there is a verse like that. There is another verse like rep...,
which Prabhupada is quoting over here. "tāṅra vākya, kriyā, mudrā vijñeha nā
bujhaya". So, even if one tries to understand, one cannot understand the
activities of a pure devotee. The words of a pure devotee. The gestures of a
pure devotee. What is the point being made over here? What is the connection
with the verse? The connection is "śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ". "mokṣyase". That
for an, you know, advanced devotee, the advanced devotee is not bound by the,
you know, goodness and the badness of this world. The pure devotee is bound
simply by love of Krishna. And because of the love of Krishna, whatever the
devotee does, is ultimately good for everyone. But the emphasis of the devotee
is not on doing good. The emphasis of the, of devotees is doing, serving,
serving God. And for that, sometimes, the devotee may apparently do something
bad, also, Something which is not Vedic. You know. Vedicly standard. Like say,
you know, you know, the, we discussed in the Second Chapter while "Mādhavendra
Purī"'s verses are there. That he says. I cannot do my "sandhyā-vandana". I
cannot do my "tarpaṇa" I cannot do my various rituals. He says, "bhadram astu".
I offer my respects to you. But I will, I am simply, I am going to remember
Krishna. That is enough for me. So, like that, "śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ",
"mokṣyase". One becomes freed from all sinful complication, all material
complications. Whether they be positive or negative. And "vimukto mām
upaiṣyasi". So, this is the ultimate goal. Ultimate perfection of demigod
worship. You know. Sorry. Of pure devotional service. That by pure devotional
service, we, you know, you know, "vimukto mām upaiṣyasi". We return back to
Krishna. We will continue the, about the glory of devotional service. And we
will sy..., more systematically, you know, recap these verses. And look at how
Krishna is glorifying bhakti in different ways in this chapter in our next
class.

Thank you very much.
