Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iPDaUApVFBU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=KePula1S5DFdp_pKMpRrK8oxbiR8MTU0ODQ4ODcyMkAxNTQ4NDAyMzIy&event=video_description&v=iPDaUApVFBU&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_098_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_09_Text_03_to_10_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the Ninth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. The most confidential knowledge. We
discussed 9.1 and 2. The glories of the knowledge that Krishna is going to give.
This will free one from all inauspiciousness. And this will burn away all sinful
reactions. Like that. Discuss, now, let us, you know, Krishna will glorify this
knowledge by talking about its converse. That if one does not, you know, have
faith in this knowledge. Does not in..., imbibe this knowledge. Then, what will
happen? That He will describe in the next verse. 9.3. Let us start with it.

        aśraddadhānāḥ puruṣā
        dharmasyāsya paran-tapa
        aprāpya māṁ nivartante
        mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani

So, "aśraddadhānāḥ puruṣā". So, those, that person who is not having faith.
"aśraddadhānāḥ". "dharmasyāsya paran-tapa". That in the "dharma", the person
does not have faith. "aprāpya māṁ nivartante". Such a person will not attain Me.
But will instead, what happen? Will "mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani". Will continue on
in the cycle of birth and death. So, here, you know, Krishna describes the
consequence of faithlessness as the continuation in the cycle of birth and
death. So, normally, if we do not put faith in the medicine, then we cannot be
cured. And our disease continues. Same way, Krishna is telling, this medicine
can cure you. But if you do not take the medicine. If you do not have faith in
the medicine, you will not take the medicine. And if you do not take the
medicine, then you will have to continue on. You know. Two things will happen.
"aprāpya māṁ". Will not attain me. Only when we attain Krishna, we go out of
cycle of birth and death. But if we do not attain Krishna, "nivartante". We will
return back. Where? "mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani". The path of birth and death. Now,
Srila Prabhupada's purport elaborately talks about faith. And he talks about
faith in terms of the three adhikaris. You know. M..., kanistha, madhyama,
uttama. We already discussed this in "Nectar of Instruction". So, we will not go
into the discussion of, you know, those stages here. But Prabhupada's,
emphasises, you know, you know, interesting point. He says that:

"development of that faith is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness."

That means what? You know. What is process of Krishna Consciousness? It is
supposed to do, it is meant to develop that faith. And if we are developing
faith, then we are actually doing Krishna Conscious activity. So, naturally, if
we are practicing Krishna Conscious sincerely, you know, then we will be
experiencing purification. We will be experience pacification. We will be
experiencing satisfaction. And that will keep increasing our faith. Just as a
patient who is cured of a disease keeps experiencing and relishing the cure. You
know. So, even Prabhupada writes, what is the faith that has been talked about
over here? We have discussed earlier about how faith be at multiple levels. We
can say faith that God exists. Faith that God is a person. There can be
different levels of faith. Here, the faith, which is talked about is faith in
bhakti-yoga. So, faith, Prabhupada co.., you know, correlates with the
"Bhāgavatam" verse.

        yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena
        tṛpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ
        prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇāṁ
        tathaiva sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā

This is 4.31.14 in the "Bhāgavatam". "yathā taror". "taror" is a tree. Just as
when we take a tree. And "mūla-niṣecanena". We root water of the root of the
tree. "mūla-niṣecanena" is watering the root. Then, "tṛpyanti". Satisfied.
"tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ". Then, the remaining parts of the tree, there is
stand, there is, their branches, that way exist, living beings. All of this
becomes satisfied by the practice of, you know, watering the root of the tree.
Similarly, "prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇāṁ". So, you know, "prāṇopahārāc". That
means when we satisfy the stomach, then "endriyāṇāṁ". All the senses of the body
become satisfied. "tathaiva sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā". Similarly, everybody is
worshiping, satisfied, by satisfying Lord Acyuta. So, this verse is talking
about, you know, a principle of spiritual mysticism. What is spiritual
mysticism? We may wonder, how is it possible that by satisfying Krishna,
everyone would be satisfied. That is actually mystical. But it is mystical, not
in the sense that misty. It is unclear. But it is that it has to be experienced.
It is devotional mysticism. The devotional mysticism is not just that somebody
can, you know, v..., you know, float in the sky. Suddenly, that person is
sitting. And the person levitates. That may be one level of mysticism. But how
much satisfaction is that going to give anyone? It is a little bit attention
to, my, oh, this, you can levitate. Just accomplished yogi. Somebody can have
some practice at the earth. Something like that. All that cannot give lasting
satisfaction. But when we understand. Then internalise. And realise this
principle that by satisfying Krishna, I will become satisfied. Then, we may gain
lasting happiness. And faith in that principle is, Prabhupada says, the faith
that has been talked about. So, faith that by glorifying Krishna. By serving
Krishna. By loving Krishna. We will gain the highest happiness. And this faith
progressively increases from the kanistha, to the madhyama, to the uttama
adikari. You know. You know. You know. You know. And Prabhupada talks about the
third, you know, kanistha adikari. That, h..., you know:

"Those who have no faith even after hearing about Kṛṣṇa and the excellence of
devotional service, who think that it is simply eulogy,"

So, here, the word eulogy is, i..., is used in the sense of, you know, empty
praise. Exaggeration.

"ﬁnd the path very difﬁcult, even if they are supposedly engaged in devotional
service. For them there is very little hope of gaining perfection. Thus faith is
very important in the discharge of devotional service."

So, what is Prabhupada talking about over here? It may seem little scary
statement that they have very little hope for gaining perfection. The point is
that, actually, you know, you know, you know devotional service is not just the
matter of external engagement. It is also matter of inner involvement. You know.
I may chant Hare Krishna. I may go to a temple. I may dance in kirtan. Now, all
this is good. All this is essential, also. But through all this, ultimately, my
hea..., heart has to be involved. And if I am just going through the motions of
doing these things. And internally, I am being eaten away by doubts. Then,
eventually, those doubts will manifest externally. And we give up those
activities. So, you know, that is why if somebody is not working on, you know,
resolving the doubts. Working on developing faith, then there is, so, every
person supposedly engaged in devotional service for some o..., some other
motive, apart from purification and elevation. Then, one will not move to
continue for very long. So, how do we work on our faith? You know. We have to
find out what are the things that increase our faith. And do those activities.
Just like muscles. We have discussed earlier. By exercising, the muscles grow.
Similarly, we, you know, find out what is it that increase our faith. It may be
studying the philosophy more. It may be associating with particular devotees.
Doing certain activities that actually help us feel the purification. The
satisfaction in the heart. You know. By that, we increase our faith. And there
are certain issues which we can put in the state of suspended judgement. If they
trouble us too much. And keep forward, you know, keep moving forward. And doing
those things which help us develop our faith. So, let us look at the section
overview of the S..., Ninth Chapter. So, it will understand what is happening.
We discussed the first section now. Developing kevala bhakti by knowledge about
Krishna. The section was the glory. Knowledge about Krishna. What will it lead
to? It will lead to pure devotional service. And that is what this is going to
talk about. Now, second section will talk about Krishna's inconceivable
relationship with the material world. Let us look at this now. So:

        mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ
        jagad avyakta-mūrtinā
        mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni
        na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ

You know. So, here, Krishna is telling "mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ". This "sarvaṁ".
This whole "sarvaṁ jagad". It is pervaded by Me. "avyakta-mūrtinā". In My
unmanifested form. "mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni". That the whole world is situated
in Me. "mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni". "na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ". But, you know, I
am not situated in this. In this world. Now, what is this referring to? Krishna
is starting the description of His relationship with the material world. By
explaining that, "mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ". He pervades all of existence. Now,
how does Krishna pervade? There are various levels. You know. One is, actually,
whatever exists is His energy only. Material and spiritual. That He has talked
about in Seventh Chapter, already. And there, also, He says:

        sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva

That He is pervading everything is immanence we talked about. You know. You
know. We, is, "raso ’ham apsu kaunteya". And those things of verses from 7.8 to
11. Hmm. He is like the threa..., you know, thread in a necklace. So, similarly,
He is underlying, unifying aspect of all of creation. So, that is there. You
know. Here:

        mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ
        jagad avyakta-mūrtinā

So, "avyakta-mūrtinā" means unmanifested form. So, that is referring to,
generally speaking, this is reg..., to, referring to the brahmajyoti. This can
also be referrings, refer to the energies of the Lord. Prabhupada, in different
contexts, you know, says this, actually, Krishna, everything that exists is
Krishna's energy. And that is why everything is meant to be used in Krishna's
service. So, "jagad avyakta-mūrtinā". So, in general, this ca..., can be used to
refer to the brahmajyoti. Krishna is pervading all of existence through
brahmajyoti. Then, "mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni". "mat-sthāni". That
"sarva-bhūtāni". That actually all living beings are situated in Me. You know.
How are they all situated in Me? They are situated in Me. This is re..., this
can said to refer to the Supersoul aspect. You know. The Supersoul is the rest
of all living beings, you know, is, sustains everything. "mat-sthāni
sarva-bhūtāni". "na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ". But I am not situated in them. I am
not situated in them means what? This refers to Krishna's transcendence. Krishna
exists beyond. The material world. He exists in the spiritual world. So, I am
not situated in these things. "na cāhaṁ". "na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ". I am not
situated. Krishna has talked about this time, point, in the Seventh Chapter,
also. You know. You know. You know. You know. In, when He talked about His
relationship with the modes. In 7.12 and 13. Where He said:

        ye caiva sāttvikā bhāvā
        rājasās tāmasāś ca ye
        matta eveti tān viddhi
        na tv ahaṁ teṣu te mayi

"na tv ahaṁ teṣu". I am not situated in them. They are situated in Me. So, He is
saying, first of all that, He di...,  is not exhausted by pervading in material
existence. And next verse, He says:

        tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair
        ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat
        mohitaṁ nābhijānāti
        mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam

I am beyond all this. I am transcendental to the three modes. I have, all living
beings are bewildered by three modes. But I transcend the three modes. And here,
He is saying, "na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ". "na cāhaṁ". That I am not situated in
this. Now, you know, you know, Srila Prabhupada emphasises the point that,
actually, Krishna, you know, cannot be understood by material sense perception.
It is, b..., H..., i..., here, He is understood by spiritual revelation. So:

        svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

It is quoted in several times. He quotes once again over here in this purport.
And then, Prabhupada would often give example of the pervasiveness through
influence. Through power. So, king pervades the establishment. Through, you
know, you know, through king..., kingdom. Or an owner perv..., pervades
establishment that he owns through the influence that is there. So, that way is
one way in which Krishna pervades through His energies. Whatever is happening,
He, He, it is, it, the interaction of His energies. And that is how He controls.
Now, the next verse reveals Kri..., the inconceivability of this point further.

        na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni
        paśya me yogam aiśvaram
        bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho
        mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ

So, "na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni". Not situated in Me. "na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni".
They are not situated in Me. "paśya me yogam aiśvaram". That just see My "yogam
aiśvaram". The inconceivability of My power. "yogam aiśvaram". And what is that,
that He will, what is the, further He is elaborating? It is "bhūta-bhṛn na ca
bhūta-stho". "bhūta-bhṛn". I am the maintainer of all living beings. But "na ca
bhūta-stho". I am not in situated in the cosmic manifestation. "mamātmā
bhūta-bhāvanaḥ". Actually, I am the source of all manifestations. These are a
lot of, you know, conceptual, concentrated, h..., insight, you know, in this
verse. Let us look at it one by one. First line is "na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni".
Now, you know, if there cannot be a more direct contradiction of a previous
statement as it is here. You know. Krishna has said in four, in 9.4, just the
previous verse. 9.4C, you know, C is nine..., which, "mat-sth...":

        mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni
        na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ

So, 9.4C was "mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni". All living beings are situated in Me.
But here, in 9.5A, what is He saying? "na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni". So, it is a
direct contradiction. Now, how can Krishna contradict? Is it that sometimes, you
know, when we are giving classes, we really, we make some mistake. And say,
actually, I did not mean that. I mean this. Is Krishna making mistake over here?
H..., no. Kishna, He does not make any mistakes. He is God. He is omniscient. He
is actually, through contradictions, helping us to rise to a higher level of
understanding. A higher level of understanding. You know. We discussed about
"arthāpatti". You know. "arthāpatti" is that when two contradictory statements
are made, you know, so as to forcefully point one's attention, draw one's
attention to a deeper unifying truth. A deeper truth that reconciles both the
statements. So, you know, suppose, we have a statement. You know, they, you
know, so, you know, Devadatta does not eat food throughout the day. That is
statement A. Statement B is Devadatta's weight is increasing. Now, can these two
statements be true? That Person is not eating food, the weight cannot increase.
So, either one of, ei..., either the first statement is not true. Or second
statement is not true. But if you are told, both statements are true. Then, how,
how do we understand it? How do we understand it? Then, we have to propose a
third statement which reconciles it. So, what will be third statement? Devadatta
eats secretely at night. So, he eats secretely at night. There, He says it,
throughout the day, he does not eat. But his weight is increasing. So, now, the
third statement is not directly stated in either of these two statements. But it
is implied. And the ai..., if both are true, then this has to be true. So that
both of them can be reconciled. So, "arthāpatti" is called as postulation. And
postulation is a form of law..., you know, form of, you know, you know, you
know, you know, one of the subpramanas. One of the ways of acquiring knowledge.
You know. So, "arthāpatti" is often used in scripture to e..., make, you know,
you know, to make a, to reveal the harmony in apparently contradictory
statements. You know. How is that done? By, you know, the, you know, you know,
postulation of a third statement. For example, scriptures say that, God does not
have a form, is not, arupa. And then, the scriptures also say "uru-rupa".
Gajendra and his prayer says:

        arūpāyoru-rūpāya
        nama āścarya-karmaṇe

"arūpāya". He has no form. And He has many forms. So, how are these two
statements to be reconciled? Their reconcilation is by the point that, actually,
both of them are..., are pointing to certain aspects. So, He does not have a
material form. But has many e..., spiritual forms. So, "arūpāya" is ref..,
so, the Lord has a form that is not material. But spiritual. That is how these
two can be reconciled. So, similarly, you know, you know, we can reconcile, you
know, different statements. You know. When they are seem to be superficially
contradictory. So, you know, there are these statements. If we just try to
understand them at the literal level. Literal means, not that we have to go to,
you know, metaphorical or figurative. But if we just try to, if we get hung up
with them. You know. This must be wrong. This is right. Both of statem..., this
cannot make sense. If then these are like banana peels. You know. When you walk
on a banana peel, zupp. You slip and fall. So, like that, if we are not guided
by guru, sadhu, shastra, and we try to study scripture. Then, in scriptures,
often, we will find many philosophical banana peels. What do we mean by
philosophical banana peels? That means these are conc..., these are concepts.
When we try to walk on them, you know, conceptually, intellectually. Then tuck.
Our intellect slips. And it falls. So, if we do not want that to happen. Then,
we have to be careful. What we have to do is, we have to understand that this
has to be understood through guru, sadhu, shastra. So, "arthāpatti" may be
required. So, the philosophical banana peels, rather than seeing them as a sign
that oh, scriptures are contradictory. They do not make any sense. We should say
that, actually, you know, where there is a banana peel. There must be a banana
somewhere. So, what that means is there is a deeper insight to be had over here.
Let me be patient. Let me be submissive. Let me be inquisitive. And let me find
out what is the real, deeper understanding. So, that way, we will be able to
understand how we can move forward. So, here, Prabhupada gives a su..., you
know, the reconcilation. And he says, what does it mean? "na ca mat-sthāni
bhūtāni"? He explains that, burdens do not burden the Lord. See, "mat-sthāni
sarva-bhūtāni". All living beings are situated in Me. Now, this might convey the
idea to some people that if all living beings are situated in Him, then will the
Lord get burden? So, Prabhupada talks about the Greek or Roman conception of
atlas. Where Atlas is supposed to be carrying the, you know, globe. And
actually, the, when the whole map of the earth, one of the name is, for it is
atlas. And that name is from, comes from that, you know, Greek or Roman
conception of, you know, Atlas as one of the Gods. So, Atlas is carrying the
globe on his, you know, shoulder. And Atlas is burdened by carrying it for a
long time. So, that conception should not be entertained about Krishna. Because
Krishna is not burdened.

        na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni

He, Krishna is actually transcendental. And by His energies, everything happens.
So, "svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca". "svābhāvikī". Naturally, it happens.
Krishna does not have to endeavor. Krishna does not have to strive. And struggle.
And strain. And sweat. To do, get things done. No. "satya-saṅkalpa". He has
desires.

        icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā
        
You know. What happens is desc..., de..., described that Durga Devi,
"Brahma-saṁhitā" describes that "icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā". That
according to his "icchā". "ceṣṭate sā". Material energy does all the endeavors.
And things are done. So, "na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni" refers to how Krishna is not
burdened by the burden of main..., by, by the burden of maintaining material
existence. It happens by His energies. And then, you know, "paśya me yogam
aiśvaram". To Krishna, rather than, you know, being, you know, sometimes when we
make a mistake, we tend to be apologetic. Oh, po..., apologetic. You know. Oh, I
said that. I said that. Oh, does not make sense. Let me correct myself. You
know. But Krishna far from being apologetic, what is Krishna doing over here?
Krishna is saying, this is My, you know, He is celebrating this contradiction.
Krishna is not minimising. Or hushing. Or covering up the contradiction.
Sometimes, you know, when we make a mistake, then we say, you know, oh,
actually, you did not hear me properly. You know. I did not say that. I meant
this. But Krishna does not hush up. Krishna does not cover it up. Krishna
celebrates the contradiction by saying "paśya me yogam aiśvaram". Just see My
opulence. What is this? "yogam aiśvaram". You know. You know. Now, normally, we
talk about yoga in terms of connection and the process that we follow by which
we connect with the Lord. So, there is this bhakti-yoga. There is jnana-yoga.
There is, you know, kar..., karma-yoga. So, these are all the ac..., activities
that we do. Centered on bhakti, karma, jnana. By which yo..., by which we are
able to do yoga. By which we are able to connect with the Lord. But here,
Krishna is talking about yoga from His side. So, what is this referring to? You
know. "paśya me yogam aiśvaram". So, actually, Krishna also endeav..., you know,
Krishna also, He reveals Himself so that we can become connected with Him. So,
you know, you know, that will be called h..., as His "yogam aiśvaram". So, how
does Krishna help u..., you know, co..., help that yoga to happen? Yoga means
connection. So, for the connection between the Lord and the soul to happen, the
soul has to endeavor. And the sadhana, that the soul does, through various
paths. You know. That the paths get the name accordingly. Karma-yoga.
Jnana-yoga. Dha..., ashtanga-yoga. Whatever. Bhakti-yoga. So, now, but the Lord
also reveals Himself so that we can get to know Him. So, that revelation from
the Lord, that can also be called as yoga. Because that is also helping us to
connect. So, Krishna is saying that, this is my mystic opulence. So, Prabhupada
translates the word yoga here as mystic. So, now, mystic is not in terms of, you
know, in unclear. It is mysterious. It is astonishing. It is "acintya". It is
wonderful. And this sort of understanding, you know, increases the devotee's
appreciation for the Lord. That how wonderful the Lord is. We see this simple
apprec..., simple faithful appreciation, in the story of Narada Muni and the    
cobbler. You know. There is a cobbler. You know. You know. When he was told that
what was Lord Narayana doing? Narada Muni told him. You know. I will not repeat
the whole story. But he said that, actually, he was threading an elephant to the
hole of a nigh..., needle. Yes, how is the, he did not ask how that possible. He
said, I h..., yes, how wonderful my Lord is. And how is it possible? He says,
you know, this is, huge banyan tree is there. It has just comes from a tiny
con..., seeds. How, so, if the Lord can put such a big tr..., you know, tree,
such a tiny seed, then why cannot He do that, also? He can do that.

In this way, it is explained. "bhūta-bh...", you know, the "paśya me yogam
aiśvaram". So, when we see Krishna's capacity to extraordinary, that increases
our appreciation. You know. Sometimes, when people hear the pastimes of Krishna.
Especially, the miraculous pastimes. The, you know, for example the pastime,
like lifting Govardhan. Or doing other such activities which seem to, which
contradict the laws of nature. So, there is a school o..., there is a class of
thinkers. Who say yes. Krishna existed. And Krishna spoke the Bhagavad Gita as a
revised person. But all these pastimes of Krishna, you know, you know, you know,
performed miracles, they are exaggerations which have been added later. So,
they say, the original Krishna was a very wise person. Very intelligent person.
Very great diplomat. Bu..., but he was overglorified. When after about, all
these, you know, supernatural ideas were added there. You know. So, they want to
remove the cy..., per, supernatural aspect from Krishna. And they just want to
make him another, you know, human being. So, why do they want to do that?
Because they, they do not understand Krishna's divinity. So, these people want
to approach Krishna the utilitarian way. And they may have nationalistic
purpose. Political purpose. Human, you know, social purpose. Whatever. And for
that purpose, they want to, you know, use Krishna as a model. Krishna ca..., we
can learn about th..., from Krishna about these things, also. But we do not have
to reduce Krishna to these roles, alone. Krishna is transcendental. So, when,
you know, people reduce Krishna to this role. Then, they try to divorce His
supernatural activities from His, you know, personality. And, you know, you
know, that is because they do not understand that God means God can do anything.
So, rather than feeling, you know, you know, apprehensive. Or abolo...,
apologetic. You know. Actually, yeah, our of scriptures have some stories.
Which were probably not true. They are mythological. Or whatever. So,
being appre.., appreci..., app..., apologetic. Or apprehensive, You know. We
need to be, we can be assertive. Why assertive? Because if He is God, He can do
anything. And the more amazing the things that He is reported to have done, the
more it is evidence that He has God. You know. It, the more it is evident that
He is God, yes, that is what, you know, if He is God. If He is omnipotent, then
shouldn't He be able to do extraordinary things. And the very fact that He has
been able to do extraordinary things, that increases our appreciation. Increases
our devotion. Increases our faith. So, we do not have to be apologetic. Or, you
know, you know, you know, you know, you know, like that. Apprehensive. We can be
assertive. Yes, this is proof of Krishna's divinity. That Krishna has done all
these activities. As Krishna says, "yogam aiśvaram". You know. You know. You
know. You know. You know. This is Krishna's, you know, mystical potency. That He
is, you know, celebrating the contradiction. And then, the next line describes:

        bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho

"bhūta-bhṛn". "bhūta-bhṛn" is, Krishna says I am the maintainer of all living
beings. "na ca bhūta-stho". But I am not situated in them. So, what is the
contradiction over here? "bhūta". Actually, normally, if somebody is a
maintainer of something, then that person is caught up in that thing. You know.
When a person mai..., when the, say, you know, you know, you know, when, you
know, the head of a family maintains the family. At that time, the, naturally,
there is attachment. And as a, as a consciousness is right in the family. So, he
is saying no. No, I am not, I am not like that. "bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho". I
am not attached. I am not entangled. "mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ". And He says,
actually, I am the source of all living beings. I am the source of all of
existence. But I am transcendental. So, Krishna does not get attached to.
Although, He, He is maintaining all living beings. Krishna has made this
beautiful creation. But He in interested in, to, us. And if we want to mess up
with it, Krishna allows us to do that. Of course, when we mess up with it, we
are doing bad karma. We will get reactions. But Krishna allows us to do bad
karma. If an artist has made a beautiful painting, the artist will not want
others to come and mess up with it. But Krishna is not attached. Krishna creates
arrangements. But if, for the living entities to be maintained in the best
possible way, within material existence. But if the living entities mess up
things. Then, He allows them to do that. Because He has given them free will.
So, He is not attached. "bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho". Now, the last line has an
interesting, you know, usage. "mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ". "mamātmā", Krishna is
saying. "mamātmā" is My soul. So, now, you know, why is Krishna using such a
word? "mamātmā". My soul. You know. Does this give credence to the, you know,
you know, conc..., to the, con..., you know, notion that some mayavadis have?
That actually, you know, we do not have to surrender to Krishna. We have to
surrender to the unborn within Krishna. So, is Krishna referred to as, as,
something like that? Now, He has the atma. And that is the source of everything.
And He is different from the atma. Actually, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura
explains in his commentary b..., you know, that, m..., here, just like sometimes
in scriptures the word is used Rahu's head. You know. Rahu's head appeared over
there. Now, actually, we may use the word Rahu's head. But Rahu is nothing, but
the head. You know. We, you know the story in Amrut Manthan lila that when the,
you know, you know, demigods and demons were both being, you know, for,
paralleling for nectar. So, Mohini, Lord came as Muhini murti. And He told them.
You both sit in the queue. And I will serve both of you. And the Lor..., you
know, Mohini murti stated serving the nectar fully to the demigods themselves.
So, Rahu and, you know, Rahu understood at that time. Oh, wha..., what is
happening? You know. And then, Rahu came along to that side. And started
addre..., addre..., address like a demigod. And started asking for the nectar.
Sitting in the queue. Sur..., Sar..., you know, so, you know, Surya saw it. And
then, Surya pointed Rahu. And when Mohini murti saw it. Then, immediately,
chakra appeared. And cut off the head. You know. But what did happen was the
nectar had gone till the, the nectar alr..., already taken away. And nectar had
gone till the head. That is why Rahu did not there. So, the head was there.

Now, we may use the word Rahu's head, you know, b..., because, you know, you
know, normally that person with a head has a body. You know. But in the case of
Rahu, the head is non-different from Rahu. Because Rahu is nothing, but the
head. Similarly, "mamātmā" is used in that sense. You know. That, actually,
Krishna is, is the "ātmā". Krishna, when you see, we use the word "ātmā".
Sometimes, in literal sense. It is, sometimes, also, in the figurative sense.
Non-literal sense. You know. Put your heart and soul in doing service. When we
say. It is not that you have to take the soul out of the body. And put it in the
service. You cannot, you know, t..., you know, take it literally over there.
What it means, put your spirit. Put your essence. So, Krishna is telling
"mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ". So, He is selling over here that, actually, you know,
you know, I am the, My, My essence should be which is Me, only. Nothing
different from Me. Krishna has, th..., if there was some "ātmā" which were
higher than Krishna. You know. You know. The, Krishna should have stated by now.
And Krishna has stated the opposite repeatedly. Krishna has said that, you know,
in 7.7, "mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat". "kiñcid asti dhanañ-jaya". There is no truth
higher than me. "mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat". Similarly, in 10.8, He will say later
on.

        ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

Everything comes from Me. It is not that I come from something. Everything comes
from Me. And 15.19, also, He will say again later that:

        yo mām evam asammūḍho
        jānāti puruṣottamam
        sa sarva-vid bhajati māṁ
        sarva-bhāvena bhārata

One who understands Me is as the "puruṣottamam". You know. You know. "sa
sarva-vid". One who understand Me as "puruṣottamam", he is "sarva-vid". That
person knows everything. "bhajati māṁ". And worships Me. "sarva-bhāvena
bhārata". With all the whole, you know, all the emotions of the heart.
Wholeheartedly. So, the important point is, "sa sarva-vid". That person knows
everything. It is not that somebody who, you know, thinks that there is
something higher than the "puruṣottamam". That is "sarva-vid". No. One who knows
"s...," "puruṣottamam" is "sarva-vid". So, the, you know, you know, you know,
so, if we look at the overall flow of the Gita, then we understand. Otherwise,
if we just take one verse out of context, then that might lead to confusion. So,
"mamātmā". It refers to Krishna Himself. Krishna is saying, you know, actualy, I
Myself. And nothing apart from Me is the source of everything. "bhūta-bhāvanaḥ".
Now, after describing this, Krishna will now talk about, you know, an example
which will illustrate this point of how He is, you know, how is "yogam
aiśvaram". So, let look at that example.

        yathākāśa-sthito nityaṁ
        vāyuḥ sarvatra-go mahān
        tathā sarvāṇi bhūtāni
        mat-sthānīty upadhāraya

H..., "yathākāśa-sthito nityaṁ". Just as, you know, you know, is situated in the
sky. "ākāśa-sthitaḥ". What is situated in sky? "vāyuḥ sarvatra-go mahān". The
"vāyuḥ". The wind. "sarvatra-go". The wind flows everywhere. "mahān". That is
great. It is powerful. So, but, st..., the "vāy...", the wind can go in all
directions. And still, the wind remains situated in the sky. Similarly, "tathā
sarvāṇi bhūtāni". Similarly, all living beings. "mat-sthānīty upadhāraya". They
are situated in Me. "mat-sthānīty upadhāraya". So, what does this refer to? This
refers to, you know, restriction not on movement. But on the perimeter of
movement. You know. What does it mean? Perimeter means the overall area. See,
when we talk about the word sky. What is it referring to over here? You know.
Sometimes, the word "ākāśa". "ākāśa" come, is the, translated differently. Now,
from the modern point of, modern scientific perspective, actually, there is no
such thing as a sky. What we see in the sky is illusion. Because it is just an
extending space forever and ever. So, you know, you know, the, in sanskrit
terms, they are not always very easily translatable into English. We discussed
earlier about how, you know, the word "avatar", you know, it cannot be
accurately translated as incarnation. Because it is not English. But Srila
Prabhupada would use familiar handles for Ameri..., you know, and familiar
concepts. So as to not complicate things. You know. The, you know, we discussed
earlier, there are terms, are mental. Sorry. You know. Terms are verbal. And
concepts are mental. So, you know, you know, ver..., you know, so, terms are
handles for concepts. But if I carry something. If there is a handle, I can
carry it easily. So, similarly, terms help us communicate concepts. Terms are
handles for concepts. So, generally, you know, you know, you know, if a concept
is new. And the term is also new. Then, it will become little more difficult for
people to appreciate it. So, what Srila Prabhupada would do is, when new
concep..., if, you know, if, when foreign concepts have to be conveyed to
people, you know, that means the concepts are the, in the Vedic thought. And
they are in sa..., sanskrit terminology. Then, while conveying it, Prabhupada
would use, you know, familiar handles. Familiar terms. Even if those terms were
not entirely, it becau..., accurate. Because those terms have different meanings
in English than what was conveyed by the sanskrit meaning. Srila Prabhupada
would use that. Why? So, to make sure that people would, you know, you know,
understand the point easily. At least, get a, you know, you know, get a start on
understanding the point. So, Prabhupada would prefer familiar handles to
unfamiliar concepts. So that, you know, the understanding would f..., move
forward. Just from the basic point of view. You know. Now, you know, the point
which is being made over here is that, you know, "ākāśa". You know. When we talk
about sky, we mo..., from the scie..., scientific point of view. From the
technical point of view, there is no such thing as a sky. But from the general,
normal conversational point of view, yes, we say the sky above exists. You
know. We look up. And we see the sky. Now, the air moves around in the sky. So,
if we have a bowl. You know. And a large bowl. And then, we put it upside down.
So, it becomes something like a dome which covers things. Then, the air inside
that bowl, the air is able to move around. It is able, it has v..., it can move
up. It can move down. It can move right. It can move left.  But it, its area of
movement. Its area of perimeter is limited. So, like that, the souls in this
world, "mat-sthāni". So, you know, you know, Krishna has used the word
"mat-sthāni" three times now. In fourth, fifth and sixth verses. Fourth verse,
in four point, 4C:

        mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni

And then, 5A was:

        na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni

And now, in, you know, you know, here in 6D:

        mat-sthānīty upadhāraya

It is actually situated in Me. So, Krishna is using it three times here. And
what is He conveying by this? See, the, you know, the apparant contradiction in,
you know, 4D and five..., you know, fi..., you know, four, 4C and 5A. Krishna
is showing us how a higher understanding reconciles it. So, then, Krishna says
that all living beings are situated in Me. What does it mean? Krishna says that,
you know, He, He says, I give them freedom. You know. Within, you know,
limitation. So, there is, you know, a, for the living entities, unlimited
freedom within a limited framework. What does it mean unlimited freedom within
limited framework? If a horse is tied to a pole. You know. Horse is here. It is
tied to a pole with a rope. Now, within the radius of the law, rope. The horse
has freedom. You know. The horse can move right. It can re..., move left. It can
move towards the pole. Away from the pole. So, when the horse has, for all
practical purposes, unlimited freedom. But within limited framework. As soon as
the radius of the rope is reached, beyond that, the horse cannot go. So, like
that, the living entity has unlimited freedom. Within limited framework. Just as
the air can move in all directions. But air is, you know, still contained within
the sky overall. So, the word "ākāśa", you know, technically speaking, it
referred to ether. Because ether is substratum where everything is present. And,
you know, you know, whatever movement happens, it happens within that substratum
which ether provides. But the point is, we can use s..., sky in a conversational
sense over here. And similarly, you know:

        tathā sarvāṇi bhūtāni
        mat-sthānīty upadhāraya

All living beings are situated in Me. That means, they are given freedom by Me.
And within the area o..., you know, within the freedom that I give them, they
can act. So, they have freedom within limited framework. You know. Like that.
You know. Now, we, we are sitting and discussing this class. You know. If one of
us want, we can just walk away from here. We can go to sleep during this class,
also. Or we can just walk away mentally during the class. And go anywhere. We
can do whatever we want. We have the freedom. But there is a limitation caused
by the human body that we have. We may want to go. But we cannot suddenly, s...,
dev..., you know, develop wings. And fly in the sky. So, there are limitations.
So, we have f..., you know, well, unlimited framework. But within, unlimited
freedom within the limited framework. That way, you know, you know,
"mat-sthānīty upadhāraya". So, the living, Krishna is describing the mystical
relationship. That there is "sthā...", "mat-sthānīty". "mat-sthānīty". How is
that reconciled? By having, you know, some restriction. And some freedom. And
how does Krishna do this? He does this based on His compassio..., you know, His,
on His compassion. You know. normally, when parents maintain a child. Parents
become attached to the child. But Krishna does not become attached to them. You
know. You know. What Krishna has said, "yogam aiśvaram". This is, see my
mystical potency. So, if it is a mystical potency, you know, then what is
mystical about it? You know. If it is, can be explained with an example like
this. That the air. H..., and the sky. Then, it is no longer inconceivable. It
is no longer "aiśvaram". It is, you know, Krishna says no. But actually, it is
inconceivable. Because it is telling, you know, actually, you know, neither the
air, nor the sky are conscious. You know. When there is consciousness. And there
is interaction. Then, att..., then, att..., affection or attachment develops.
So, we do not want affect..., you know, you know, the, when Krishna does not
become attached to anyone. Although Krishna maintains all living beings. He is
not attached to them. That capacity to maintain without becoming attached, that
is the inceivability of the, Krishna's relationship with the world. Now, you
know, you know, Prabhupada quotes here, h..., the point of how, you know, the
lay..., the Lord is in control. "mat-sthānīty". So, He quote, quote several
verses. He quotes "Taittirīya Upaniṣad", "yad-bhīṣā vā...":

        yad-bhīṣā vātaḥ pavate

"yad-bhīṣā". "bhīṣā" is referred to be fear. "vātaḥ pavate". Wind blows out of
fear of the Lord. And then, you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada quotes from
the "Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad", also.

        etasya vā akṣarasya praśāsane gārgi sūrya-candramasau vidhṛtau tiṣṭhata
        etasya vā akṣarasya praśāsane gārgi dyāv-āpṛthivyau vidhṛtau tiṣṭhataḥ

So, by His order, the moon, the sun, and the other Vedic planets are moving. So,
similarly, Prabhupada quotes "Brahma-saṁhitā" for the same point. Now, after
describing this. "mat-sthānīty upadhāraya". So, this is with respect to the
normal, when, maintenance. Now, in creation, there are different phases. So, in
the, in material existence, there are different phases. There is maintenance.
There is crea..., there is also creation. And there is also destruction. So,
after describing how Krishna maintains all living beings. Within natural, also.
Now, Krishna will talk about creation and destruction. Let us look at the
creation and destruction aspect now.

        sarva-bhūtāni kaunteya
        prakṛtiṁ yānti māmikām
        kalpa-kṣaye punas tāni
        kalpādau visṛjāmy aham

So, "sarva-bhūtāni kaunteya". So, all living beings, oh, "kaunteya". "prakṛtiṁ
yānti māmikām". "prakṛtiṁ yānti". They enter into my nature. "kalpa-kṣaye". At
the end of the "kalpa". And "punas tāni", "kalpādau visṛjāmy aham". You know.
And at the beginning of the "kalpa", I create them again. So, here, something
interesting is happening. You know. Krishna is taking the development of thought
to a more theistic, more personal l..., level. You know. Similar point was said
in the Eighth Chapter. Let us compare these two verses. Now, same point was
talked about in the Eighth Chapter. In the context of talking of Krishna, of the
Supreme Lord's, of the, sorry, of, you know, the cyclic nature of material
existence. So, there, it was described how at the end of the creation,
everything is destroyed. You know. You know. You know. And at the start of
creation, everything is, you know, at the, everything is created. But then, the
difference was that, actually, it was just talked about as under the influence
of material nature. So, you know, you know, you know, so, let us look at this
verse here. So, this is, let us compare these two verses now. Here, what is He
saying? "bhūta-grā...", it is 8.19. We discussed this earlier.

        bhūta-grāmaḥ sa evāyaṁ
        bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate
        rātry-āgame ’vaśaḥ pārtha
        prabhavaty ahar-āgame

So, He is describing the whole of material existence. You know. So, "prabhavaty
ahar-āgame", at the arr.., arrival of night. Night refers to night of Brahmaji.
"av...". Everything is destroyed. "avaśaḥ". Helplessly. And "prabhavaty
ahar-āgame". It is all created at the start of the day. So, like that,
"pralīyate" and "prabhavaty" is talked about. You know. And now, what is the
difference in n...,  9.7 when it is talked about over here? Here, it is said,
yes, "kalpa-kṣaye" is talked about. Same point is there. And then, you know,
w..., "kal...", at the end of a "kalpa", there is destruction that is talked
about. And that "kalpa", at the, you know, at the beginning of a "kalpa", there
is a creation that is talked about. But the important point is "māmikām". And
"aham". So, the, everything is withdrawn into Me. And everything is created by
Me. So, the difference, or is the develop..., in terms of development of
thought, there, in the Eighth Chapter, the primary focus was not on explaining
who is in control of material nature. The point was there, of how material
nature is temporary. And one needs to transcend material nature. So, therefore,
there, the focus was just that, yes, Brahmaji's life may be very very long. But
ultimately, even, you know, you know, He, even His abode is destructible. And
all of creation is destructible. Therefore, one should seek the indestructible
abode. And then, Krishna says, that is My abode. And we should go the..., and
we should aspire to go there. So, there, when Krishna was talking, the f...,
when the focus was not on, you know, understanding, you know, Krishna's role in
material nature. But the focus was on transcen..., going beyond material nature
to the spiritual world. At that time, Krishna did not focus on, who, who is in
charge of this, under whose will this creation-destruction happens. He says
this, this creation-destruction is happening. Nothing is t..., eternal. So, do
not focus on this. Look beyond this to the eternal. But here, what does He,
Krishna, what does Krishna do? Krishna is now focusing on, yes, you know, His
glory is such that He exists in His eternal majesty in the spiritual world. But
along with that, He is also in charge of the material world. So, there is a
development of thought. And it is described how, you know, the, you know, huge
creation with all its magnificence and mystery is created and destroyed under
the will of the Lord. "sarva-bhūtāni kaunteya". All living beings. Now, Srila
Prabhupada would use this verse often, you know, to, you know, counter the
theory of evolution. And the theory of evolution, the idea is that, you know,
different living beings are created at different stages in the, you know,
unfolding of creation. So, you know, you know, originally, there was just
unicellular specie..., you know, originally, amoeba came alo..., unicellular
species came along. And then, from there, multicellular. And then, gradually,
you know, all the variety of species came over ab..., for, came about over
millennia. So, this is the idea. So, Prabhupada is saying here "sarva-bhūtāni
kaunteya". Actually, I create all living beings. So, you know, now, you know,
the important point is that, Krishna is saying that, material nature is under
His control. You know. You know. You know. So, let us move forward. Now, Krishna
will continue this theme about how material nature is, you know, you know, under
His control.

        prakṛtiṁ svām avaṣṭabhya
        visṛjāmi punaḥ punaḥ
        bhūta-grāmam imaṁ kṛtsnam
        avaśaṁ prakṛter vaśāt

So, "prakṛtiṁ svām avaṣṭabhya". So, you know, actually, it, it all enters into
My, enters into Me. What does enter into Me refer to? We know that, you know,
you know, when the whole creation is, you know, you know, it has run, it has run
its course. At that time, when there is a destr..., cosmic destruction that
happens. At that time, the cosmic substratum, that is withdrawn into the living
enti..., into, into the body of Mahavishnu. Just as all the living entities are
withrawn into the body of Mahavishnu. So, "prakṛtiṁ svām avaṣṭabhya". "visṛjāmi
punaḥ punaḥ". And then, "visṛjāmi". I create it all. "punaḥ punaḥ". Again and
again. "bhūta-grāmam imaṁ kṛtsnam". "bhūta-grāmam imaṁ kṛtsnam". This
"bhūta-grāmam". This all of material existence, the cosmic creation. "imaṁ
kṛtsnam". All this. Everything about it. "avaśaṁ prakṛter vaśāt". So, "avaśaṁ".
Now, "Kri...", the, Krishna is using two words over. "avaśaṁ" and "prakṛter
vaśāt". So, "avaśaṁ" means helplessly. There is no "vaśaṁ". There is no control.
And then, n..., n..., there is no control performed our perspective. You know.
When a cosmic devastation will happen, all of us will be destroyed. So, nobody
will survive. So, in that sense, we are "avaśaṁ". But actually, I, what is?
Th..., it is the power of nature. And two verses later, Krishna will tell that
power of nature is under His control.

        mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

But here, He is talking about "prakṛter vaśāt". So, in this way, you know,
Krishna is telling that this material nature is, not only is it sustenance done
by Me. In four, five, six, He talks about sustenance. How He is doing
sustenance. Now, seven and eight, He is talking about how He is overseeing even
the creation and destruction. You know. You know. Then, after that, Krishna says
that, actually, still, I am not entangled. Because I am not attached. This is
important verse to demonstrate Krishna's transcendence.

        na ca māṁ tāni karmāṇi
        nibadhnanti dhanañ-jaya
        udāsīna-vad āsīnam
        asaktaṁ teṣu karmasu

So, "na ca māṁ tāni karmāṇi". Actually, "tāni karmāṇi". All this karma, you
know, which is being, all this action that is being done. "nibadhnanti", "na",
"dhana". "nibadhnanti dhanañ-jaya". This does not bind Me. "na" has come in the
previous line. So, this does not bind Me. Why? Because "udāsīna-vad āsīnam".
"udāsīna". Krishna says, I am neutral. I am det..., "vad". "udāsīna-vad". I
am situated as if netural. "āsīnam". "asaktaṁ teṣu karmasu". I am not attached.
We have discussed earlier the difference between "āsaktaṁ" and "asaktaṁ".
"āsaktaṁ" is attached. "asaktaṁ" is detached. So, Krishna is "udāsīna-vad
āsīnam". Krishna is detached like a judge. So, material nature has its own
system. And it acts according to that system. It is under Krishna's supervision.
But Krishna is not, you know, having any personal agenda. Krishna does not have
any vendetta against someone. You know. You defied Me. Therefore, I will punish
you. No. There is a law of karma. And Krishna lets the law of karma r..., run
its course. So, Kri..., Krishna is saying that I do not become bound. Because I
am "udāsīna-vad". You know. Normally, you know, if one person kills somebody
else. That person will be, get karmic reactions. Now, we may say that somebody
destroys, you know, you know, a big house. Somebody sets fire to a whole house.
And that person, that is quite a serious crime. Arson. And if there are people
who die in the fire, then it is even greater crime. So, we may say this is
serious crime. And what to speak of if somebody, you know, destroys a whole
city? So, then, we may say that, actually, he..., here, Krishna, when He sets up
the material nature. Then, you know, not just once. One house. Or one city. Or
one country. Or one continent. Or one planet. Or one planetary system. Or even
one, you know, you know, actually, all, all of universe is destroyed. And not
just one universe. Like that. All universes ultimately destroyed. So, is Krishna
culpable? It seems Krishna is causing all this destruction. He is causing all
this suffering. No. Krishna says "udāsīna-vad āsīnam". This is, is a, not I am
causing it. It is, actually, happening by the course of material nature. Now, 
somebody may argue but Krishna is only ch..., in charge of material nature. So,
then, if Krishna in charge of material nature, then what material nature does
is, isn't it Krishna causing it? No. Actually, Krishna has set up a particular
system. But He has not forced us to go into the system. What does that mean? You
know. In a jail, there is suffering. But if the pat..., if the prisoner is
suffering, the jail, can the king be responsible, you know, held responsible for
that? No. Because the king did not force the prisoners to go into the jail. The
king, there is, the jail system is under the king. And if there is suffering in
the jail, you know, yes, the king knows about it. And the king, that is a part
of the system. But the king did not force the prisoners to go into the jail. The
prisoners did wrongdoing. And, and did wrong actions. And because of that, they
went to the jail. Similarly, the souls who are in this world, they are
suffering. Because they chose, you know, to defy the Lord. You know. And they
sought to enjoy separate from Him. So, Krishna, the king does not have any
personal vendetta against the prisoners. You know. There is, there is a law.
Those who abide by the law, they are protected by the king. Those who defy the
law, they are accordingly sent to correction centers.

So, similarly, this world is like a correction center. And, you know, whatever
happens, the point here is, Krishna says, it is not that I am karmically
implicated. Because Krishna does not emotionally driven in this. Krishna is
"udāsīna-vad". He is detached. And therefore, "na ca māṁ tāni", b..., you know,
"karmāṇi nibadhnanti". I do not become bound by all this. Then, after describing
this, you know, Prabhupada again quotes the same verse which he has quoted
earlier from "Vedānta-sūtra".

        vaiṣamya-nairghṛṇye na

"vaiṣamya-nairghṛṇye na". That actually, there is no partiality in the Supreme
Lord. And then, Krishna concludes the section with the famous verse. Which
Prabhupada would quote quite often.

        mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ
        sūyate sa-carācaram
        hetunānena kaunteya
        jagad viparivartate

So, "mayā". "adhyakṣeṇa". Under My supervision. "prakṛtiḥ". So, "prakṛtiḥ"
works under My supervision. "sūyate sa-carācaram". "sūyate". "sūyate" means it
manifests. "sa-carācaram". "cara-acaram". The moving and the non-living.
"hetunānena kaunteya". And, you know, you know, you know, for that reason. Under
that "hetunā". "kaunteya". "jagad viparivartate". "viparivartate". So,
"parivartan" refers to change. "viparivartate" means the cycle of change is
working. It is going on. So, Krishna concludes the section by saying all this
"viparivartate". So, that means the sust..., maintenance which was talked about
from four, five, six. And then, the destruction which was talked about from, the
creation, destruction. Which was talked in seven, eight, nine. All this is
happening. "jagad". This is "jagad viparivartate". All this happening is under
My supervision. "mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ". This happening under My supervision.
When it is happening under My supervision. The word supervision is important.
"adhyakshta". So, you know, overseer or supervisor is not necessarily ha...,
involve hands-on. You know. That person is overseeing. Opr..., from ov..., over.
The word very overseeing, what means? Over. And see. To see from over. So,
like that, Krishna oversees. "mayādhyakṣeṇa". "akṣa" is eyes. So, Krishna
oversees from above. "ādhya" means, He is also, presents in the Supersoul.
Inside. He is also seeing from inside. But when He is seeing from inside, also,
He is not attached. He is not entangled. He is as if above. He is above material
consciousness even if in this present, within matter, He is still above. Because
He is not caught up in material consciousness. And "sūyate sa-carācaram". All of
creation is happening under His will. So, as devotees, what is the, you know,
implication of this understanding? In, you know, sometimes, we may think that,
ok, I am trying to serve Krishna. And this material nature is, you know, you
know, the place where I am currently trapped. And I have to go from this
material to the spiritual world. But, you know, I am fighting with so, I am
fighting many battles. Internally, my mind is troubling me. Externally, in the
world, there are so many hostile forces. How can I continue fighting this battle
all alone? It is difficult. We may feel sometimes lonely. And destitute. But we
should know that, actually, we are not lonely. And destitute. Why? Because
Krishna is with us. How is He with us? You know. Even in material nature,
whatever is happening, is ultimately under His will. Under His supervision. You
know. It, it is not His will. It is sanction. As we discussed. Subtle
difference. Between will and sanction. But overall, He is supervising. And He is
there with us. So, we will see later on, you know, you know, that Krishna is
personally involved for His devotees. For others, He is dispassionately
overseeing. But for His devotees, He is passionately involved. And, you know,
that will be the endearing aspect of Krishna's glory. That He is involved. He is
concerned. He is, for His devotees, He is hands-on. You know. At the same time,
even for everyone else. You know. Krishna is there. He is, you know, in charge
of creation. In charge of existence. And ultimately, you know, even the jail, if
the king may not be directly hands-on. Involved in the jail. The purpose of jail
is what? It is to reform the per..., you know, prisoner. So that they can come
out. And become good citizens. 

Similarly, this world is a place of suffering. And all the destruction. And the,
you know, misery that is there. It is, ultimately, a part of the arrangement to
reform the souls. So, there is no need to feel, you know, destitute. Or lonely.
Krishna is there within our heart. You know. Krishna is involved. Krishna cares.
And in fact, He, the whole system of material nature has been created by Him. So
there has to provide a facility for us to turn back to Him. You know, in, when
we turned again...., from, away from Him, He could have just left us. He did not
do that. You know. He created a system by which we could, you know, try out our
desires for independent enjoyment. When those desires are exhausted, we can
return back to Him. So, therefore, Krishna helps us. And Krishna is there to
help us. So, even His apparent detachment. Even His detachment for the karmis.
For those who are not His devotees. That is also a part of His compassion, only.
Because that is what they want. You know. They do not want God to be involved in
their life. They want to play out their fantasies independently. Krishna says,
ok, I will provide you an arena for trying it out. Try it out. And when you are
fed up, then I will be there waiting in your heart. For you, to turn to Me. And
return back to Me. And for the devotees, He is eagerly acting. Constantly. To
help them come back to Him. How He, you know, e..., special, He, you know, shows
His grace to His devotees. That will be part of a later chapt..., you know,
lat..., the, later section of this chapter. And we will discuss subsequent
verses in the next class. 

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
