Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZkH942Kt7Os
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=uWHpxBWI93m-UUQnYZSoESh5mVl8MTU0ODQ4OTI5NEAxNTQ4NDAyODk0&v=ZkH942Kt7Os&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_111_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_11_Text_17_to_31_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
discussing the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. And we are in, there is
section in which Arjuna is describing the "viśv...", Vi..., "Virata rupa". The,
the "viśva-rūpa". Universal form. So, first, Krishna has given a brief preview
of what is going to come. Then, "Sañjaya" has given a description of what is
being revealed. And then, now, Arjuna is describing what he is seeing. So, in
the first verse, Krishna has said, Arjuna said that actually, I am seeing the
whole universe from the top to the bottom. And then, in the next verse, he is
see..., he has used the word "viśva-rūpa". He says, actually, I am seeing the
form which is pervading. There is no beginning. No end. You know. No middle. It
is all-pervading, practically speaking. And that is the "viśva-rūpa". Now, as he
is looking around, he starts discerning something specific. And what he
discerns, he describes now. Let us look at it.

        kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ cakriṇaṁ ca
        tejo-rāśiṁ sarvato dīptimantam
        paśyāmi tvāṁ durnirīkṣyaṁ samantād
        dīptānalārka-dyutim aprameyam

So, "kirīṭinaṁ". "kirīṭi" is helmet. So, it can refer to crowns. So, this
universal form is very adorned. And "gadinaṁ". "gada" is maces. "cakriṇaṁ".
"cakriṇaṁ" is chakra. So, this "gada" and chakra can be used to, s..., we take
an, it can be taken as a reference to Vishnu. So, he is seeing the form of
Vishnu over there, also. But there are so many other things also he is seeing.
Which we will describe in the successive verses. "tejo-rāśiṁ". It is having
an effulgence. What is the nature of that effulgence? "sarvato dīptimantam". All
directions are ablaze. They are glowing because of that effulgence. And then, as
I am trying to look at s..., it, "paśyāmi tvāṁ durnirīkṣyaṁ samantād". So,
"nirīkṣyam" is to see. "durnirīkṣyam" is that which is difficult to see. So, I
am seeing this form which is actually very difficult to see. "durnirīkṣyaṁ
samantād". And "dīptānalārka-dyutim aprameyam". "dīpta-anala". "anala" is fire.
"dīpta" is burning. Blazing. So, the word "dīpta" has been used twice in the
same verse. "dīptimantam". And "dīptānalārka". So, "alārk...", "arka" is the sun.
So, he is saying, this is effulgent like blazing fire. Like sun. "dyutim
aprameyam". And "dyutim" is the effulgence. It is "aprameyam". It is
immeasurable. So, the essential point is, he is saying is, ok, I am seeing the,
you know, "kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ cakriṇaṁ ca". I am seeing the crowns. I am seeing
the maces. I am seeing the, you know, you know, cis..., disks. But basically, it
is blindingly effulgent. So, this verse emph..., emphasises, as is trying to
discern. Sometimes, when there is a very dark..., bright light. Then, we cannot
see anything clearly. So, he is telling this is so effulgent. I cannot see
anything here. "durnirīkṣyaṁ samantād". And then, he further describes. What
happens after that? Let us look forward to his description. Then, as he
understand, oh, this is a manifestation of Abs..., Absolute Truth. So, his
description starts becoming a glorification. So:

        tvam akṣaraṁ paramaṁ veditavyaṁ
        tvam asya viśvasya paraṁ nidhānam
        tvam avyayaḥ śāśvata-dharma-goptā
        sanātanas tvaṁ puruṣo mato me

"tvam akṣaraṁ". So, you are the infallible. Imperishable. "paramaṁ veditavyaṁ".
You are the Supreme. "paramaṁ veditavyaṁ". You are the ul..., ultimate object to
be known. "tvam asya viśvasya paraṁ nidhānam". You are, of the universe, the
supreme shelter. The supreme basis. You know. You know. "tvam avyayaḥ
śāśvata-dharma-goptā". You are inexhaustible. And You are the eternal protector
of religion. "dharma-goptā". "sanātanas tvaṁ puruṣo mato me". You are the
eternal Supreme Personality. This is my opinion. So, here, what is happening,
you know, you know, the perception is, the description of the perception is
changing into a glorification. And an identification. "mato me". This is my
opinion. So, initially, when he sees, he is not able to make sense of anything.
This, earlier, I was describing about how people who have been congenitally
blind. And then, they get eyes. They just cannot make sense of anything. But
gradually, ok, when they touch a knife. Or, or, works material, touches a knife.
And then, young, oh, then he understands, oh, this is a kni..., this is a knife.
This is a tool. This is saw. Like that. So, he is, gradually, the
identification, the, when, when the perception is linked with our pre-existing
conceptions. Then, there is an identification. So, like that, he is seeing
something blinding over here initially. Something all-pervading. Something
blinding. Now, we are identifying. Oh, this is a "sanātanas tvaṁ puruṣo mato
me". This is, You are the supreme person. So, until now, it is not directly a
prayer. Although, there is a mood of a little bit of a prayer. But right now,
the, what is going on is the description. And when the description, there is a
glorification, also. So:

        anādi-madhyāntam ananta-vīryam
        ananta-bāhuṁ śaśi-sūrya-netram
        paśyāmi tvāṁ dīpta-hutāśa-vaktraṁ
        sva-tejasā viśvam idaṁ tapantam

So, "anādi-madhyāntam ananta-vīryam". So, what he has described earlier is being
slightly repeating. "nāntaṁ na madhyaṁ na punas tavādiṁ". The same thing he is
saying. "anādi-madhyāntam ananta-vīryam". So, there is no beginning. No middle.
No end. "ananta-vīryam". There are unlimited glories. "ananta-bāhuṁ". That You
have unlimited arms. And "śaśi-sūrya-netram". That there are the sun and the
moon who are acting in Your eyes. "paśyāmi tvāṁ dīpta-hutāśa-vaktraṁ". I am
seeing You. Now, earlier, he has said there is an effulgence around Your head.
He has not yet mentioned the ve..., head. But there was just effulgence all
around. Now, the description is becoming a little more. And "hutāśa-vaktraṁ".
So, "vaktraṁ" is the mou..., mouth. So, actually, there is just a huge
effulgence that is everywhere. But as he is discerning the face, then he says,
from the mouth, a blazing fire is coming out. Blazing fire. "dīpta" word is used
again. "dīpta-hutāśa-vaktraṁ". So, you know, this is a, a form which is actually
quite frightening. Sometimes, when a person is angry, we feel frightened by that
person. If that person's mouth opens. And sometimes, some, you know, yogis or
something they open their mouth. Waoh..., fire comes out. So, actually, even
people who, there are people who do some jugglery by which they seem to be
eating fire. Now, they take some fire. And hen..., oh, and it goes inside. So,
they are called as fire-eaters. So, it is, of course, mostly jugglery. But even
eating fire is frightening to see. What to speak of put..., putting out fire?
Woah, fire comes out. You know. So, "dīpta-hutāśa-vaktraṁ". The blazing mouth is
there. And then, "sva-tejasā viśvam idaṁ tapantam". "sva-tejasā". With Your
effulgence. "viśvam idaṁ". The whole universe is "tapantam". "tapantam" is
blazing. It is becoming hot. So, until now, only sight was being described. And
now, even the sensation of touch, in terms of heat, is also being described. So,
the whole description is moving forward now. And we will see how this is a, now,
he also makes some other points here. "śaśi-sūrya-netram". "śaśi-sūrya". The sun
and the moon are like Your eyes. Which I am seeing over here. So, now, we see a
picture of the "Virata rupa". And we see many, many different forms over there.
So, actually, the "Virata rupa" is so difficult that, you know, it is a, it is
impossible for us to conceive. Or describe. What to speak of to depict. So,
whatever depiction is done, is a partial, you know, depiction. Which is
indicative of what is, what was as be, see, what was seen by Arjuna. So, there,
it is described that he was seeing many faces. So, you know, that is what
"Sañjaya" has also descri...,  "aneka", "vaktra-netraṁ". Many, many faces. And
"Sañ...", you now, Krishna, and Arjuna has said over here that, "paśyāmi tvāṁ".
I am seeing a mouth which is blazing and burning. And then, he is saying, eyes
are also, eyes are also splendorous. They are like the sun and the moon. So,
basically, you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada writes in the purport that
the repetition is to, is because of the ecstasy and amazement that what is
happening. It is so extraordinary. That is why, out of ecstasy, there is a
repetition that is coming out. So:

        dyāv ā-pṛthivyor idam antaraṁ hi
        vyāptaṁ tvayaikena diśaś ca sarvāḥ
        dṛṣṭvādbhutaṁ rūpam ugraṁ tavedaṁ
        loka-trayaṁ pravyathitaṁ mahātman

So, now, there is a beginning of the description of fear over here. But, a
slightly. It is "loka-trayaṁ". So, all the three worlds are "pravyathitaṁ". They
are troubled. "mahātman". Oh, great one. "mahātman". So, here, the word
"mahātman" is used by Arjuna to refer to Krishna. Krishna has used this word.
"Sañjaya" has used it earlier to refer to, refer to Krishna who is going to
reveal the "Virata rupa". So, now, you know, you know, Arjuna is also using it.
So, "dyāv ā-pṛthivyor". "dyau". "ā-pṛthivyoḥ". So, what does this mean? "dyau"
is actually the sky. "pṛthivyoḥ" is the earth. So, actually, this world, form is
pervading, all of this vertical dimension, also. So, it is "dyāv ā-pṛthivyor
idam antaraṁ hi". The whole distance that is there, it is completely pervaded.
"vyāptaṁ tvayaikena". It is not just the vertical direction that is perv...,
pervaded. "vyāptaṁ". "vyāptaṁ" means occupied. Pervaded. "tvayaikena". By You,
alone. Not only the vertical dimension, but also "diśaś ca sarvāḥ". All
directions. So, actually, when Arjuna sees the "Virata rupa", he does not even
see, at that time, anybody else. He does not see the "Kurukṣetra" battlefield at
all. He is transported by the divine vision that he has been given into a
different arena of perception. And he is not able to see anything. He is not,
he does not see the warriors. At least, he does not see the warriors as they are
waiting for him. The conversation to get over. So that the war can start. But
then, he is simply seeing this, only one thing. And "dṛṣ...", "dṛṣṭvādbhutaṁ
rūpam ugraṁ tavedaṁ". So, he is describing, using two adjectives to describe
this form. "rūpam". What is it? "adbhutam". And "ugram". "adbhutam" means
wonderful. And "ugram" is dreadful. So, normally, wonder, thing, wonderful and
dreadful, we do not bring it together. So, it means, wonder..., wonderful is a
positive emotion. Dreadful is a, you know, negative emotion. But he is saying,
wonderful and dreadful. Prabhupada translating "ugram" as terrible. So, it is
just, there is a conflicting emotions going on through Arjuna's mind. Because
this form is so extraordinary. "dṛṣṭvādbhutaṁ rūpam ugraṁ tavedaṁ". And then,
"loka-trayaṁ pravyathitaṁ mahātman". That oh, great one, everyone is bewildered.
So, now, what is happening? You know. You know. We see in the future verses, it
is described that Arjuna is not only seeing this form. In this form, he is
seeing Brahmaji and other devatas. But along with that, the, he is seeing that
others are also seeing this form. The members of the, you know, celestial
planets. The devatas and others are seeing their form. And they are getting
troubled by seeing this form. So, we will see, you know, how their reaction is
gradually, in the ne..., in the, moving forw..., next few verses. So, you know,
let us look at an overview of what is going to happen in this. You know. This
ca..., Arjuna's description. So, first is, 15 to 20 is what we are discussing
right now. Vision of the universe. Then, 20 to 23 is description of the effect
of the univer..., on the universe. That means, you know, there are other, you
know, real..., realms of existence where other living beings are there. Rudra,
Aditya. Then, all those. And they are affected, also. By the perce..., by the
fury of the "Virata rupa". And then, as this effect, as this effect pervades,
then there is an effect on Arjuna, also. So, what is that effect on Arjuna? That
will be described in 23 to 25. And then, 26 to 30 will be, Arjuna will see not
only see the universe. Not only the celestial, l..., l..., celestial beings
effected. But Arjuna himself gets affected. And after he gets affected, by
seeing that, he suddenly sees that in that "Virata rupa", he is seeing the
"Kurukṣetra" battlefield itself. And he is seeing all the warriors from there
getting devoured. And that really shakes him. And then, finally, in 31st, he
asks, who are You? Who are You? "ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo". How are You?
And that is how, how, you know, terrific, terrible, terrifying description
actually ends with a question. It is a question which is filled with doubts. So,
let us see what he is, so, now, from here onwards, he is, we see the effect on
the universe. 

        amī hi tvāṁ sura-saṅghā viśanti
        kecid bhītāḥ prāñjalayo gṛṇanti
        svastīty uktvā maharṣi-siddha-saṅghāḥ
        stuvanti tvāṁ stutibhiḥ puṣkalābhiḥ

So, "amī hi tvāṁ ". So, all those "sura-saṅghā viśanti". So, all the, you know,
"sura-saṅghā". "saṅghā" is groups. "sura" is devatas. So, the devatas are
"viśanti". Entering into You. "kecid bhītāḥ prāñjalayo gṛṇanti". "kecid". Some
of them, "bhītāḥ". They are becoming fearful. And "prāñjalayo". "prāñjalayo"
means with folded hangs. "gṛṇanti". So, earlier, you know:

        na me viduḥ sura-gaṇāḥ
        prabhavaṁ na maharṣayaḥ

In 10.2, Arjuna has said that even the "sura"s and the "ṛṣi"s do not know Me.
So, here, the effect on the "sura"s and the "ṛṣi" is described. Even they, when
they see the "Virata rupa", they are amazed. And "svastīty uktvā
maharṣi-siddha-saṅghāḥ". So, "svasti". "svasti". "svasti" means peace.
Auspiciousness. "svasti". You know. "svasti". The "om" is, you know, depicted
diagrammatically. And it is depicted by lines of, "svasti" is a symbol. So,
Hitler had adopt..., appropriated the symbol for his nazi regime. But he had
twisted it around. So, actually, he did not want "svasti". He wanted "asvasti"
for everyone. He wanted is..., inauspiciousness for everyone, except the nazis.
He wanted nazis to be the rulers of the whole word. And for some, he wanted the,
like the jews and the guipsies, he wanted like inauspiciousness of complete
annihilation. But "svasti". "svasti". "īty uktvā" here. The "Virata rupa". On
seeing it, the "ṛṣi"s, "svastīty uktvā maharṣi-siddha-saṅghāḥ". So,
"maharṣi-siddha"s, they are saying, "svasti". Be auspicious. The auspicious.
Auspicious. Like they say "Om Shanti". "Shanti". "Shanti". So, like that is what
"svasti". "svasti". They are saying. "stuvanti tvāṁ stutibhiḥ puṣkalābhiḥ". And
then, generally, whenever the Lord appears in a manifestation. So, "stuvanti".
That time, praises are offered. So, that is a standard. When the Lord, Lord is a
glorious worshipable person. So, when He appears, it is appropriate to praise
Him. So, praises are being offered. "stuvanti", "hiḥ". "stuvanti tvāṁ stutibhiḥ
puṣkalābhiḥ". So, praises are being offered. So, now, first is the demigods
are, you know, shocked. And there is "asura"..., the, they are also saying,
they, they are "kecid bhītāḥ". They are folding hands. And the "ṛṣi"s, they are
offering prayers. Prayers. And they are trying to pacify the Lord in that way.
And then, what happens? Now, he says, who choo..., who are all the specific
demigod..., who are beings whom he is seeing? So, as he is observing, he starts
discerning. And as he discerns, he describes further.

        rudrādityā vasavo ye ca sādhyā
        viśve ’śvinau marutaś coṣmapāś ca
        gandharva-yakṣāsura-siddha-saṅghā
        vīkṣante tvāṁ vismitāś caiva sarve

So, "rudrādityā vasavo ye ca sādhyā". "sādhyā"s are also one kind of univer...,
you know, beings in the universe. "viśve ’śvinau". So, "vi....", there are
"Viśvedevas". "Aśvinī-kumāras". "Maruts". And then, the ancestors are referred
to by a very interesting word, "uṣma-pāḥ". So, "uṣma" is, as in the, "uṣma" is
heat. So, stea..., the stream-eaters. So, it is said that the ancestors, they
eat steam. You know. "uṣma". They drink steam. They eat or drink, whatever you
want to say, it is steam. That is one of their diets. So, different
univer..., you know, different beings in the universe have different kinds of
diets. So, they are being referred to by that diet over here. "uṣma-pāḥ". And
"gandharva-yakṣāsura-siddha-saṅghā". So, "Gandharva". "Yakṣa". And even, the
"asura"s are there. It is not just the higher beings. Even the lower beings are
there. "siddha-saṅghā". All this happening. "vīkṣante tvāṁ". They are all seeing
You. And what is the, as they are seeing You, what is happening? "vismitāś caiva
sarve". "vismitāḥ". They are amazed. Astonished to see all this. You know. So,
"rudrā"s are. And "Śiva" is there over there. Now, Brahma has already been
described. Right at the beginning itself.

        brahmāṇam īśaṁ kamalāsana-stham

In the first verse, in the 15th, it was described. And here 22, 22, "rudrā" is
also mentioned. And then, first, they are amazed. But just like Arjuna, there is
amazement, from, from their fear will come. So, here, also, for the devatas,
also, fear is being described now.

        rūpaṁ mahat te bahu-vaktra-netraṁ
        mahā-bāho bahu-bāhūru-pādam
        bahūdaraṁ bahu-daṁṣṭrā-karālaṁ
        dṛṣṭvā lokāḥ pravyathitās tathāham

"rūpaṁ mahat te". This great form. "bahu-vaktra-netraṁ". "bahu-vaktra-netraṁ".
There are many faces. And many eyes. "mahā-bāho bahu-bāhūru-pādam". "mahā-bāho".
Very powerful arms are there. "mahā-bāho". "mahā-bāho" actually refers to the
Lord who is, you know, mighty-armed one. "bahu-bāhūru-pādam". So, there are
many, many arms. Many feet. Many thighs. "bahūdaraṁ bahu-daṁṣṭrā-karālaṁ".
"bahūdaraṁ". There are many bellies. And many teeth. And what is the nature of
the teeth? "karālaṁ". They are fearsome teeth. So, generally, you know, you
know, if some, generally, one of the frightening features of the "rākṣasa"s,
that is often shown as, the "rākṣasa"s have sometimes hor..., horns coming out
of their head. And then, they have teeth coming out, their mouth, also. It is
very frightening. It is aaa, the teeth. So, here, "daṁṣṭrā-karālaṁ".
"daṁṣṭrā-karālaṁ". So, "bahu-daṁṣṭrā-karālaṁ". And then, what happens? "dṛṣṭvā
lokāḥ pravyathitās tathāham". So, "dṛṣṭvā lokāḥ". Through seeing this, "lokāḥ
pravyathitās". So, everybody is "pravyathitās". Everybody is disturbed.
Perturbed. As Prabhupada translates "pravyathitās". And then, "tathāham". So,
now, sometimes, when people go and see a horror movie. You know. In the horror
movie, there is some, some frightening, maybe shape changing creature. Which
suddenly assumes some horrible form. And bounces. And then, everybody there is
scared. So, initially, when people go to watch the movie, they are observing
enter..., the, entertainment. But as the image becomes more and more grote...,
as grotesque. Then, not only are the characters in the horror movie frightened.
But even the audience gets frightened. So, like that, Arjuna is seeing. And he
is saying, oh, they are all frightened. But I am also getting disturbed.
"pravyathitās tathāham". "tathā...". I am also dis..., "āham". I am also
disturbed like that. Then, he describes further, he goes on and describing
further the form. So, you know, until 23, it was describing effect on the
universe. Now, Arjuna will start describing the effect on Me. So, that "āham" is
a transition. Where he is, start, going to foc..., talk about his own emotions.

        nabhaḥ-spṛśaṁ dīptam aneka-varṇaṁ
        vyāttānanaṁ dīpta-viśāla-netram
        dṛṣṭvā hi tvāṁ pravyathitāntar-ātmā
        dhṛtiṁ na vindāmi śamaṁ ca viṣṇo


You know. So, "nabhaḥ-spṛśaṁ". "nabhaḥ-spṛśaṁ" is again describing "dyāv
ā-pṛthivyor" was told earlier. So, "nabhaḥ-spṛśaṁ". Reaching right up to the
sky. "dīptam aneka-varṇaṁ". "dīptam"". The word "dīptam" has come several times
until now. So effulgent. That is a, that is the word which Arjuna is using
repeteadly. Because such a blinding sight. "dīptam aneka-varṇaṁ". There are many
colors which I am seeing over there. "vyāttānanaṁ". "vyāttānanaṁ" is, the mouth
is wide open. "dīpta-viśāla-netram". And again, the eyes are effulgent.
"dīpta-viśāla-n...". They are large eyes. And, you know, you know, you know,
they are "dīpta". They are eff..., effulgent. Now, Krishna is said to have, you
know, you know, g..., large eyes. But they are sweet eyes.

        Sundara Kundala Nayana Vishala

So, "Nayana Vishala". Krishna has large eyes. But Krishna's eyes are filled with
curiosity and love. And they bring joy to the heart. But this "Virata rupa", the
eyes are scary. "dīpta-viśāla-netram". "dṛṣṭvā hi tvāṁ pravyathitāntar-ātmā". By
seeing it, "āntar-ātmā". My whole being is "pravyathitā". And "dhṛtiṁ na vindāmi
śamaṁ ca viṣṇo". "dhṛtiṁ na vindāmi". I am not able to maintain my peace. So, it
is interesting. He is now identifying this as Vishnu. Until now, he has not
identified it as anyone else. Just "paraṁ". "sanātanas tvaṁ puruṣo mato me". You
are the Supreme Person. But he is identifying it here as Vishnu. This univer...,
universal forms. So, he is recognising this Vishnu. So, the word "Vishnu" will
come once more in the descriptions. So, he knows this Vishnu. But just like in
the Narasimha lila, it is described that when Lakshmi Devi saw Narasimha Deva.
She was ca..., she, she was, you know, hesitant to approach. You know. Lord
Narasimha Deva was so angry. And no other devatas could pacify. At that time,
Brahma, he told Lakshmi Devi, you pacify. She says, even I have not seen my Lord
in this mood. I cannot go there. Now, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura explains in
his purport there that, actually, you know, Lakshmi Devi resides with Lord
Narasimha Deva in the spiritual world as his consort. And she knows the Lord.
But here, the yoga-maya potency covered her. So, and the whole arrangement of
the yoga-maya potency was such that, it was, the whole pastime was orchestrated
to demonstrate, highlight and underscore the singularly exalted devotion of
Prahlad Maharaja. So, when everybody else in the universe has subor...,
submitted to Hiranyakasipu, Prahlad did not submit. And when everyone else
could fail in set..., pacifying, you know, Pra..., Narasimha Deva. Prahlad
would be able to pacify. So, in this way, the whole pastime was orchestrated in
such a way that Prahlad Maharaja's extraordinary devotion will be, you know,
convey to the world. So, the point is similarly, here Arjuna, he, in a
sense, he knows, Krishna who has revealed the form. And he knows Krishna and
Vishnu are the same. So, he is identifying it intellectually as Vishnu. This
"Virata", "viśva-rūpa". But still, we will see the later verses. He will get, so
overwhelmingly ask, who are You? "bhavān ugra-rūpo". "dhṛtiṁ na vindāmi". He
says, I am not able to maintain my composure. My tranquility. My steady. I
cannot maintain it at all. And further, he asks:

        daṁṣṭrā-karālāni ca te mukhāni
        dṛṣṭvaiva kālānala-sannibhāni
        diśo na jāne na labhe ca śarma
        prasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa

So, "daṁṣṭrā-karālāni". "karālāni". That means the, "karālāni" is teeth. You
know. The, terrible. So, "daṁṣṭrā-karālāni" is terrible teeth. "ca te mukhāni".
I am seeing the terrible teeth in Your mouth. And, and what is happening?
For, so, earlier, it separately, it was described there was a fire coming out.
And the teeth were also described. But now, both are described together. As
everything is becoming clearly. He says, first of all, there are fearsome teeth.
And after that, there was this scary fire also coming out. "dṛṣṭvaiva
kālānala-sannibhāni". And this is not just any ordinary fire. What is this fire?
This "kālānala". "kālānala", it is like the fire of universal destruction.
"kālānala". You know. So, the fire that happens when the universe has to be
destroyed. This called a "kālānala". And then, he says, "diśo na jāne na labhe
ca śarma". "diśo na jāne". I do not understand which way. Which is right. Which
is left. Which is top. Which is bottom. You know. Sometimes, when we are, you
know, too overwhelmed by emotions, our emotions make us lose our voice. Which is
lose orientation of everything. So, like that. That is why sometimes, when
people have tremendous emotions, and then they fall down. That because the body
loses its orientational ability. So, like that, "diśo na jāne na labhe ca
śarma". So, you know, you know, you know, actually, my dear Lord, please, have
mercy on me. And then, "prasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa". So, You are, here, here,
"prasīda". Please, please be pleased with me. "deveśa". You are the Lord of all
the Gods. Clearly, You are seen and all the devatas folding hands and offering
respects. So, this is "deveśa". And You are "jagan-nivāsa". You are the shelter
of all the Gods. So, from here onwards, what is happening? Arjuna is, you know,
the, this, after describing the personal effect on him. How he has become
terrorised, practically speaking. Then, he will start talking about this outer
vision itself changing further. And becoming even more scary. So, just seeing
the fury of the form is bad enough. But now, he starts seeing that that form is
not just somewhere far away. It is right here. So, imagine that somebody is
watching a horror movie. And then, they say that, this scary creature with a,
with a blazing mouth. And frightening teeth. And that is attacking, that is
coming somewhere. Just a side to scare it. And suddenly, you find that, ok, what
is being seen over there on the movie screen is not just some distant place. You
see the same movie theatre which you are sitting. And you are seeing all the
spectators who are in the audience, they are getting suddenly consumed. So, what
happens that which is a distant vision, suddenly get..., acquires an immediate
urgency which causes panic. So, like that, Arjuna is not, not seeing this, the
universal form. You know. Cau..., blazing fire. And causing heat in diff..., in
a distant arena. He suddenly sees everything happening on the battlefield. And
that is, that takes the fear to a far greater level. So, he starts describing
how that vision now becomes imm..., that remote vision becomes immediate.

        amī ca tvāṁ dhṛtarāṣṭrasya putrāḥ
        sarve sahaivāvani-pāla-saṅghaiḥ
        bhīṣmo droṇaḥ sūta-putras tathāsau
        sahāsmadīyair api yodha-mukhyaiḥ

        vaktrāṇi te tvaramāṇā viśanti
        daṁṣṭrā-karālāni bhayānakāni
        kecid vilagnā daśanāntareṣu
        sandṛśyante cūrṇitair uttamāṅgaiḥ

So, "amī ca tvāṁ". He says, these, here, these are all what? "dhṛtarāṣṭrasya
putrāḥ". So, "dhṛtarāṣṭrasya putrāḥ". All the sons of the, the "Dhṛtarāṣṭra",
The Kauravas. "sarve sahaivāvani-pāla-saṅghaiḥ". So, "avani" is earth.
"āvani-pāla" is the, you know, refer to the king. So, the various kings are
there. So, "sarve saha". Along with the sons of "Dhṛtarāṣṭra", there are all the
various kings, also. "pāla-saṅghaiḥ". The groups of all of them. And then, he is
saying, even, it is not only those who are, you know, vicious. But even the
pious. So, "bhīṣmo droṇaḥ sūta-putras tathāsau". So, you know, "Bhīṣma" and
"Droṇā" are objects of his, you know, respect and reverence. So, "bhīṣmo
droṇaḥ". "pramuktah". Actually, in, Krishna had taken the chariot. We discussed
in the first chapter. He placed it in front of "Bhīṣma". And "Droṇā". And that,
and that took Arjuna's, you know, confusion to, and indecision to a much higher
level. Much more com..., much more insolvable level. So, here, he is saying that
even they are there. "bhīṣmo droṇaḥ sūta-putras tathāsau". And "sūta-putraḥ"
refers to "Karṇa". He is also there. "sahāsmadīyair api yodha-mukhyaiḥ". So,
"sa...", "saha". "asmadīyaiḥ". And "asmadīyaiḥ" means even our side. So, it is
not just the opponents. So, actually, when the "Virata rupa". Now, the "Virata
rupa", here, "kalarupa" is being described in the "Virata rupa". So, what is
this "kalarupa"? See, the universe generally has two dimensions. Space and time.
So, space, we generally see up. Down. Left. Right. So, all of space is pervaded.
But space is only one part of it. The, in ma..., in the material existence,
there is space. And time. So, time causes distraction to everyone. So, later on,
we will see, Arjuna asks, who are You? You know. He is able to identify the
"viśva-rūpa". But he is, he, and that is what he had asked to see. But he is not
accept..., expected to see the "kalarupa". Which also is revealed. And Krishna
had said that, I will say you. "anya". Something more, also, which you may like
to see. So, here, he is seeing this. And in the "kalarupa", see, eventually, in
time, everybody is going to be destroyed. You know. It is said that, you know, a
life is a journey through which nobody comes out alive. You know. At the
material level. So, no one comes out of alive for life. So, if we look at life
from a, you know, perspective of one lifetime material existence. Then,
everybody has to die. So, at that level, at the material level of existence. So,
even the good and the bad. Both are destroyed. So, we may say, generally, even
people go to God. They want something good. They want something peaceful. They
want something sweet. And soothing. So, what is this kind of? You know. God is
giving a vision. Generally, even people want to see something ghastly, they go
to a horror movie. You know. People, if people go to a temple. And they start
seeing something ghastly. And gristly over there. You know. They say, blood. And
fire. And teeth coming out. They say, hey, is this, what is this? I did not come
to temple to see this. So, we may wonder, is this something related to God? You
know. And God is Himself revealing his vision. And everything is, seems to be so
terrible over here. So, what is this? Actually, the Vedic culture is
understanding, Vedic, you know, philosophy's understanding, God not, God is not
just one side. He is all-sided. And all-sided means, it understands that,
actually, material nature has two aspects. One aspect is the aspect of, you
know, you know, stability. Stasis. And the other aspect is stabil..., you know,
aspect is change. So, stability in the material world is largely in illusion.

Even now, when I am sitting, you know, the, everything in me is changing. Cells.
Even you are looking at my face. But the cells in my face are also growing old.
And are changing. My whole body is changing. Even I am speaking right now. But
the voice cords that are there, you know, the voice cords, also, the cells
within them are growing. They are, some old ones are dying. Some new ones are
coming. And like that, everything in a state of flux. You may be sitting on a
chair. The chair under you, it may be solid. And stable. But within that, also,
let, ponds are whizzing around. Whizzing around. And at the subatomic level,
matter is coming into ex..., you know, nothings are just, you know, coming into
existence. And going out of existence. Not in absolute terms. But specific forms
are getting destroyed. So, destruction is an integral part of material
existence. And, you know, any vision of life. Any conception of God, that does
not include destruction, is incomplete. It is describing only a part of the
reality. And not a complete reality. So, the "Virata rupa" does not mean that
God likes to be like this. Or God, you know, you know, you know, God is
inherently destructive. No. You know. God is Himself a supremely all-attractive
loving person. As will be, you know, described in the later chapters. And even
in this chapter, Arjuna will say, I do not want to see this form. I want to see
Your "saunmi rupa". Your sweet form. But the point remains is that this is an
aspect of material nature. And denying it does not drive away its reality. It
still remains real. So, you know, the Vedic culture, the Bhagavad Gita's
wisdo..., vi..., vision includes that. So, destruction is also an aspect of God.
How is it an aspect of God? That it is one of His energies. Now, when God
destroys, that is not cruelty. Because God destroys the temporary to make way
for the eternal. It is not cruely. Now, as long as our hearts are attached to
the temporary, we stay on the cycle of birth and death. So, when the
destructiveness is being described over here, the purpose is that the
destruction is not just destruction itself. Through the destruction, we are, you
know, shown in stark terms how everything in this world is perishable. Nothing
is going to last forever. Therefore, it, we should not keep our affections, our
attachments on this world for long. We should redirect our affections and
emotions from the world towards the source of the world. Towards Krishna. So, in
our heart, you know, that by the, by demonstration, the destructiveness of this
world, the temporary is replaced with the eternal. That is what should happen
over a period of time. And it is that which is being demonstrated over here. So,
destroyer, God is not a destroyer. Per say. Alone. You know. Alone. Or alone.
God is the eternal lover. And the beloved. But when we turn away from Him, then
we place ourselves in the arena of destruction. And we understand that
destruction, also, is an aspect of God, only. It is an energy of God. Which is
meant to redirect our affection. Our love. Our devotion. From the temporary to
the eternal. So, God destroys the temporary to make way for the eternal. You
know. You know. You know. So, now, he is describing:

        vaktrāṇi te tvaramāṇā viśanti

So, "vaktrāṇi". Into their mouth, "tvaramāṇā viśanti", they are entering. So,
who are all the warriors from both sides? And "daṁṣṭrā-karālāni bhayānakāni".
So, the, you know, teeth which are there, they are, you know, they are horr...,
fearful. "karālāni bhayānakāni". There are actually two words that are used.
"karālāni" is itself very f..., terrible. And "bhayānakāni" is very fearful. So,
because it is so, so scary. So unnerving. So, you know, blood-freezing. That
Arjuna is, is trying to convery that through different words. And then, even
more scary, "kecid vilagnā daśanāntareṣu". So, some of them, as they are
entering into You, so, as they are going into the mouth, what is happening? So,
all these warriors are just entering into the mouth. So, earlier, it was
described that fire is coming out. So, fire coming out is bad enough. You know.
We may be afraid. This is something with fire coming out. Will that fire come
and take me? But now, what is being described, is something opposite, only. It
is like universal section composed everything inside. So, like that, everythi...,
everybody seems to be going inside this "Virata rupa". So, as, and as they are
going in, also, it is scary. But, you know, "daśanāntareṣu". "daśana". "daśana"
is teeth. "antareṣu". In the space between the teeth. As they are going inside.
Aaa. Aaa. His teeth are co..., coming out. You know. The path is not
unobstructed. As they go inside. So, as they go inside, some of them, tuck.
"sandṛśyante cūrṇitair uttamāṅgaiḥ". So, "aṅgaiḥ" is body. "uttamāṅgaiḥ" is the
best part of the body. So, it is said to be the head. The head, we think with
the head. The brahmanas are considered the most important part of the social
body, also. The head directs the rest of the body. So, you know, so,
"uttamāṅgaiḥ" refers to the head. So, what is happening? The head is tuck.
Crashing against the teeth. "daṁṣṭrā-karālāni bhayānakāni". And then,
"sandṛśyante cūrṇitair". "cūrṇitair" means there is getting crashed. Tuck. He,
sometimes, you know, there is acci..., head-on accident. And some people's bones
come out. It is a scary sight to see. What to speak of hea..., head coming out?
Oh, it is all, it is a terrible, terrible which is there. Arjuna is overwhelmed
by seeing it. Now, you know, Arjuna, although he is overwhelmed, now, he gives
a, you know, gives a further description of how everybody is going inside.
Everybody is going inside. So, he gives two metaphors. And those two, use of two
metaphors, metaphors has its significance. So, let us look at those two
metaphors.

        yathā nadīnāṁ bahavo ’mbu-vegāḥ
        samudram evābhimukhā dravanti
        tathā tavāmī nara-loka-vīrā
        viśanti vaktrāṇy abhivijvalanti

So, "yathā nadīnāṁ". Just as a river, what happens? "bahavo ’mbu-vegāḥ". The
many waves in the ocean, you know, river, they have their own force. Who?
"vegāḥ". "bahavo ’mbu-vegāḥ". And what happens? "samudram evābhimukhā dravanti".
They enter into "samudram". "ābhimukhā dravanti". So, it glides towards, towards
the ocean. "tathā tavāmī nara-loka-vīrā". "tathā tavāmī". You know. "tavāmī"
means unto You. All these. "amī" is these. "tava" is You. Similarly, all these
are entering, you know, "nara-loka-vīrā". Who are these? They are not ordinary
people. They are great heroes among the human beings. "nara-loka". Among the
abode of the human socie.., beings, Prabhupada translates it human society. So,
they are "vīrā"s. They are great heroes. And what is happening? "viśanti
vaktrāṇy abhivijvalanti". They are entering in the blazing mouth. "viśanti
vaktrāṇy". So, let us look at this. You know. And the next me..., verse. With,
here, the, when, they are compared to just as river enters into ocean.
Similarly, these warriors are entering into Your mouth. So, let us look at the
next verse, also. And then, we will come back. And compare both.

        yathā pradīptaṁ jvalanaṁ pataṅgā
        viśanti nāśāya samṛddha-vegāḥ
        tathaiva nāśāya viśanti lokās
        tavāpi vaktrāṇi samṛddha-vegāḥ

So, "yathā pradīptaṁ jvalanaṁ pataṅgā". So, just as a blazing fire, into which,
"pataṅgā". "pataṅgā" is a, the moths. And when the moths enter, what happens?
"viśanti nāśāya". They actually enter. And they are destroyed. And here, you
know, curious word is "samṛddha-vegāḥ". And they go very fast. "vegāḥ" is speed.
"samṛddha" is actually end all with. Full of. So, normally, "samṛddha" is used
in a positive sense. That, ok, some there is some "samṛddha" yoga there. There
is propsperity over here. So, speed in an animal could normally be, you know,
used positively. Oh, this animal can move so fast. This creature can move so
fast. But if a moth is rushing towards fire, then that "samṛddha" actually is
not desirable. It is going to literally distraction. If a car, if a car is going
very fast. And it is very fast wearing of the road down into a valley, then the
grea..., of, greater the speed, the greater the distraction that is going to
happen. So, "samṛddha-vegāḥ". So, actually, you know, we are taking out fossil
fuels from the earth. And we take fossil fuels out from the earth. You know.
The, the better our technology becomes, the better we become, the worse we
become. How is that? You know. The better we become, our technology becomes,
then we are able to take out more and more fossil fuels from the earth. So, more
and more fossil fuels are required because our needs for fuel, there are so
much. But then, as the fossil fuels are coming out, the reserves are not
unlimited. So, when the reserves get exhausted, what will happen? We will have a
serious crisis. So, speed, in all situations, is not always good. So, when, you
know, here, "samṛddha-vegāḥ" is used in a negative sense. That, oh, this
"pataṅgā"s are going so fast to the fire. Like that. "tathaiva nāśāya viśanti
lokās". So, similarly, the people, "viśanti". "nāśāya". They are entering into
Your mouth. "tavāpi vaktrāṇi samṛddha-vegāḥ". "samṛddha-vegāḥ" means with great
speed. So, here, he is using a second metaph..., second meta..., metaphor. That
of, you know, moths entering into fire. So, first was, you know, river entering
into ocean. The second is, moth entering fire. What is the difference between
the two? A lot, world of difference. See, the difference, now, actually, you
know, there are, all the acharyas have analysed it. "Baladeva Vidyabhushana".
"Chakravatipada" talk about it. So, they basically say that, one is volunt...,
one is natural. The other is vol..., voluntarily. One is involuntarily. So, the
river naturally goes towards the ocean. Whereas the moth voluntarily goes
towards the fire. So, you know, so, similarly, it is said that, "Bhīṣma",
"Droṇā", you know, they, they did not, actually, it was thus the course of
events. Beyond their control. Because of which, they had to fight on side of the
Kauravas. And they were going to be destroyed now. So, they, that they are going
to be destroyed is not changing. But they are getting involved. They were not
malicious. They were not evil-minded. They did not, you know, willingly and
intentionally, you know, enter into the what and, war, and court. Destruction.
And disaster. And death. You know. Just as a river, by the, its, by the
arrangement of nature itself goes towards the ocean. Similarly, by higher
arrangement, by the force of circumstances, there were situations where they
could not opt out of the war. And they had to fight on the wrong side. And they
would be destroyed by that.

So, on the other hand, a moth chooses willingly and deliberately to enter into
the fire. And caught its destruction. So, similarly, this moth and metaphor is
used to refer to the Kauravas. Duryodhana and his brothers. Because they knew
that what they were doing were wrong. Not just Duryodhana's brothers. Even his
whole, you know, whole network of friends. "Shakuni" included, also. So, that
means "Karṇa", also. So, they, you know, knew, they knew that they are on the,
that actually if we enter into it, there will be destruction. So, did they know
that? They may not have known exactly. Oth..., Duryodhana also confident. He was
thinking I will not be destroyed. Yes, but Duryodhana was sure that he would be
win. And he was ready to provoke war. In fact, he wanted war. You know. He was
so overconfident about his own strength. That at one time, just before the war,
"Maitreya ṛṣṭi" came. And "Maitreya ṛṣṭi" told him, you know, do not fight this
war. He said, you will be destroyed. You cannot first stand against the
Pandavas. And you can certainly not stand against Krishna. So, at that time,
Duryodhana was so insolent. Normally, he is, sages should be respected. But he
was beyond hearing anyone. So, in his insolence, not only did he turn a deaf
eye toward, deaf ear towards the request of "Maitreya ṛṣṭi". In sheer defiance.
He, one is negligence. Second is defiance. Negligence means, somebody saying
the, something. We do not pay attention. But defiance is, we do the opposite of
what that person is saying. That is even more disrespectful. You know. So,
defiance, so, how Duryo..., you know, Duryodhana showed his defiance. What did
he do? He started, started beating his thighs right in front of him. So, the
idea is, generally, wrestlers, you know, they may beat their arms. And they beat
their thighs to show their strength. Yes. So much power. Come and fight with me.
So, he bet his thigh. So, at that time, "Maitreya ṛṣṭi" lost his temper. He said
I have come to give you good advice. Not only are you neglecting it, but you are
defying me. He says. A very thigh that you are proud of. That thigh will be
broken. And that thigh will become the cause of your death. So, when he cursed
him this way. At that time, "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" sobered up. And "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" said,
he, he says, his and he actually said, "Bhīṣma" will break this thigh. And
"Bhīṣma" will cause your death. "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" sobered up. And everyone was
scared, actually. They said, Duryodhana remained a defiant. And "Dhṛtarāṣṭra"
said, oh, please forgive my son. He is foolish. He is insolent. Please take back
your curse. So, "Maitreya ṛṣṭi" said that I cannot take back the curse. He said,
if he agrees to my council. And refuses to fight the war. Then, the curse will
not act. But otherwise, that curse will act. So, actually, Duryodhana, you know,
before that, also, you know, he went, "Draupadi" had been dis..., you know, that
had been dishonored. And brought to the assembly. So, at that time, he had
exposed his thigh. And he said, now, you are my maidservant. Come and sit here.
So, at that time, "Bhīṣma", you know, enraged. Had taken a vow. I will break
this thigh of yours. So, you know, "Bhīṣma" had already taken that vow. And
"Maitreya ṛṣṭi" is cursed for the reinforced that vow. So, the point is,
"Duryodhana" knowingly, intentionally and deliberately chose to go into the
mouths of destruction. In fact, before the war started, here, the, he,
Duryodhana sent the son of "Shakuni". And he sent the son of "Shakuni". And he
told them, ru..., give him my messages. And he, actually, in that message,
insulted the Kaurava leaders. He insulted "Yudhiṣṭhira". He insulted
"Yudhiṣṭhira". You think you are a great king? But oh, what a foul. You lost
yourself. You lost wife. You lost your kingdom. In a gambling match. And such an
attached and foolish person, I have not seen. And you, I am going to crash you.
And, you know, the exile that you suffer is going to be nothing. You are going
to be, cry..., you have to suffer the humiliation of defeat against me. He says,
Arjuna, you think you are a great hero? You know. You had to become a dance
teacher. You know. A dance teacher. Not only that dance teacher. You became a
eunuch. You know. You are, you are, the, you are, you have not only became a
eunuch. You are always a eunuch. Your power is just on the, you know, inverse.
You know. And it will crash you. And defeat you. Like that, and he says,
"Bhīṣma", you think you are very powerful? You are nothing, just a cow. So, he
insulted everyone.

By that time, Shakuni's sons were speaking. The whole Pandava assembly was
filled with furious warriors. You know. They were roaring. And growling. And
thundering. And then, Shakuni started to become so scared. Immediately, oh,
"Yudhiṣṭhira", remember the codes. You know. A messenger should not be hung. I
am simply giving the message of my master. So, "Yudhiṣṭhira" calmed down. And
he, then, all the Kau..., Pandavas, you know, they gave their responses. And
then, the various Kaurava, the Pandava warriors also gave their responses. The
point was that the war was about to take place. And anyway, they are going to
fight. But "Yudh...", Duryodhana was so insolent. So brazen. So arrogant. That
he, as if the war was not bad enough, he wanted to provoke the Kauravas. It is
like putting, you know, you know, he wounds somebody. The wound itself is
painful. Then, you take the skin apart and put salt on it. The wound becomes
even more. The pain becomes even more intolerable. So, like that, he was putting
salt on the wound. Aggravating the agony of the Pandavas. And infuriating them
beyond all limits. So, like that, he was actually, you know, provoking them.
So, it was like a moth entering into fire. Moth entering into fire. So, "viśanti
nāśāya samṛddha-vegāḥ". It is just like the moths very fast enter into fire. So,
like that, Duryodhana fast, he entered into fire. Provoking the Pandavas. And,
you know, and getting their wrath which eventually in 18 days, would destroy him
completely. So, you know, one is voluntary. One is involuntary. There is a big
difference between the two. That is what is conveyed by these two examples which
Arjuna has used. Now, beyond that, you know, there i.., there are other acharyas
who have explained further. In the Sri Sampradaya, "Ma...", "Rāmānujācārya" is a
pro..., pro..., pro..., is a prominent commentator, you know, he is a
systematiser. You know. Prominent acharya in their Sampradaya. And after him,
there were two acharyas who were prominent successors. Not immediately, but
after some time. Vedanta Desika was one of them. And "Pillai Lokacharya" was the
other. So, "Vedanta Desika" is called as a "tark ratna", is a great logician.
You know. Dual among logicians. So, he has written his, you know, you know,
insights about this verse. And Vedanta Desika describes some brilliant points.
He says that, actually, you know, you know, you know, I am paraphrasing now.
Ma..., materialistic people are also going to die. Spiritualists are also going
to die. So, what is the difference? Ultimately, everybody has to die. Whether
you believe that there is a God. Whether you believe, alone, there is an
afterlife or not. You know. In this world, everybody has to die. So, what is the
big deal? What is the need to practice spiritual life? So, he says, this,
through his examples, a profound point has been conveyed. When a river goes to
the ocean, the river's nature continues to stay the same. The river is water
when it is before. Flowing towards the ocean. And when it reaches the ocean,
once it continues to be water. So, in that sense, it continues to exist. So,
like that, those who are devotees, devotees' of Supreme Lord. You know. They are
serving Krishna in this world. And eventually, when they return to the, return
back. You know. T..., you know, after their death. When they reach the ocean,
what happens at that time? You know. They, in the spiritual world, they continue
to serve the Supreme Lord. So, in that sense, their essential nature does not
change. On the other hand, with respect to a moth, when the moth enters into the
fire, what happens? The moth is burnt. Now, the soul is never destroyed.

        nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ

But the moth which is existing at the, that particular level of existence, the
body is completely destroyed. It is burnt to ashes. Car beyond recognition. You
know. And reduced to nothing, practically speaking. And that soul has to go into
another body to have another different kind of existence. So, like that, those
who live at the materialistic level of existence, those, they, when death comes,
it destroys completely. Nothing is left for them. Only their karma goes from
this body to another body. And all their positions, all their positions, they
lose everything. So, although death comes for both. But the essential nature of
the death experience and the, you now, consequences is that is very radically
different. You know. For devotees, death is a transition. After which, there
will be basically continuation. They may, you know, they exist at the material
level of existence. And later, they exist at the spiritual level of existence.
But here, they are serving Krishna. They are also continuing to serve Krishna.
Whereas with respect to, you know, with respect to materialistic people, their
whole, everything is destroyed for them. You know. So, secondly, not only is the
end different. But also, in the process, also. You know. When a moth is moving
towards the fire, the moth does not do any good to anyone. The moth simply
destroys itself. But when a river is moving towards the ocean, the river
nourishes all the land that is by its side. All the land that is by its side. It
gets nourished. And watered. So, like that, when devotees are serving the
Supreme Lord, they are moving towards the Lord. But while moving towards the
Lord, what are they doing? They are also benefitting others. The devotees, by
living a life, you know, dev..., centered on God, they set an example for
others. Oh, this is how life is actually meant to be lived. And further, by
their actions, they may also, by their, in addition to their actions, even by
their words, they may share Krishna Consciousness with others. And in this way,
they are basically doing a lot of valuable things for everyone else. So, the
existence of a devotee is beneficial for the world. Just as the flow of the
river towards the ocean is beneficial for all those who are on the bank. Not
just plants. But even animals. You know. Even human beings. Everyone. So, like
that:

        maitraḥ karuṇa eva ca

In the Twelth Chapter, Krishna will describe how devotees are the well-wishing
friends of everyone. The compassionate friends of everyone. So, the existence of
a devotee is beneficial in this world. And afterwards, it is beautiful in the
next world. Because it is a beautiful in the sense that the devotee continues to
serve the Supreme Lord. And he continues to serve without any of the problems.
That, you know, were being faced in material world. In the material world, are,
we have a body that limits us. We have mind that distracts us. In the spiritual
world, we do not have either. So, you know, the devotional, you know, the life
of devotional service is beneficial to others. And it ha..., it has a beautiful
ending in terms of, we get to a place where we can serve Krishna without any
restriction or distraction. Now, after describing this, so, he says that all
these people are going inside. And they are in two kinds. They are like rivers
who are entering into ocean. And moths entering into fire. And he furth...,
conduce further description of what is happening.

        lelihyase grasamānaḥ samantāl
        lokān samagrān vadanair jvaladbhiḥ
        tejobhir āpūrya jagat samagraṁ
        bhāsas tavogrāḥ pratapanti viṣṇo

So, second time, he is using the word "viṣṇo". This identifying. This "viṣṇo".
So, "lelihyase". Now, in the prev..., in the 27th verse, what was described?
That "sandṛśyante cūrṇitair uttamāṅgaiḥ". So, when these people are entering
into the mouth. At that time, they are hitting against the, you know, teeth. And
their skulls are shattering apart. And then, blood is flowing aside. Now, when
blood is flowing aside, what happens? "lelihyase". So, this "Virata rupa" is
taking the tongue out. You know. And He is licking. Generally speaking, if
something is delicious, you know, if we had taken some "Rasgulla". And some
juice is there on the mouth. Then, we do not want to miss out the juice. So, we
lick everything. So, like that, this "Virata rupa". What is it doing? He is
licking the blood . So, "lelihyase grasamānaḥ samantāl". "grasamānaḥ". While
devouring everyone. "lelihyase". And then, "lokān samagrān vadanair jvaladbhiḥ".
"lokān samagrān". All the people. From everywhere. "vadanair jvaladbhiḥ". This
blazing mouth is consuming everything. So, now, this may seem very un..., you
know, disturbing for us. What is this actually? You know. The "Virata rupa" is
not only devouring everyone. But it is also leaking blood. Normally, we are
supposed to be vegetarian. So, is the, what is happening with the "Virata rupa"?
It is leaking blood. And the, consuming people. So, we have to understand here
that this is a vision. This is a vision. It is not that there is a form of God
which eat..., consumes everything. But the point is, this is a vision which
demonstrates a particular principle. What is that principle? That there is
destruction in this world. And that destruction is inevitable. And that
destru..., destruction is also within the jurisdiction of God. So, when we see
this kind of vision, we have to understand that all-pervasive aspect of God's
actions. And specifically, we discussed earlier, how in 4.24, in the Bhagavad
Gita, when:

        brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir

So, there, acharyas described that this is actually like a yajna. The war is
like a yajna. And the "Kurukṣetra" is the "yajna-sthali". The Kauravas are
"ahuti". And the, you know, you know, the Gandhiva, Arjuna, your Gandhiva is the
spoon with which you will be offering the "ahuti". So, this, this metaphor is
also used in the Mahabharata. You know. At one place. The Kauravas are going to
be "ahuti" in the "yajna-sthali" of "Kurukṣetra". So, here, Krishna is
demonstrating that actually, you, what you will offer, I will accept. And every
single thing, I will accept. So, for example, in the normal fire sacrifice, the
fire is considered to be the mouth of Vishnu. So, Krishna has told Arjuna that
the sac..., principle of fire sacrifice is not limi..., limited only to physical
fires. It is a principle of sacrifice. And it can, it can, ca..., include all
activities. So, we discussed in the Fourth Chapter how from 25 verse, verse 25
to verse 30, you know, how, it was 29, actually. How there can be different
kinds of yajnas. And then, 30 said, even 30 to 32 talked about the pri..., the 
principle underlying yajnas. So, you know, you know, Arjuna is being there
revealed or overhear that, ok, if you perform this yajna at the battle of
"Kurukṣetra". In which, you offer the "ahuti" of the Kauravas. Then, I will
accept that "ahuti". So, that is what He has demonstrated. That, the, when the
"ahutis" are offered, even the ghee is offered into the fire. So, at that time,
all the ghee should go into the fire. The ghee should not be spilled here and
there. Because it is meant for the, you know, offering to the Agni. And to
Vishnu through that. You know. Medium of fire. So, like that, whatever is being
offered, you know, this "Virata rupa" is accepting that. That is described.
"tejobhir āpūrya jagat samagraṁ". "tejobhir āpūrya". So, you know, "tejo". By
the "tejo" of You, "jagat samagraṁ". The whole universe. What is happening? It
is bla..., blazing. The effulgence is spreading. Pervading all of universe. And
"bhāsas tavogrāḥ pratapanti viṣṇo". "bhāsas tavogrāḥ". By the "ugrāḥ". "bhāsaḥ".
"ugrāḥ" effulgence of Your form, the whole universe is now troubled, is
disturbed. And then, when he is seeing this, he now asks the question. Who is
this person? Who are You, my dear Lord?

        ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo
        namo ’stu te deva-vara prasīda
        vijñātum icchāmi bhavantam ādyaṁ
        na hi prajānāmi tava pravṛttim

You know. "ākhyāhi". I am asking. "bhavān ugra-rūpo". "ugra-rūpo". Oh, fearsome
form. Who are You? So, now, you know, it is interesting. Previous verse only has
said, You are Vishnu. But now, you asking. Who are You? Just Vish..., You are
Vishnu? But this kind of form of Vishnu, I have never seen. Therefore, who are
You? You know. What is this "ugra-rūpaḥ". "ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo". So,
we see the relationship changes. You know. You know. So, from times, you know,
relationship has changed. Now, even when, you know, Krishna, Arjuna surrendered
to Krishna. He used the word "tvam". "tvam" means You. And "bhavān" is a more
respectful second person address. So, for example, in hindi, even with, "tvam"
would be to. And "bhavān" would be up. It is more respectful. You know. So, you
know, you know, you know, you know, normally, there is no such thing that
dir..., such difference in English. The, so, all the second persons are referred
to by you. But the respectful second person is used when, you know, we know the
other person is, you know, worthy of our respect. For example, you know,
sometimes, we may call, some..., somebody may call us. We may pick up on,
"Ahkonedu". How are you? And then, suddenly, we are, oh, maybe that is some
senior devotee speaking. Some spiritual, or maybe, our spiritual master is
speaking. A..., a..., a..., a..., a..., ap..., op..., ak..., kaseva kar sapta
home? So, that to becomes up. You know. So, suddenly, the whole mood changes.
So, like that, until now, the conversation was "tvam". But now, "bhavān".
"bhavān". Oh, "ugra-rūpaḥ". Who are You? "ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo". "namo
’stu te deva-vara prasīda". I offer my obeisances to You. "pra...", "prasīda".
The word "prasīda" has been used second time now. Please. "prasīda". "prasīda".
I am pleased. Please be pleased with. "vijñātum icchāmi bhavantam ādyaṁ". I want
to know "vijñātum". I am asking You. "bhavantam". Again. Second per..., second,
you know, respectful reference. "bhavantam ādyaṁ". You know. You know. "na hi
prajānāmi tava pravṛttim". What is Your "pravṛttim"? What is Your intention? So,
who are You? And what is Your intention? So, with this inquiry, Arjuna becomes
silent. And what is Krishna's response? Thereafter, we will discuss in the next
class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
