Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OMJUSi0LoiU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_105_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_10_Text_08_to_11_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=OMJUSi0LoiU&event=video_description&redir_token=w677UApDtXEQLfNvgR0CsbF5tO98MTU0ODQ4ODkzMkAxNTQ4NDAyNTMy

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now going to start the four essential verses of the Gita. The Chatur Shloki
Bhagavad Gita. 10.8 to 11. Rāmānujāchārya, you know, you know, has referred to
this as the, the four nutshell verses of the Gita. And that nomenclature has
been adopted by subsequent teachers, also. Of the Bhagavad Gita. And we will see
why these verses are so significant in terms of their content. And in terms of
their context. So, in terms of their context, you know, in a sense, these are
the last verses that Krishna speaks in His instructions. And then, after this,
Krishna gives a con..., Arjuna gives a conclu..., you know, you know,
almo..., an understanding that is almost conclusive. So, till now, whenever
Arjuna has spoken, First Chapter, Arjuna spoke. At that time, He was speaking
that I do not wan..., the reasons why he does not want to fight. After that,
whenever Arjuna has spoken. Arjuna has spoken to ask questions. And, you know,
you know, this is practically the only time in the Bhagavad Gita, where, you
know, Arjuna, you know, paraphrases and rephrases his understanding of, you
know, Krishna's message. This is the place where, after the Chatur Sholoki
Bhagavad Gita comes the, you know, explanation o..., by Arjuna of the position
of Krishna. And this sort of exp..., you know, explanation does not come even at
the end of the Bhagavad Gita. At the end of the Bhagavad Gita, you know, the
Gita has been taken. The Gita has taken Krishna and Arjuna far away from the
battlefield to the discussion of, you know, profound philosophical topics. That
the height of which has rarely been scaled either before or after. But by the
18th Chapter, from those phenomenal heights, Krishna and Arjuna are coming down.
And there, Arjuna says:

        kariṣye vacanaṁ tava

I will fight. I will fight. Because now, the action has been called for on the
battlefield. But here, after the Chatur Shloki Bhagavad Gita, Krishna, His, you
know, message is rephrased by Arjuna. And there, we will see, he unambiguously
declares Krishna to be the Supreme Person. The hear..., ultimate Ab..., you
know, ultimate reality. The hear..., Absolute Truth. The acme. The pinnacle of
existence. So, that is the message of the Bhagavad Gita. And that comes
immediately after these verses. So, prior to this, also, Ninth Chapter, Krishna
has called as the most confidential knowledge. This chapter, also, Krishna has
said "paramaṁ vacaḥ". This chapter. He says that I am going to give the supreme
instructions. And till now, He has been building up by saying in 10.3 that this
knowledge will free you from sinful reactions. And 10.7, He has said that this
knowledge will give you, you know, you know, will grant, will make you
wholeheartedly devoted to me. Discussed in last, yesterday's verse.

        so ’vikalpena yogena
        yujyate nātra saṁśayaḥ

Without any doubt. Without any delusion. You will become wholeheartedly fixed in
Me. So, then, Krishna will describe this in the forth verses. So, if we look at
the context. What is happening? You know. After that, Arjuna gives, the only
place in the Bhagavad Gita where he explains his understanding. Now, of course,
when there is Virata rupa, in the Eleventh Chapter, Arjuna does offer
prayers. And, he, and describe what he is, you know, you know, see beholding.
But, you know, that is not exactly a paraphrase of what Krishna has spoken. So,
here, Krishna is, Arjuna is giving understanding on, so, Arjuna is giving the
understanding here only, the only place of the Gita. And before d..., it,
Krishna is building up by saying this is "paramaṁ vacaḥ". The most confidential
knowledge that I will be speaking. So, therefore, you know, th..., from the
context, it is very significant. Now, let us look at the content. So, when we
look at the content, let us look at the, you know, you know, summary and
overview of what the four verses are saying. Then, we will go into the four
verses. So, in one sense, among these, you know, four verses, also, 10.8 to 11.
8 gives a summary. And 9, 10, 11 are elaborating that. So, 8 says, those who
know that I am the source of everything become enlightened. They become buddha.
And they become devoted to Me wholeheartedly. That is "bhava samanvitah". So,
you know, now, this that they become devoted. And they become enlightened. That
is talked about in 8. Now, 9 is, describes how they become devoted to Me. That
is, you know, "mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā". You know. That is described in 9th
verse. And then, 10th and 11th verses describes how they become buddha. So, you
know, you know, so, Krishna, He says that, you know, A..., Krishna gives buddhi
yoga. That is described in the "dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ" verse. Famous verse in
10.10. And then, how Krishna gives buddhi is described in the 11th verse. That,
you know, I am present in the heart. And I remove, with the torchlight of
knowledge, the darkness. So, in a sense, this is what the verses are talking
about. How a devotee become, how a soul, one understanding Krishna's positions
becomes devoted. And becomes enlightened. So, this talks about the redirection
of the heart. And the redirection of the head. So, the redirection of the heart.
The, the enlightenment is described in the, the, the understanding of Krishna's
position described in the 8th verse. And the resulting redirection of the heart
is described in 9th verse. And then, the 10th and 11th verse, the, you know,
direction of the, the illumination, the understanding that comes up. That is
also described. So, now, let us look at this from another way, perspective. The
8th. We know that there are these categories in, you know, you know, you know,
understanding God. Or for that matter, any subject. Sambandha. Abhidheya. And
prayojana. So, what is this Sambandha? Abhidheya? And prayojana? Actually,
"sambandha", you know, the "Caitanya-caritāmṛta" says, "sambandha", krishna.
"abhidheya", "bhakti". "premā", "prayojana". So, these are three aspects.
"sambandha". What is it that we want to develop a relationship with? So, by
philosophical, you know, contemplation, we understand, I want to develop a
relationship with the ultimate reality. And the ultimate reality is personal, is
Krishna. So, therefore, that is the first step. "sambandha". Then, how do I
develop the relationship? There is a process of "sādhana-bhakti". That is
bhakti. So, that is the process which I follow. And after that, what happens
when I develop that? Then, the result is "prayojana". That is "prema". So, for
example, to understand this "sambandha". "abhidheya". "prayojana". Let us, we
may consider a simple example. Sometimes, there are, you know, t...,
advertisers. Which say, say, you know, person, as a car is shown. And if that
person is showing, driving the car. And says, enjoy this ca..., purchase the
car. And enjoy the envy in your neighbors' eyes. Now, actually, when the
advertisements indicate the level of people's consciousness. You know. Is
env..., envy something to be enjoyed? Enjoy the envy in your neighbors' eyes.
So, that is a standard of enjoyment that people have. There is no positive
enjoyment. The enjoyment is in pushing people down. But anyway. So, when that
person sees an ad like this, that person sees, oh, I want that car. So, what
happens? The "sambandha" is with the car. Oh, I want to develop a relationship
with the car. What is the relationship? I want to be the owner of the car.
Possessor of the car. So, then, "abhidheya". What is the "abhidheya"? Oh, I have
to earn that much money. If I do not have the money, I have to take a car loan.
So, procuring the money is the "abhidheya". And then, what is the "prayojana"?
The "prayojana" is I come in the car. And I am proudly riding the car. And I am
waiting to see the envy in my neighbors' eyes. And then, I look at. Even I find
that, he has got a new better car than me. And instead of the envy coming in his
eyes, the envy comes in my eyes. So, what happens is, in material life, just
when we expect the "prayojana" to come. When we expect the fruit, the happiness
to come, at that time, it just does not come. It just does not come. You know.
Or it comes. It is so little. And it goes away after that. You know. You know.
But the overall point is that this is how in any activity, we develop. We may
want to develop a relationship. We decide. This is the object. Or this is the
person with who, with whom I want to develop the relationship. Then, there is
a process. And then, after the process comes the result.

So, you know, here, "sambandha". "abhidheya". "prayojana". So, "sambandha" is
Krishna. Now, "sambandha" is, Krishna means, we understand that I have to
develop a relationship with Krishna. So, the first verse talks about
"sambandha". "abhidheya". And "prayojana". All three. And then, second verse
talks about "abhi...". It is the, 10.9 talks about "abhidheya" as well as
"prayojana". And the 10th, 11th talks all the more about "abhidheya". That
means, it talks about, you know, you know, you know, you know, the process by
which the connection is developed. So, let us see how that happens in this
verse. Verses one by one. But suffice it, at this stage, we understand the
significance of the verse. The whole philosophy is, you know, compressed
together in a cond..., in a concised way in these four verses. So, let us look
at, you know, you know, 10.8 now.

        ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo
        mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate
        iti matvā bhajante māṁ
        budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

So, "ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo". I am the source of everything. "mattaḥ sarvaṁ
pravartate". Everything emanates from Me. So, actually, we may say, this
seem..., this may seem to be just repetitious. You know. Everything comes from,
I am the source of everything. And everything comes from Me. So, what is the
point of repeating the same thing again? I am the source of everything. "ahaṁ
sarvasya prabhavo". Is, doesn't that mean the same thing as "mattaḥ sarvaṁ
pravartate"? Actually, the word "pravartate" is, you know, also used in a
present tense. In the sense of maintenance. That means, Krishna is saying I am
not only the source of everything. But actually, I am also the maintainer of
everything. Everything is being sustained by Me. So, everything is being
arranged. And its, you know, whole maintenance is going on by My arrangement.
So, everything is, in that sense, ema..., acting within Me. So, earlier, we have
discussed the conception of God as, you know, deistic which some people have.
You know. There is theism. There is deism. And there is atheism. Atheism is God
does not exist, only. God is neither the creator, nor the controller. So, theism
is the idea that God is the creator and the controller. But deism is the idea
that God is the creator. But not the controller. God is the creator. But not the
controller. Say, just like a clock is there. A clock is made by some maker. But
is not the, maker is not controlling the clock right now. So, that is the idea
of God that some people have. So, that is not the idea of God that the Bhagavad
Gita very directly substantiates. Krishna, it says that, actually, God is not
just a distinct, you know, deistic sort of designer. God is also a, you know,
proximate, personal, ov..., overseer of everything. So, He is present as the
Paramatma in the heart. And He cares for everyone. Of course, He is also a
judge.

        udāsīna-vad āsīnam

For those who do not want Him to intervene directly. But for those who turn
towards Him, He is personally there. So, "pravartate". That means Krishna is the
sustainer, also. He is not just the source. He is the sus..., sustainer, also.
You know. And then, "iti matvā". One who understand this. What happens to such a
person? "bhajante māṁ". That one who understands Krishna's position. "bhajante".
Now, Srila Prabhupada has already explained the word "bhajante" quite in detail
in the purport of 6.47.

        yoginām api sarveṣāṁ
        mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā
        śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ
        sa me yukta-tamo mataḥ

So, "bhajate". "bhajante". They are all from the same root. You know. The word
"bhajante" has also come. That there was "bhajate". The word "bha...", similarly
the "bhajante" has also come in, earlier in 9.13:

        mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha
        daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ
        bhajanty ananya-manaso
        jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

You know. So, "bhajante" means that, actually, Krishna is wholehearted. You
know. That, you know, you know, you know, that the devotee wholeheartedly offers
oneself to Krishna. So, it is not just some ritualistic worship. It is, you
know, you know, complete offering of one's heart. Oneself. And one's very being
to Krishna. So, here, "iti matvā bhajante māṁ". That person starts worshipping.
But in what way is the worship going on? "budhā". "budhā" mean the person
becomes intelligent. "budhā" is actually, the word "budhā" is related with the
"buddh...". "buddha. "buddha" is the enlightened one. So, "budhā" is also
similarly enlightened. And the word "budhā" is often constanted..., contrasted
with the word "mūḍhā". "mūḍhā" is a foolish person. "bhāva-samanvitāḥ".
"bhāva-samanvitāḥ" means that with, you know, the emotion of the heart. So, it
is not, the person does not do ritualistic worship. But "bhāva-samanvitāḥ". With
the emotion, one offers. So, "samanvitāḥ". Imbued with. With great attention.
So, "bhāva-samanvitāḥ". Now, you know, that means what? It is telling here the
knowledge of Krishna's position. What does that lead to? That makes the person
enlightened. And that person, that makes the person, you know, also, attracted
to offer the whole heart. So, in that sense, the head and the heart, both get
transformed and, you know, directed towards Krishna. The head becomes illumined.
That is "budhā". And the heart becomes transformed. That is "bhāva-samanvitāḥ",
"bhajante". So, in, now, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport. Prabhupada,
the purport primarily focuses on, you know, substantiating the point that
Prabhupada, that Krishna is making that He is the source of everything. That He
is the Absolute Truth. And Prabhupada marshalls a remarkably impressive galaxy
of verses as supports for, you know, you know, this, you know, point that
Krishna is making. So, you know, we see Prabhupada quotes from various verses.
Let us look at how many verses he is quoting from. So, manda..., there is a
section, Atharva Veda, the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad". We discussed earlier
quotations, also, in this book. So, what does he, he says?

        yo brahmāṇaṁ vidadhāti pūrvaṁ yo vai vedāṁś ca gāpayati sma kṛṣṇaḥ

So, it was Krishna who instructed Brahma and "pūrvaṁ", "pūrvaṁ yo vai vedāṁś ca
gāpayati". And it is He who gave knowledge, in the Vedic knowledge in the past.
So, again, the point that He is being made, indicating through, is that Krishna
is the source of all. So, now, what are the alternative sources that people may
conceive of? People may think Brahma is the source. Shiva is the source. But
here, this verse is indicating that, actually, you know, if Krishna gave
knowledge to Brahma, that means Brahma is not the sour..., Brahma is not the
ultimate source. Krishna must have been there before. Krishna is more
enlightened than Brahma. And Krishna gave knowledge to Brahma. So, that, and
then, again, so, this is from the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad". And Prabhupada
quotes again from the "Nārāyaṇa Upaniṣad". What does "Nārāyaṇa Upaniṣad" say?
"atha puruṣo". "atha jāḥ pur...":

        atha puruṣo ha vai nārāyaṇo ’kāmayata prajāḥ sṛjeyeti

So, you know, you know, "’kāma". You know. So, in their "atha", in the
beginning, it was "Nārāyaṇa" who desired to create, you know, you know, all
living beings. And then, it is described, when he said, desired, desired to
create all living beings, what happened? Then, actually, who all are created?
Here, we see, practically, the whole, who is who in the Vedic cosmology is
described over here. As all coming from "Nārāyaṇa".

        ārāyaṇād brahmā jāyate, nārāyaṇād prajāpatiḥ prajāyate, nārāyaṇād indro jāyate, nārāyaṇād aṣṭau vasavo jāyante, nārāyaṇād ekādaśa rudrā jāyante, nārāyaṇād dvādaśādityāḥ

So, here, Brahma, it is like, as I said, it is a who is who of the Vedic
cosmology. Brahma, you know, is the creator. Prajāpatiḥ as a subsequent pro...,
you know, progenitors. Very important people in the Vedic universe. Indra is
the, you know, chief among all the Gods. The "vasavo"s, Vasus are, you know,
the, you know, you know, important among the devatas again. And Shiva, of
course. Rudra, eleven Rudras, they are also coming from "Nārāyaṇa". And the
"Ādityas" are also coming from "Nārāyaṇa". The, and, then, Prabhupada makes the
point:

"This Nārāyaṇa is an expansion of Kṛṣṇa."

So, now, when, when this "Nārāyaṇa Upaniṣad" is there, the point which is being
made is that from "Nārāyaṇa", everyone has come. Now, if we study the
description of the universes' origin. Which is given, o..., of not the exactly 
universes' origin. But the origin of the, you know, various, you know, living
beings in the universe. Including the prominent living beings. In the
"Bhāgavatam" itself, sometimes, different processes are described. So, it is not
necessar..., it is not that every time all the details within the process of
creation are, happen exactly identically. There can be variations. At different,
in different universes. That means, you know, actually, you know, you know,
Krishna does not have to, necessarily all the time, while unfolding the
universe, follow a rigid pattern. You know. Just as Krishna's pastimes can have
some variations.  Similarly, some things can be vary. So, when it is said that
from "Nārāyaṇa", Shiva came. Now, if we look at the "Bhāgavatam", we may say
that, actually, Shiva, Rudra, Rudra comes from the, from Brahmaji. It is
considered son of Brahma. So, how can it be said that from, you know, you know,
"Nārāyaṇa", Shiva has come? The point is here that it is by "Nārāyaṇa"'s
arrangement. And it is "Nārāyaṇa" who is the original source. So, we may say
that, you know, say, if so, one person emigrated from, you know, this
particular, from, say, in the early, you know, India, you know, it, to, say,
Afr..., fr..., to Siberia. You know. Not many Indians were there. And then, that
person gave birth to, you know, some people. And from then, the dynasty has
moved on. And the dyn..., hundreds of people after that. Hundreds, even
thousands of people. Then, what would we say? That now, there may be different
generations who have there gone on. But we will say, oh, from him, you know,
this king has come. You know. From him, this warrior has come. From him, this
business person has come. From him, this artist has come. So, it may not be that
all of them are directly his children. But they have all come from him. So, it
is in this sense that it is said that all these people come from "Nārāyaṇa".
"Nārāyaṇa" is the source, ultimately. But it is not necessarily that they, these
are directly born from "Nārāyaṇa". Although, that can also happen if that is
what the Lord wills in, you know, some other universes. You know. So, the
"Bhā...", the "Bhāgavatam" describes a particular genealogy. And the important
point is, this genealogy, it all comes from, it all comes from, you know,
Krishna. It all ultimately comes from Krishna who, because "Nārāyaṇa" also comes
from Krishna. So, the important point that is being made over here is that, it
is amaz..., He is the source of everyone. Now, "sṛjeyeti". "’kā...".
"’kāmayata". So, it is said that, the Lord come..., "’kāma...", "’kāmayata",
"sṛjeyeti". That Lord desired to create living entities. What does it refer to?
Now, we know that all, the souls are eternal. Then, the Lord does not create
in souls. Because the souls exist eternally. So, what is being referred to here?
It, this is not referring to anything at the spiritual level. The souls
are eternal, exist at the spiritual level. But this is referring to the, you
know, beginning of the universe. We know that the Lord is sleeping. And then,
you know, you know, say, you know, when Brahmaji is, also, Brahmaji's life ends.
At that time, the whole universe is destroyed. And when the universe is
destroyed, at that time, you know, you know, what happens is, you know, the,
when the universe is destroyed, you know, you know, the universal substratum
enters into Vishnu. You know. And then, after that, you know, when the Lord
desires again, then the universes start emanating from His body. And then, after
that, He glances. And the whole creation, you know, triggers off. So, that
moment, when the creation is going to start, that is what is being referred to
as "srjeyeti". So, it is not souls are being created. But the souls are becoming
embodied. Those souls who have already come to the material world. Or are
willing to come, or, or wanting to come to the material world. You know. For
them, the Lord gives body. So, this "srjeyeti" refers to, not His desire to
create new souls. But, you know, to start remanifesting the creation for
allowing the souls to play out their desires. And ultimately, come back to Him.
So, that is what is different to as the Lord's desire over here. Now, you know,
beyond that, you know, let us look at several other verses. You
know.

        brahmanyo devaki-putrah

"brahmanyo devaki-putrah". So, actually, you know, this is from the "Narayana
Upanisad". "brahmanyo". So, the Abs.., the Absolute Truth, the Brahman is
actually coming as "dev...", is the "devaki-putrah". You know. And then,
further, what is being said over here? In the, what was there at the origin?
This is from the "Maha Upanisad". "eko vai narayana".

        eko vai narayana asin na brahma nesano napo nagni-somau neme dyav-aprthivi na naksatrani na suryah

"eko vai narayana asin". In the beginning, there was only "Nārāyaṇa". Brahman
was not there. "nesano" refers to Shiva. He was not there. "napo". So, there was
no water. There was no fire. You know. You know. And then, there was no, you
know, you know, there was no, you know, stars in the sky. "naksatrani na
suryah". "na", "dyav-aprthivi". So, there was no, you know, you know, you know,
there was no "dyav", moon, also. So, "somau". "neme". "somau" refers to the
moon, "somau". Moon. So, like that, Prabhupada says, the point that is being
made is, there was no one there at that time. So, you know, again, now,
Prabhupada quotes from the "Moksa-dharma". "Moksa-dharma" is like an appendix to
the "Mahabharata".

        prajapatim ca rudram capy
        aham eva srjami vai
        tau hi mam na vijanito
        mama maya-vimohitau

So, "prajapatim ca rudram capy". So, Krishna is saying that Rudra and the
"prajapatim", they are all created by Me. But those who do not know this. But
those who not know Me. "mam na vijanito". So, what does this indicate is, what
does this state of such a person? "mama maya-vimohitau". You know. People do not
know this because they are deluded by My "maya". Then, Prabhupada quotes from
the "Varaha Purana" here. What does the "Varaha Purana" say?

        narayanah paro devas
        tasmaj jatas caturmukhah
        tasmad rudro ’bhavad devah
        sa ca sarva-jñatam gatah

So, "nar...", you know, so, from "narayanah", "jatas", is, "narayanah" is the
"paro devas". So, He is the Supreme among all the Gods. And from Him was born?
"caturmukhah". "caturmukhah" refers to Brahmaji. And from him comes "rudro". And
"rudro" eventually became "sarva-jñatam gatah". He became omniscient. Now, you
know, what does it mean when we say Vi..., Shiva became omniscient? Actually,
there are levels of omniscience, also. We may, the word omni normally means all.
So, how can there be levels of omniscience? Is, the word omni means all. But the
Vedic universe is so subtle. So complex. That often, the English vocabulary is
not enough to describe, you know, the Vedic exa..., understanding of existence.
So, the word omni means all. But, you know, what, what does it, all refer to?
Does all refer to, you know, all of existence? Or all the universe? Or all the
earthly planetary system? Or all the earth? Or what? So, all can refer to many
things. Omni basically refers all. So, Shiva is omniscient within a particular
universe. Yamarāja is also omniscient similarly in a limited sense. So, all, it
is all within a jurisdiction. But it is only the, Lord, Lord Vishnu, the
Supersoul who is pervading everywhere. Who is completely omniscient. So, partial
omniscience is granted to other living beings based on the particular portfolios
that they have in the universal management. So, to be able to execute the
responsibility that are interested to them. They are given that power. And
accordingly, they manifest certain, you know, you know, levels of abilities
which most people do not have. So, now, going back, you know, so, now,
Prabhupada explains further that, you know, you know, actually, the whole
"Bhāgavat...", you know, the whole Bhagavad Gita has been pointing towards this
particular point which Krishna has made. So, for example, it is said that:

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat
        kiñcid asti dhanañ-jaya

There is no truth higher than Me. You know. That was one of the most categorical
declaration of Krishna's positions. And now, this is all, now, there have been
many declarations like that before, also. "mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ". Very direct.
So, similarly, there is this word declaration of "ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo".
"sarvasya" means. Everything actually comes from Me. Everything means there is
no exception to that everything. So, everything literally means everything. Now,
when Krishna is speaking this, what, you know, let us look at the overall
understanding of how the universe manifests. So, the universe manifests in this
world. You know. Actually, we know that, originally, there is Krishna. From
Krishna comes "Nārāyaṇa". You know. From Krishna comes Balaramji. From Balaram
comes Vasudeva. Sankarshan. Pradyumna. Anniruddha. From him comes "Nārāyaṇa".
From "Nārāyaṇa" comes second chakra, vio..., chakra. Vayu of..., Vasudeva.
Sankarshan. Pradyumna. Anniruddha. And from him comes Mahavishnu. From
Mahavishnu comes "Garbhodakaśāyī". From him comes "Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu". And
like that, the whole universe goes on. So, ultimately, from the point of view of
cosmology, universe, will, cosmology, it is the Lord who, it is He who is the
source of everyone. So, you know, you know, now, Srila Prabhupada, you know, is,
is quoting from the previous acharyas. And explaining to us how all these things
come from, all these are coming from Him. And then, Prabhupada concludes this
purport by describing that:

"A Kṛṣṇa conscious person should not be bewildered by fools;"

What is the fool's idea? That

"Only a fool would consider Kṛṣṇa to be an ordinary man."

So:

"he should avoid all unauthorized commentaries and interpretations on
Bhagavad-gītā and proceed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness with determination and
ﬁrmness."

So, what does this refer to? You know. You know. This is Prabhupada explaining
how we can become "budhā" and "bhāva-samanvitāḥ" at our level. So,
"bhāva-samanvitāḥ" is with determination and firmness. And "budhā" is reject
"all unauthorized commentaries and interpretations". So, the Bhagavad Gita
itself is quite clear. You know. Prabhupada would say that the, you know, his
purports make, you know, the self-evident meaning, you know, g..., the meaning
is, Prabhupada would some time say that scripture is self-evident. There is no
need for any interpretation of scripture. So, Krishna is very clear. "ahaṁ
sarvasya prabhavo". You know. I am the source of everything. Now, we know that
what Prakashan Saraswati, you know, and Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya, both of
them, basically, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu told more or less the same thing. But, you
know, you know, when Chaitanya Ma..., when Ved..., when these impersonalists,
you know, when Prakashan Saraswati, when Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya especially,
say, was giving his impersonal explanation of Vedanta sutra. So, at that time,
what happened? At that time, you know, He, you know, you know, first heard from
Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya for seven days. And Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya asked him,
you are not asking any questions. Are you understanding or not what I am saying?
And then, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, you know, he gave, what you can say is an iron
fist in a velvet glow. Externally, what was spoken is soft. But the important
was very heavy. What he said is, actually, I understand the Vedanta sutra quite
well. But I cannot understand what you are saying. So, wha..., see, what does
this actually imply? It is like a teacher is explaining something to a student.
And the student says, you know, I understand the textbook. But I do not
understand what you are saying. So, firstly, what it means is the teacher is
unnecessary. Because the teacher is trying to explain that book. But the student
is saying that I already know the textbook. You, I do not need you. Without you,
I have understood it. But it, worse than that, what is the student saying
further? That, actually, you know, I can understand the textbook. But I cannot
understand you means, what you are saying does not make sense. That means is
your understanding is improper. Or it is event incorrect. And that means, the
student is not only saying that I do not need you. The student is also saying
that you are wrong. It is quite a slap on the face for the teacher. So, then, he
say..., Chaitanya Mahaprabhu further says, actually, the Vedanta sutra is like
the sun. And your explanations are like the cloud covering the sun. So, fi...,
that means, first, I understand with you. You do not understand. And third is,
that you, what you are understanding is a misunderstanding. So, it is quite a
strong statement. So, then, now, it is said that the, Ved..., sutr..., Vedanta
sutra is like a a sel..., is self-evident. So, the Bhagavad Gita is also
self-evident that way. The meaning is clear. We do not need any interpretation.
So, if we do not need any interpretation, then why is Srila Prabhupada giving a
commentary? You know. Isn't his commentary also an intepretation? If the, you
know, scripture is self-evident, then, you know, you know, why do we need a
commentary? So, actually, what is self-evident may not be evident to us. We may
wonder. How is that possible? What does it mean? Just like the sun gives light.
Sun is self-luminous. And the sun's light is going far and wide. But for us,
over our head may be clouds. And for us, the clouds may be blocking our vision
of the sun. Similarly, for our, the Bhagavad Gita, in and of itself, its meaning
is self-evident. But for us, the meaning is covered because of our
preconceptions and prejudices. Because of our misconceptions. And our
misdirections. So, you know, you know, preconceptions means, our own past
notion. Prejudices means, we have our own biases. We like certain things. We do
not like certain things. So, same, misconception means wrong understanding.
Misdirections means our desires also, not only the, our understanding wrong, but
even our desires are wrong. So, becau..., these preconceptions and prejudices,
misconceptions and misdirections, they form a cloud. And what Srila Prabhupada
does is, his purports are removing the cloud that is covering our vision. So,
what is self-evident is not evident. You know. And therefore, what we need is,
the acharyas to explain. And those who are not, you know, actually living the
Gita, they cannot explain the Gita. You know. To live the Gi..., you know, to,
you know, you know, to actually understand the Gita, we must live the Gita. And
to live the Gita, we must love Krishna. Because that is what the message of the
Bhagavad Gita is. So, those who are not loving Krishna, they K..., are not
living the Gita. And they are not understanding the Gita. Because the Bhagavad
Gita is not just a theoretical subject. It is a transformational subject. And
without becoming transformed, we cannot get its proper understanding. You know.
You know. So, therefore, the devotee should not doubt. And with firmness and
con..., determination, we should move forward. And there are so many
interpretations of the Gita. And they may contain certain things which are, you
know, valuable. You know. Some points may be, you know, good in them. But
overall, if they are neglecting Krishna. If they are bypassing Krishna. If they
are saying that, saying that there is some reality beyond Krishna, then that is
a seriou..., grievous misunderstanding. And therefore, a devotee has to be
cautious. So, "budhā" means to understand Krishna as the Supreme Absolute Truth.
You know. What happens after that? Let us describe in the next verses. You know.
You know. So, you know, the next verse says. "mac-cittā". "a...", Now, "āv...",
remember, this verse says, it is, how is this going. Sambandha? Abhidheya?
And prayojana? So, sambandha jnana is:

        ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo
        mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

When we understand Krishna's position, that enables us to understand sambandha.
And then, abhidheya is what? "bhajante māṁ", you know, is, "bha...", "bhajante
māṁ" is the abhidheya. To do "bhajan". And, you know, "bhāva-samanvitāḥ". With
divine emotion. With pure spiritual emotion. That is the last part. That is the
aspect of love for Krishna. That is, you know, devotion that is manifesting. So,
in this way, we can understand that everything is talked about in this verse.
You know. You know. So:

        mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā
        ...

        mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā
        bodhayantaḥ parasparam
        kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ
        tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca

So, "mac-cittā". One offers one's consciousness to Me. "mac-cittā". "cittāḥ".
"cittāḥ" is the consciousness. The mind. Now, Prabhupada translates this very
poet..., very poe..., aptly and poetically. He does not just say that the
devotees think of Me. He says, the thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in
Me. Such a precise, yet poetic translation. When we love Krishna, Krishna
becomes our inner home. And just like when we have a home that we love. Then, we
may go out. We may go here. We may go there. But we love to come back to the
shelter and security of home. So, similarly, a devotee may think about other
things. But Krishna is the home of the devotee internally. And that is why the
devotee's thoughts may go here. May go there. Depending on whatever services are
required. Whatever practical needs are there. But as soon as there is nothing
else to do, devotee's thought come back to Krishna. Now, all of us have some
home. Our own inner home. You know, for us, our home may be money. It may be
sense gratification. It may be cricket. It may be, you know, baseball. There
may be so many different homes we can have. Mental homes. Whatever we are fond
of. So, if there is nothing to do, nothing demanding our attention, immediately,
tuck, our mind gravitates towards that thing. The whole process of bhakti means
to change our inner home. You know. Spiritually is, we make spiritual
advancement to the extent to which our inner home changes from worldly things to
Krishna. So, "mac-cittā". Our home, Krishna becomes our home. The "Bhāgavatam"
talks about this, also. This conception of Krishna being our home.

        dhautātmā puruṣaḥ kṛṣṇa-
        pāda-mūlaṁ na muñcati
        mukta-sarva-parikleśaḥ
        pānthaḥ sva-śaraṇaṁ yathā

The same example. "pānthaḥ" is traveler. "sva-śaraṇaṁ". One's own shelter. One's
h..., own home. So, just as a traveler weary after a long, trouble journey,
comes back homes. And feels comfort. And joy. And love. And security. And
happiness. Like that, what happens is, and the traveler does not want to leave
again. Similarly, "dhautātmā". One who is purified. Purified soul. "puruṣaḥ".
Such a person. "kṛṣṇa-pāda-mūlaṁ na muñcati". That person never gives up the
lotus feet of Krishna. Why? "mukta-sarva-parikleśaḥ". There, one is freed from
all "parikleśaḥ". One is freed from all misery. So, that is the way h..., this
works out in a devotee's life. That, everything else may agitate the mind. But
once we bring the mind to Krishna, the mind becomes peaceful. The mind becomes
joyful. Just like if the room may be hot, if, you know, externally, it may be
hot. But then, when we come into a room where there is AC, suddenly, we feel
relief. Like that, when we come, when we bring our consciousness to Krishna
within the remembrance of Krishna, we feel relief from all the agitations and
the irritations of the world. And then, we can move forward steadily. So, you
know, you know, you know, you know, now, let us look at this verse a little bit
more. "mac-cittā". So, how, the three primary faculties of our existence are
described over here. So, "mac-cittā". "cittā" refers to, you know, you know, you
know, the mind. Then, "mad-gata-prāṇā". "prāṇāḥ" refers to life itself. That
can be said to refer to the body. And "bodhayantaḥ". "bodhayantaḥ" means to
speak. And to hear. You know. You know. "mat".

        mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā
        bodhayantaḥ parasparam
        kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ

"kathayantaḥ". That is also speak. So, when we speak, "bodha...", "kathayantaḥ".
When others speak. And we understand. That is "bodhayantaḥ". It is the delight
in enlightening each other. "mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā". So, "mat-cittāḥ". That
you have to offer the consciousness to Me. Then, "mad-gata-prāṇā". The whole
existence is offered to Krishna. The devotee wants to live the whole life simply
for the service of Krishna. And for no other purpose. "bodhayantaḥ parasparam".
And the devotees come together with the other devotees. And they discuss,
delight in discussing. "parasparam". "kathayantaś ca māṁ". And "nityaṁ". That is
what one devotee is, want to do forever and ever. And we see, "Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu". In the "Caitanya-caritāmṛta", demonstrating this. You know.
Wherever he would be tra..., he would travel around. But when there would be
some association of devotees, immediately, he would sit and discuss Krishna
Katha. And what he demonstrated in the "Gambhīrā", in his līl..., An..., in his
An..., in his final pastimes, in "Antya-līlā". You know. When he stayed in, in
Puri, was just this, you know:

        kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ
        tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca

That one, so, "tuṣyanti". And "ramanti". "tuṣyanti". Satisfied. You know.
Devotee is satisfied with the bliss that Krishna is providing. There, whatever I
am getting, I am, I do not even deserve that. So that I have got this, is itself
a matter of great satisfaction. I have an opportunity to practice Krishna
Consciousness. I am satisfied with that. But at the same time, "ramanti". Now,
the word "raman" is often used. "raman". Like we have "radha raman". "radhika
raman". So, "raman" is often used in the context of "mādhurya-rasa". So, the
devotee is looking forward. "ramanti ca". Oh, there is so much more ecstasy
waiting for me in the future. So much more ecstasy. Waiting. Waiting. Waiting.
So, "ramanti ca". In this way, the devotee goes deeper and deeper into ecstasy.
And by that way, you know, what happens is that the devotees' joy knows no
bounds. So, it, this verse is describing how a devotee's life is completely
transformed. The body. The mind. And the speech. All of them are used in
Krishna's service. And actually:

        parasparānukathanaṁ

"parasparānukathanaṁ" means the sitting. And the discussion about Krishna Katha.
This talked about in the Ca..., in the "Bhāgavatam", also. That the joy of
Krishna Katha is greater than the greatest joy in material existence. The
greatest joy between two people can be the pleasure of sex. But greater than
that is the pleasure of Krishna Katha. When two devotees who are like-minded.
Who are like-hearted. They like the same things about Krishna. And they have the
same natures by which they can serve Krishna. Then, when they come together.
Then, the ecstasy that comes in their discussion about Krishna. There is no,
none, there is no parallel to that. You know. So, in this way, the devotee
offers everything to Krishna. And experiences great joy in serving Krishna. You
know. You know. Now, after describing this, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's
purport. So, you know, you know, Prabhupada even gives the example. Prabhupada
talks about the "bhakti-latā-bīja" over here. And how, you know, you know,
shravana, kirtana, karaye, sinchana. So, "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". "Madhya-līlā".
Chapter 19. That is Chaitanya Mahaprabhu giving instructions to Sanatana
Goswami. Actually gives instructions to Rupa and Sanatana Goswami over
there. In that section of the "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". You know. So, there, he
describes this "bhakti-latā-bīja". So, initially, when the spiritual master
gives his, this "bīja". Just as when there is, the seed is there, it has to be,
you know, you know, protected and watered. So, the water is "sravanam kirtanam".
The more we water it, the more, and protect it, the seed grows. And grows. And
grows. And when it grows, it eventually blossom. It will, f..., grows into
beautiful tree. And then, it gives out, you know, flowers. And then, it gives
out fruits. And that fruit, actually, the tree, it, "Caitanya-caritāmṛta"
describes, it goes all the way beyond the material world. Beyond the coverings
around the universe. Through the "brahma-jyotir". Up to the spiritual sky. And
in the spiritual sky, it goes beyond Vaikuntha. To Goloka. To Goloka Vrindavan.
Within Goloka, within that Goloka planet. And it goes to Krishna's lotus feet.
And when it touches Krishna's lotus feet, actually, that tree gives a fruit. It
blossoms. And fructifies. And actually, then that fruit falls right from the
spiritual world to the material world. And then, the devotee hear itself, when
the fruit falls. The juice comes out. The devotee can rejoice this juice here
itself. Here itself. That means that as we make spiritual advancement. We start
ex..., relishing the richness of pure love for Krishna even in this world. Once,
the "bhakti-latā-bīja" has grown. Then, the relish that we get in our bhakti is
enormous. And that is what is talked about over here. So, you know, actually,
Krishna is there to give all of us the supreme ecstasy. And this, this is the,
one of the most important versesOnce, the "bhakti-latā-bīja" has grown. Then,
the relish that we get in our bhakti is enormous. And that is what is talked
about over here. So, you know, actually, Krishna is there to give all of us the
supreme ecstasy. And this v..., this is the, one of the most important verses
in the Bhagavad Gita. Which talks about association. You know. The joy of
devotion is experienced, especially intensely in association. Association of
like-minded devotees. Now, after that, let us look at the next verse.

        teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ
        bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam
        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ
        yena mām upayānti te

So, this is a well-known verse which Prabhupada would often quote. "teṣāṁ".
"teṣāṁ" means those people who are talked about in the previous verse. So, you
know, now, just before I go to this, 10.9, what did it talk about? It talks
primarily about "abhidheya". You know. How to practice devotion. You know. It,
by, it talks about "mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā". But then, "t...", "ramanti ca".
One delights. Supreme delight. That is also talking about "prayojana". It
desc..., describing the process by which one can attain perfection. And it is
also describing the stage of the perfect s..., minute soul. Perfected beings. So,
in that sense, it talks "prayojana", also. Now, these two verses will talk about
"abhidheya". Now, how will that devotee, you know, normally, the question comes
up, if somebody, you just do bhakti. In bhakti, you just chant. Dance. Sing. You
know. You have to have jnana. You have to have knowledge. So, this was what, you
know, there was a criticism of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu by Praka..., you know,
Prakarshan Saraswati. He says, you are a sannyasi. You should be sitting. And
discussing Vedanta with us. Why is this dancing? Like a sentimentalist on the
streets? So, at that time, what did, you know, you know, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
say? You know. He, out of his humility, he says that, actually, my spiritual
master said that I was of, I was not very intelligent. So, he told me just to
chant. But then, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu showed him how intelligent he was. You
know. There was a, you know, discussion. A debate. And Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
demolished all the e..., false explanations of Vedanta that Prakarshan Saraswati
had given. And tranqui..., and elightened. And converted Prakarshan Saraswati at
that time. So, you know, you know, you know, it is not that devotees do not have
intelligence. But people think like that. So, Krishna is assuring here, how will
a devotee become enlightened? He says, I will give that intelligence. "teṣāṁ
satata-yuktānāṁ". So, He is not saying that they have to be very budhiman. They
have to do vimarshana. They have to be very intelligent. Or they have to do
lot of deliberation. No. "satata-yuktānāṁ". Let them be just engaged in
devotional service. But "yuktānāṁ". And how? "bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam".
"bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam". Let them be engaged, you know, with devotion.
"prīt...". With affectionate attitude. "prīti-pūrvakam". And not, you know, so,
affectionately. Not resentfully. Not grudgingly. So, actually, bhakti can give
us illumination. If we do it with a pro..., affectionate attitude. If we do it
resentful attitude attitude, then we prevent Krishna from giving us the gift
that He wants to give us. "dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ". And then, what happens?
"dadāmi". Krishna says I will give. What? "buddhi-yogaṁ". I will give the
knowledge by which you can come to Me. The intelligence by which you can come to
Me. "yena mām upayānti te". By which you will come to Me. Now, this
"buddhi-yogaṁ" is a compound word. Now, "buddhi" and "yogaṁ". And this has been
used earlier by Krishna in the Second Chapter. In verse 2.39.

        eṣā te ’bhihitā sāṅkhye
        buddhir yoge tv imāṁ śṛṇu
        buddhyā yukto yayā pārtha
        karma-bandhaṁ prahāsyasi

So, "buddhir yoge tv imāṁ śṛṇu". "buddh...". You know. So, Krishna had used the
word, "buddhir yoge". They are the, although, the words are the same. There,
"buddhir yoge" primarily refers to, you know, acting intelligently for the
purpose of yoga. So, but there, when Krishna had used the word, Krishna had not
talked about Himself so much. So, the, so, there, if we look at the context, it
just refers, ok, you have got the knowledge that you are not the body. You are the
soul. Now, hack, how to act even that knowledge. So that one can do yoga. One
can connect. One can get, connect with the higher spiritual reality. So, what
that higher spiritual reality was not known at that point. But here, Krishna is
telling that higher spirituality is clearly established that it is I who am that
higher spiritual reality. And here, I, spiritual real..., spiritual, not higher.
But the highest spiritual reality. "ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo". "mattaḥ".

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat
        kiñcid asti dhanañ-jaya

7.7. 10.10. Krishna has talked about all this. Now, what is He talking about
here? Here, He is talking about, you know, that one who understand. So, He is
saying that, I am the Supreme Truth. And I give the knowledge by which what will
happen? Again, you will come back to Me. "yena mām upayānti te". So, it is not
that, you know, you know, you know, by that knowledge, something else will
happen. See, this verse is so pow..., clearly and consistently, you know,
devotional. These set of verses. And this causes a lot of headaches for
mayavadis. You know. The mayavadis. They somehow want to bring about their
impersonalist imper..., interpretation. So, what they try to say is that,
actually, see, here, Krishna is telling, from bhakti, "buddhi" will come.
Therefore, "buddhi" is higher than bhakti. You know. Say, when you have bhakti,
bhakti "yuktānāṁ". Then, what will happen? "buddhi" will come. And the "buddhi"
means jnana. And jnana is used for impersonal merging. But this is completely
unwarranted explanation because Krishna is telling, what is the result of
that "buddhi". "dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ". By which "yena mām upayānti te". By
which you will come to Me. Krishna is not saying that "buddh...", I will give
you the "buddhi" by which you will go to Brahman. Or some other reality beyond
Me. He says no. You will come to Me. "yena mām upayānti te". By which, you will
come to Me. "dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ". So, I give the "buddhi-yogaṁ". So,
Krishna is telling that even if you are deficient in knowledge, does not matter.
I will provide that knowledge. So, "buddhi-yogaṁ", you know, you know, g...,
this compound word can be understood in two ways. The "buddhi" that helps us to
do "yogaṁ". You know. Or the "yogaṁ" that grants "buddhi". Let us look at these
two. The "buddhi" that helps us to do "yogaṁ". That means, "yogaṁ" means
connection with Krishna. Connection with the Absolute Truth who is Krishna. So,
"buddhi-yogaṁ" will mean the "buddhi" that enables us to do "yogaṁ". Krishna
gives the intelligence. You know. How? How should I serve? You know. I am in
this situation now.

        ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ
        prātikūlyasya varjanam

Let me accept what is favorable. Let me reject that which is unfavorable. So,
how do I do all this? That "buddhi", Krishna says, I will give. You know.
That "buddhi" for doing yoga. So, "buddhi" for doing yoga is "buddhi-yogaṁ". Or
you know, you know, you know, we could also have it as yoga that gives "buddhi".
So, when we do yoga. That means when we try to practice bhakti. You know. When
we engage in devotional service, by that itself, "buddhi" comes along. So, in
the "Bhāgavatam", also, it is said that if one just keeps:

        śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

If one, you know, keep, hears about Krishna. And

        śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya

In the First Canto, Second Chapter, verses 6 to 21. There is a series of verses
that describes how we become purified by the process of bhakti. And described
that by that process itself, what happens? You know. We understand, you know,
the science of Krishna.

        sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati

        evaṁ prasanna-manaso
        bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ
        bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ
        mukta-saṅgasya jāyate

So, "evaṁ prasanna-manaso". When one with, with a, "tasan...". So, it is
described that by the practice of bhakti, one becomes purified. One, and one
becomes joyful by that. "sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati". When coincidence,
sattva-guna, one becomes choi..., cheerful. Because the hankering that makes us
miserable go away. And then, the "prasanna-manaso" is similar here to, you know,
"bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam". One has cheerful disposition. Affection. That
disposition. So:

        evaṁ prasanna-manaso
        bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ

You know. When one engages in bhakti-yoga, then what happens to the Supreme
Lord? You know.

        bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ

That the science of the "bhagavat-tattva". Ccience of Krishna becomes
manifest to us. And then:

        mukta-saṅgasya jāyate

One becomes, you know, free from all attachments. All bondage. And then, it is
like, when we become detached from worldly bondage, we have already come to know
about Krishna. We have understood Krishna. Then, naturally, we will become
attracted to Krishna. So, that same point is said over here.

        yena mām upayānti te

By this, the devotee will come back to Me. So, here, Krishna is telling that the
devotee primarily has to engage in devotional service. And the devotee engages
in devotional service, Krishna says, I will provide whatever is required. It is
not that you have to do anything separately. Yah. So, Prabhupada explains:

"One should know that the goal is Kṛṣṇa, and when the goal is assigned, then the
path is slowly but progressively traversed, and the ultimate goal is achieved."

So, what is the most important thing? At lea..., at the beginn..., you know,
very foundatio..., foundational level, we need to know what is the goal. And
then, the scriptures give overall path. And when we start going along that path,
you know, that path itself is rendering devotional service. Then, Krishna gives
the intelligence from within. And the path becomes more and more clear. And one
keeps moving forward that way. Then, Prabhupada explains further that. You know.
You know. That, sometimes, a devotee may not be intelligent enough. If still, if
he is, you know, devotee:

"A person may have a bona ﬁde spiritual master and may be attached to a
spiritual organization, but if he is still not intelligent enough to make
progress, then Kṛṣṇa from within gives him instructions so that he may
ultimately come to Him without difﬁculty."

So, the point here is that the focus should be on service. You know. Now, for
us, when we study scripture, also. You know. We are not interested in
intellectual study of scripture alone. For its own sake. We want to study
scripture so that we can develop our love for Krishna. And when devotee studies
Krishna, study the philosophy of Krishna Consciousness. It is not to just
intellectually scrutinise Krishna. It is to intellectually submit to Krishna.
That means, you know, to lay..., to, it is to use our intelligence in the
service of Krishna. We do not place our intelligence on an altar about Krishna.
With my intelligence, I will look down. And I will extra..., examine Krishna.
This does not make sense. This makes sense. Oh. This is right. This not right.
No. That is not a devotee's attitude. Devotee's attitude is that actually
Krishna is above. And Krishna ha..., has given me various faculties. One of the
faculties is intelligence. 55:45
