Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jVl7Jzu-4LQ
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=jVl7Jzu-4LQ&redir_token=KoXFTEtAXnd40T5iLtv6P2OdT1x8MTU0ODQ4ODQ4MUAxNTQ4NDAyMDgx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_090_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_07_Text_13_to_18_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the middle of the Seventh Chapter right now. So, let us look at the verse
which start off with 7.13. So, we completed the first section. The Seventh
Chapter has, you know, three sections. First is knowledge about Krishna. And
then, the second section from 13 to 25 is about, how, kno..., you know,
knowledge of Krishna leads to surrender. And He talks about people who
surrender. People who do not surrender. And people who surrender to something
other than Krishna. So, let us start with:

        tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair
        ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat
        mohitaṁ nābhijānāti
        mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam

So, "tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair". So, there are three modes. Filled with the three
modes. Made of the three modes. Comprising of these three existences. That is
"bhāvair".

        tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair
        ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat

This whole world is "mohitaṁ". Everything in this world. Everyone in this world
is bewildered. You know. By "mohitaṁ". By the three modes. "na abhijānāti". We
have to not kn..., know. What do they not know? "mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam". That
I am "param". I am transcendental. And I am imperishable. "param avyayam". So,
here, Krishna is talking about the three mode..., His posi..., His relationship
with the three modes. And Krishna is emphasising the point that He is beyond the
three modes. His position is transcendental. Always. So, "tribhir guṇa-mayair
bhāvair". We have these three modes. But, you know, Krishna's position is
transcendental thre..., three modes. And in fact, it is Kr..., it is the three
modes which cause the bewilderment. And which make people forget, you know, you
know, Kri..., you know, a, misunderstand Krishna. Forget Krishna. "mohitaṁ
nābhijānāti". "na abhijānāti". So, you know, how, how do the modes cause
forgetfulness of Krishna? See, the modes color our perception of everything.
Now, if I have a red tinted glasses, everything will seem, you know, seem red to
me. So, the modes themselves comprise different tinting, of different color
tinted glasses. So, goodness is one ki..., one kind of, you know, you know,
tinted glass. Passion is the, one kind of tinted glass. Ignorance is one kind of
tinted glass. And all these three are different glasses. And they all cause a
different kind of tinting. But more, tinting means coloring. Contamination of
our vision. Now, beyond that, in general, all the three modes are material. So,
overall, there is a material covering. There is a material contamination. A
material distortion of our perception. And because of that, we cannot understand
Krishna's transcendental position. "mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam". Krishna is
saying, you know, "param". I am transcendentally situated. And "avyayam". So,
Krishna i..., "avyayam" means imperishable. So, transcendental and imperishable.
You know. So, Krishna is, you know, a, in, beyond the limits of time and space.
So, "param" can be correlated with the limits of space. You know. "avyayam" can
be correlated with the time, limit of time. Everything in this world is, you
know, limited by time and space. But Krishna is transcendental to the
limitations of time and space. "mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam". H..., and now,
Prabhupada talks about, in the purport that h..., how there are, you know, you
know, even people in goodness are bewildered about Krishna. How do we see that?
We see that in Tenth Canto of the Srimad Bhagavatam where practically everyone,
you know, the demigods like Indra. Even Brahma. You know. And even Shiva. You
know, Shiva. You know. There is no description directly of Shiva being
bewildered in Vrindavan. But later on, Shiva takes the side of Banasura. And
then, later on, when Shiva Juara is defeated by Narayan Juara in the fight of
Banasura's forces with Krishna's forces. At that time, Shiva surrenders and
offers prayers. So, in this way, actually, everybody, you know, is bewildered by
the three modes. You know. So, the contaminations of three modes prevents us
from understanding what actually reality is. And that causes us to stay in
illusion. You know. And now, you know, people talk about illusion in relative
terms, also. That means, a drunkard thinks that, you know, alcohol is a source
of happiness.

Although alcohol is a source of bondage and misery. So, like that, there are
illusions within the material world, also. Within the material world, there are
different things which seem pleasurable. But turn to be out miserable
afterwards. So, that is true. But what Krishna is talking about over here is
something much greater. Actually, Krishna is talking about, how, in this world,
everyone is overcome by illusion with respect to understanding Him. You know.
The illusions e..., with respect to things of this world get us into material
bondage. They may cause us, you know, if that person is in passion. And then,
the person gets addicted to alcohol. That person may go into ignorance. And
sometimes, the person may be in ignorance. Maybe, addicted to something. And by
some laborious efforts, by willpower, some therapy, may become sober and give up
addiction. So, that person will remove, will be freed from the ignorance of
ignorance. The ignorance of ignoran..., or the illusion of ignorance. Illusion
caused by the mode of ignorance. But still, that person may still have an
illusion of passion. Nothing else. Now, I am freed from addiction. Now, I can
work hard. And I can make it big in life. I will have a big house. And his
family. And I will be happy in life. So, that does an illusion in passion. So,
you know, there may be movement through various kinds of illusions from passion
down to ignorance. And from ignorance down to passion. Or even to goodness. But
overall, the person stays in illusion. As long as we do not understand about
Krishna properly, we stay in illusion. So, the three modes, they may cause their
own in..., you know, individual illusions. But beyond that, the three modes also
cause illusion about Krishna. And that illusion is what Krishna is focusing on
over here. Because, you know, that is the illusion that keeps us in bondage in
material existence. Now, naturally, the question will come up, ok, if, you know,
the modes bind the person, and keep the person under illusion, then how can such
a person come out of illusion? That, Srila Prabhupada describes, you know, in
his purport in the next verse. And Krishna answers first in the next verse of
that, also. So:

        daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī
        mama māyā duratyayā
        mām eva ye prapadyante
        māyām etāṁ taranti te

H..., m..., "daivī hy", divine indeed. "eṣā guṇa-mayī". That actually, this
energy of Krishna is divine indeed. "mama māyā duratyayā". This is my "māyā".
And it is "duratyayā". Very difficult to overcome. "mām eva ye prapadyante". But
those who surrender unto Me.

        mām eva ye prapadyante
        māyām etāṁ taranti te

They will cross beyond "māyā". And come out, cross beyond "māyā". They will come
out of illusion. You know. Hmm. So, here, what is Krishna saying exactly? You
know. In the previous verse, Krishna has stated that, you know, in "māy...",
that:

        tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair
        ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat

So, He said that, the three, the covering of the three modes deludes everyone.
Now, He is taking that understanding further. And He is saying, so, that means,
the 13th verse is saying how the covering of the three modes prevents the living
entities from understanding Him. So, if we consider the three-level
hierarchy, what does 13th say? 13th say that the l..., living entities are here.
At a lower level. The three modes are covering the living entities. And that is
why, they cannot, you know, the living entities cannot understand Krishna. So,
say, we have the sun. We have the clouds. And we have the observers on the
earth. People on the earth. So, when the clouds are there, the clouds block the
perception of the sun for the observers on the earth. So, now, it may appear as
if the clouds are covering the sun. But the sun is inifinite. And the sun can,
sun is not infinite. But sun is far greater than the clouds. Sun cannot be
covered. What is covered is the observers' vision. So, Krishna is telling that,
He is, I, He is like the sun. He is, he has told in the previous verse, "param
avyayam". He is transcendental. He is inexhaustible. Imperishable. So, it is
not, who, He that is covered. It is actually, m..., we who are covered. Now,
beyond that, Krishna is telling something more in this verse. That, actually,
this covering is also under His control. So, the 13th said that there is a
covering of the three modes which prevents us from perceiving. Now, Krishna, in
the 14th verse, takes the point further. And says, this covering is, actually,
you know, not something that is independent of Krishna. This covering is under
Krishna. And this covering is due to Krishna's energy. So, m..., m..., "mama
māyā duratyayā". "mama māyā". Krishna is saying this is my "māyā". It is my
"māyā" which is putting the living entities under illusion. So, He is intri...,
He has talked about the three modes in the previous verse.

        tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair
        ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat

That by the three modes, everybody is deluded. And now, He is saying that,
actually, His "māyā" is made about these three modes. "guṇa-mayī". "guṇa-mayī".
He says. Now, and He says, this is "daivī". "daivī" means divine indeed. So, why
divine? Because we may say that, actually, it is "māyā" which makes us, peo...,
makes people do demoniac things. "māyā" is what makes peo..., drives people away
from Krishna towards, you know, you know, you know, bad things. So, if "māyā"
takes people away people towards wrong things, then why should "māyā" be
considered to be divine? You know. You know. "māyā" makes people lusty. "māyā"
makes people greedy. "māyā" makes peo..., people, you know, angry. And all the,
you know, absurdities and perversities, that people engage in are ultimately
caused by maya. So, then, how can "māyā" be considered to be divine? See, the
absurdities and perversities, you know, in people's actions are not caused by
"māyā". They are, you know, facilitated by "māyā". They are caused by people's
own free will. So, we have discussed earlier the example of a multiple choice
paper. In a multiple choice paper, that mean four options. And one of them is
right. Remaining three are wrong. Remaining four may be wrong. So, when they are
wrong like this, who is making them wrong? Is it the teacher or the student? The
teacher is providing the options. But the teacher also provides the education
for choosing the right options. And the student is responsible for the wrong
choice. The student cannot tell the teacher that, you know, you give the wrong
options. And I simply think what are the options that you give. So, if I get
poor marks, you are responsible. Not me. No. So, "māyā" gives these options. But
it is we who tick the choices. And if we take guidance from guru, sadhu,
shastra, we will not tick the wrong choices. We will tick the right choices. So,
the purpose of the teacher is not to fail the student. But to promote the
student. And if the student fails, that is primarily because the student does
not understand. You know. Student does not understand what? Student does not
understood the subject properly. Student did not study the subject properly.
Student did not apply of the intelligence while pass..., while passing the exam.
So, in this way, we can understand what is righ..., you know, what is the cause
of the suff..., problem. The problem is not caused by "māyā". You know. The, the
setup by which the illusions are present, the temptations are present, they are
created by m..., that setup is created by "māyā". But it is we who choose to go
into "māyā". And it is we who choose to stay out of "māyā". And each of us has
the power to stay out of "māyā" if we want. Hmm. Hmm. So, now, when we move
forward, you know:

        mama māyā duratyayā

Krishna is saying, this is my energy. So, it is called divine. Because it is,
the purpose ultimately, it is servi..., a, serving, is positive. It is a good
purpose. Just like, the purpose of the exam, ultimately, is good. Although for
some students, the exam may result in a, you know, poo..., poor or bad result.
The students fail in the exam. And they, if, you know, wha..., you know, this
exam, I have failed. And they may become dejected by that. And the failure may
reflect on, you know, their career as negative. But overall, the purpose of the
exam is to help them make positive development in a career. So, Krish...,
"daivī". It is divine. It is c..., because it is connected with Krishna, this
energy is considered divine. And "duratyayā". Hmm. "duratyayā" means that this
energy is actually very difficult to overcome. "duratyayā". "mama māyā". Krishna
says, my energy. And it is difficult to overcome. Prabhupada gives the example
for this "mama māyā". He says that, h..., when a parent wants to, you know,
discipline a child. The parent may, you know, engage a tutor. And the parent
loves the child. But the tutor may be a disciplinary. May be strict. To ensure
that the chur..., child gets educated properly. So, the parent is like the, you
know, like Krishna. And the, you know, tut..., restrict tutor is like "māyā".
So, "mama māyā duratyayā". "duratyayā" means that, it is very difficult to
overcome. Almost impossible. Why? Because actually, Krishna is, you know, you
know, determined to ensure that only those who use their free will properly can
get through. And that, His, you know, that is His, ensured. Implemented.
Actualised by Maya Devi. So, you know, once a devotee asked Srila Prabhupada
that, Prabhupada, if our purpose is to serve Krishna, then why is "māyā" so
strong? And Prabhupada almost immediately replied. You know. It, because your
purpose is not strong. What does it mean? You know. If our purpose is to serve
Krishna, you know, then why is "māyā" so strong? Your purpose is not strong.
Actually, all the temptations trouble us as long as we are not determined to
serve Krishna. Once we become determined to serve Krishna, then we do not get
overcome by, you know, temptation so much. The temptations come. But we can put
them aside. Because we understand that I am going to be fixed in my purpose of
serving Krishna. Actually, this principle of a strong purpose helping a person
to overcome temptations is seen everywhere. You know. When a student is serious
about studies. And wants to crack a particular exam. Say, the purpose is very
strong. I am going to study. And I am going to succeed in this exam. Then, even
if there is some favorite sports match. Some, you know, popular TV show. Some,
you know, some super hit movie. Which is there. Now, all these temptations are
there. They could be potential distractions. But these distractions will
distract the students whose purpose is not strong. But those students whose
purpose is fixed, one-pointed, they will not be deluded. They will not become
distracted. So:

        mām eva ye prapadyante

What does it mean to make our purpose strong? It means to take shelter of
Krishna. To surrender to Krishna.

        māyām etāṁ taranti te

So, those people will cross over "māyā". "māyām etāṁ taranti te". They will go
beyond "māyā". How will they go beyond "māyā"? By wholehearted surrender to
Krishna. So, you know, if a person, you know, goes to visit somebody's house.
And that person has got a ferocious dog as a guard. And may be some German
Shepherd or overland, giant dog. It is said. And that dog starts growling. As
soon as, it see..., sees. The dog tr..., Dog is seeing this trespasser. And
the dog starts charging towards this person. It starts charging. Now, we may
think, what can I do? Now, if I decide I will try to fight with the dog, it is
impossible. That dog is trained to bite and, you know, beat, practically, to
bi..., bite, trespasses and drive them away. So, what can a person do now? If
this visitor, if I am the visitor. And I say I know the owner. And I call the
owner. And the owner comes out. And so, oh, this is my friend. He says, they
say, the dog's name is Tommy. Tommy, stop. Stop. And then, Tommy stops again.
So, now, my telling the dog to stop is not going to work. But the owner, just
one word, that same dog was bristling, and growling, and about to pounce on me.
You know. That dog suddenly stops. And becomes calm. How? That magical
transformation happens when the dog gets the order of its master. Same way, when
we turn towards Krishna, when we surrender to Krishna, at that time, we become
free from "māyā". How do we become free from "māyā"? Because, you know,
surrender to Krishna is the choice that Kri..., m..., that "māyā" also wants us
to make. Ultimately. Just like, you know, when we make a, a right choice in the
multiple choice paper, then that question goes off. We get to the next question
after that. So, like that, the whole purpose of, you know, ou..., our purpose of
the temptations and tribulations, that are present in "māyā". You know.
Temptations means the idea that, I, let me do this. Let me do this. And then, I
will enjoy. Temptations, promises of plea..., you know, promises of pleasure.
And tribulations means threats of pain. You know. You know. Hmm. So, all these
promises of pleasure and threats of pain that are there, they are all removed
for a person who surrenders to Krishna. Because Krishna tells the material
energy to withdraw. Hold back. Stop. There is no more the, need to test this
devotee.

        māyām etāṁ taranti te

By "māyā"'s arrangemen..., by the, by Krishna's arrangement, that person can
"taranti te", go beyond "māyā". Hmm. So, Krishna tell, i..., Kri..., that means
this verse has two parts. First part is telling how "māyā" deludes. That:

        daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī
        mama māyā duratyayā

So, the two describers for "māyā" are "daivī" and "duratyayā". So, you know, you
know, "daivī" is divine. And "duratyayā" is formidable. Insurmountable. Very
difficult to some. So, th..., these describers indicate the power of "māyā". And
then, the second part that the C and D of this verse, they introduce us to a
power great than "māyā". And that is a power of Krishna. And how do we access
that power of Krishna? By surrender. So, you know, when we surrender to Krishna,
"māyām etāṁ taranti te", we go beyond "māyā". That is the process. And when we
follow this process, we all make spiritual advancement rapidly. So, you know,
you know, now, we may wonder, what exactly is surrender? How do we surrender? We
will discuss about surrender more in a, in the 18th Chapter. When we will talk
about:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

But here, suffice it to say that surrender is not passive. Surrender is active.
You know. It, th..., the, Bhaktiv..., Bhaktivinoda Thakur talks based on the scriptures
about six elements of surrender.

        ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ
        prātikūlyasya varjanam
        rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso
        goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā
        ātma-nikṣepa-kārpaṇye
        ṣaḍ-vidhā śaraṇāgatiḥ

So, he says that, you know, actually, "ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ" and "prātikūlyasya
varjanam". Accepting that which is favorable. And rejecting that which is
unfavorable. That is surrender. Accepting that which is favorable. And rejecting
that which is unfavorable. So, you know, what does this involve? It involves,
you know, choice. Constant, you know, conscientious choice. So, that means, how
GI surrender to Krishna. Surrender is not, does not mean, you know, we have the
quite essential example of surrender, Draupadi surrendering to Krishna. Krishna.
Help. She raising her hearts and hands in surrender. Yes, that is one way of
surrendering. But that is not just the only way of surrendering. Even when
Arjuna is fighting on the battlefield with his full intelligence. Full
determination. Shooting the arrows. That is also surrender. You know. It is not
that just Draupadi is raising her hands is surrender. Arjuna shooting arrows
intelligently. And fiercely. Ferociously. That is also surrender. How is that?
Because surrender essentially means choosing the actions that take us towards
Krishna. And rejecting the actions that take us away from Krishna. So, you know,
you know, a, for Draupadi in that particular situation, when she was being
dishonored, you know, she could do. She tried her best. You know. She tried to
hold unto her saari. And she tried to defend her honor. But when that did not
work, then what did she do? She surrendered to Krishna. So, that is important.
Now, we see that, Arjuna also surrenders to Krishna at the start of the Bhagavad
Gita. When He says that:

        prichami tvam dharma samudha cetaha

I ask you what I should do. So, he is not necessarily raising up his hands to
surrender. But he is folding his hands. And asking Krishna for knowledge. But
then, when Arjuna starts shooting arrows. He is acting on Krishna's
instructions. And that actin..., acting out of Krishna's ins..., instructions is
also surrender. So, to understand about surrender, you know, let us look at, a,
a, from the broad perspective. You know. What is the basic principle of
spiritual life? The basic principle of spiritual life's is harmonising our will
with the divine will. With Krishna's will. So, that harmonisation can be
some..., sometimes be through activity. And sometimes through outer inactivity.
But either surren..., inner, you know, deference to Krishna's will. Inner, you
know, surrender to Krishna's will. So, that will vary how it will be ecti..., 
externally expressed. So, essentially, surrender means, ho..., you know, giving
up our will for exce..., accepting Krishna's will. Now, how we will accept
Krishna's will, will vary from time, place to cir...., time, place, and
circumstance. So, that, we, you cannot know in advance. Therefore, what is
important is, we always be thinking. What is anikul? What is pratikul? So, that
means, you know, when we do our sadhana diligently. Through our sadhana, also,
we are surrendering to Krishna. That means when we do our, you know, seva
diligently. Through that, also, we are surrendering to Krishna. So, when we know
that certain situations are tempta..., tempta..., c..., going to tempt us.
Moving away from those situations, that is also surrender to Krishna. When we
feel our senses getting agitated. And we reject that agitation. Which crush that
agitation with determination, that is also surrender to Krishna. Surrender
can come in many forms. Essentially, for us, what we should focus on is:

        ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ
        prātikūlyasya varjanam

Whatever is favorable, accept. What is unfavorable, reject. So, you know, much
of the, you know, what comprises surrender will be within the mind. You know.
Within the mind, if we entertain thoughts that take us away from Krishna. If we
fuel desires that take us away from Krishna. Then, we are not surrendering. We
are actually rebelling against Krishna. We may not have any direct intention to
rebel against Krishna. But essentially, the result will be that, we will be
rebelling against Krishna. On the other hand, when we turn towards Krishna and
surrender. That means we choose the thoughts and the desires that will take us
closer to Krishna. So, then, m..., Prabhupada's gro..., Prabhupada quotes
several verses. You know. Ta..., you know, Prabhupada's quo..., this is one of
his favorite quotes from "Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad". He quotes it repeatedly. "tam
evaviditvā 'timrtyumeti". So, one will go beyond birth and death. From the
"Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad", he is quoting.

"Freedom is possible only by"

"tam eva viditvā". Knowing that Absolute Truth. So, you know, now, a, the
question may come up that, yes, why don't, you know, if su..., by surrender to
Krishna, one can become liberated, then why doesn't everyone surrender to
Krishna? So:

        na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ
        prapadyante narādhamāḥ
        māyayāpahṛta-jñānā
        āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

So, "na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ". Actually, those who are "mūḍhāḥ"s. Those who are
foolish, you know, you know, they do not surrender unto Me. "duṣkṛtino". So,
Krishna is talking here about four kinds of people who do not surrender to Him.
So, the previous verse, Krishna has said that by surrender to Him, you know,
people can get free from illusion. Then, the question comes up. You know. If it
is possible to become from illusion, by surrender to Krishna. Then, why don't
people accept that, you know, path of surrender? And thereby, become free from
illusion? Become free from difficulty? You know. You know. Now, that is because,
Krishna says that, you know, they, they are "duṣkṛtinaḥ". So, "kṛtinaḥ", "kṛti"
means activity. In fact, it re..., mea..., it means, you know, a, meritorious
activity. "kṛti". And "duṣkṛtinaḥ" means a not meritorious activity. But
notorious activity. So, activity that involves, a, some level of talent. Some
level of intelligence. But they are activities which is in a, the wrong
direction. So, that which is not meritorious. But which is not too notorious.
"duṣkṛtinaḥ". So, Krishna says, these are the people, n..., you know, "na",
"prapadyante". That, you know, do not surrender to Me. And who are these people?
"mūḍhāḥ". Four categories, Krishna says. "mūḍhāḥ" is the foolish. Then,
"narādhamāḥ". The lowest among the mankinds. Then, "māyayāpahṛta-jñānā". Those
whose knowledge is stolen by illusion. And "āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ". Those who
are the outright demoniac people. Now, you know, you know, these four
categories, who they represent? You know. Prabhupada gives an elaborate pur...,
a purport. Where he describes who are these four categories of people. Now,
interestingly, if we look at the commentaries of the previous acharyas, we look
at Chakravati Pada, Baladeva Vidyabhushana, and Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya. You
know. All of them, you know, describe slightly different people. You know.
Means, we, you know, they explain these categories. They are referring to
different kinds of people. So, what does it mean? Actually, we have to
understand that scriptural knowledge is not just in the text. It is also in the
context. That means, scriptural knowledge is just there is the text. There are
the words of the Bhagavad Gita which are important. But there, also, it is also
meant to be, you know, in the context. Context means that it has to be relevant.
You know. That when the, when is, many times people say that, you know, we have
to preserve the purity of the knowledge. Yes, there should not be any
speculation. There should not be any deviation. That is true. But, you know, one
important attribute that we have to preserve, is also, which is a part of the
tradition, is the relevance. You know. Every acharya explains the commentary,
explains the scripture in a way that is relevant to the current context. So, if
we do not, if our presentation of scripture is not relevant, then actually, we
are not being faithful to the tradition. Because relevance is an integral part
of the, you know, tradition that has to be preserved. So, tradition is not just
something, you know, immobile and static that is preserved. Tradition is itself
living. So, you know, w..., that is why we will see that, different acharyas
explain different things in different ways. You know. That means that there are
four categories of people who do not surrender to Krishna.

But, you know, what these four categories refer to, you know, the, if for now,
a, the acharyas are writing a commentary, say, h..., you know, Ma, Rāmānujācārya
is writing a commentary in the 10th century, 10-11th century. Then, when he is
going to present a commentary, he is going to observe the people around him at
that time. He is going to say that, ok, which are the categories of, who are the
people who fit this category. Now, those, that explanation may be relevant
later, also, in some ways. You know. But the nature of maya is that, you know,
"avidya" constantly keeps getting updated. Av..., what does it mean? "avidya"
keeps coming in newer and newer brands. Ultimately, it is the same old thing.
And it is just an excuse, a rationalisation, you know, you know, you know, a
justification for forgetting Krishna. That is what the essence of maya is. But
maya comes in, you know, you know, newer and newer brands. And countering the
latest brand of maya is the tradition of the acharyas. So, maya keeps updating
herself. And the acharyas, their commentaries, they keep updating the
refutations. So, that is how the tradition is. So, that is why, there is some,
there are some core principles that remain true. But the acharyas give their
commentaries in terms of countering the current versions of maya that are
prevalent at their times. And because in broad ways, the conceptions, of people
which block them from towards Krishna. Those conceptions may vary from person to
person. Those conceptions may cause people to go into delusion. And that is why,
those conceptions are not always the same for everyone. You know. You know.
Because the maya herself comes in different ways. So, for example, when Baladeva
Vidyabhushana is writing the commentary on the Vedanta Sutra. You know. Govinda
Bhashya commentary. So, then, you know, he will explain, you know, you know,
the, he will refute the six systems of, the Ved..., five systems of philosophy
apart from Vedanta. And now, the systems of philosophy are also not static. You
know. There are different scholars in those traditions who write commentaries.
So, whatever the thoughts at that particular time, you know, they will be
refuted by Baladeva Vidyabhushana. All, while the are drawing insights from the,
you know, universal time independent, you know, you know, principles that are
thought in the scriptures. Srila Prabhupada, when he is presenting his
commentary, you know, you know, he will talk, also, he will draw from the same
time independent universal principles. But he will address the issues of his
time. So, for example, even in Prabhupada's times, there will be, say, you know,
the conflict between communists and capitalists. You know. And the fear of a
Third World War because of this conflict. Prabhupada may address this repeatedly
in his purport. But that may not be relevant. After a, you know, you know, a,
that may be not relevant now. Because communism is not so much, you know,
directly active now. You know. So, you know, let us look at the way Srila
Prabhupada explains these four categories. So, these four categories can, will
be explained by different acharyas in different ways. Because they are
responding to the specific brands of maya, the specific sets of misconceptions
that are misleading, you know, people at their times. You know. You know. So,
"na", "mūḍhāḥ". The word "mūḍhāḥ" means donkey. It means a fool person who is
foolish like a donkey.

The opposite of the word "mūḍhāḥ" is "būḍhāḥ" "būḍhāḥ" is a wise person. And
actually, there is, "būḍhāḥ" is related "buddhi". And then, we have "buddha".
"būḍhāḥ" is in the, you know, m..., in the, buddhi..., buddhistic tradition
context. The enlightened person. So, who is a "mūḍhāḥ"? "mūḍhāḥ" is a person who
is like a donkey. Now, Prabhupada's purport in the, you know, for this section
is quite eloquent. Let us look at some sections of Prabh..., Prabhupada's
purport over here. You know. So, hmm, the "mūḍhāḥ"s. Hmm. So, he says that. You
know:

"The swine who eat the night soil do not care to accept sweetmeats made of sugar
and ghee. Similarly, the foolish worker will untiringly continue to hear of the
sense-enjoyable tidings of the ﬂickering mundane world, but will have very
little time to hear about the eternal living force that moves the material
world."

So, in his explanation of "mūḍhāḥ", Prabhupada also includes another animal
here. That is, you know:

        swavid varaha ostva karaye

So, "varaha" is a, you know, you know, m..., is a hog. Now, a hog eats night
soil, is a, night soil is a, you know, euphemism, m..., for stool. So, the hog
eats the night soil. And the hog is given some sweet meat. The hog says, I, I
will not prefer that. So, what happens is, now, somebody may say that, actually,
you know, why do we blame a hog? You know. A hog is simply acting according to
its nature. You know. For hog, you know, a, halava may be delicious for us.
Halava is not delicious for a hog. So, why should we judge a hog according to
our standards? You know. What is fool for a hog is different from what is fool
for us. So, you know, actually, the point here is not that, you know, the hog
does not have its own diet. The point here is that, that which is a refuse of
the human beings. And that which smells nasty. And that which is abominable.
M..., in, m..., m..., that is what the hog eats. Now, whenever we are, you know,
giving any scriptural example, we have to understand that it is given from a
particular perspective. So, from the point of a perspective, you know, f..., a,
we have to understand what has been talked about. Here, whenever the scriptures
teach something, the point that they are trying is that, you know, we have to
learn, a, some lesson. So, here, the lesson is, the lack of discriminating
ability. So, when we human, if we, for intelligent human beings, we are given a
choice between a foul smelling, you know, substance and a delicious substance.
Naturally, that person will choose the delicious substance. So, a person, who
chooses the foul smelling im..., substance, lacks intelligence. So, same way, we
say that, the hog lacks intelligence over here. So, you know, here, we are not
talking about, you know, the way, you know, nature has made different living
beings with a, different, you know, taste. That is a fact of nature. You know.
We do not deny that fact. You know. And animals are largely programmed to act
according to the nature. So, animals lack the discriminatory capacity. So, when
we are looking from the point of view of how nature has made different living
beings, we can say that, yes, ma..., a, d..., hogs are simply acting according
to our nature. But the point is, from the enlightened perspective. That is
scriptural perspective. From the perspective, the intelligent human being, who
has aligned, you know, oneself according to scripture, that perspective, the hog
is lacking discrimination. So, the point here is, not the specifics. But the
generic principle that, you know, there is an inability to discriminate between
what is, you know, m..., palatable. What is unpalatable. You know. So, now, you
know, you know, a donkey or a hog, what does the hog do? The ho..., sorry, the,
what does the donkey? Donkey just works, works, works, works, works. And, you
know, donkey may carry huge ba..., huge bundle of clothes for getting little
grass. You know. That grass can be got anywhere. But the dog carr..., the donkey
carries his huge bundle. Why is that? Because the donkey thinks I have to do
this. So that I will get the bun..., grass. So, actually, eating, sleeping,
mating, defending, these are the bodily pleasures. And all living beings are
getting that. So, human beings who work terribly hard, just to get that, they
are, you know, missing out. They are losing out. They are depriving themselves
of what can be available for them, truly. What will be far more beneficial for
them. What is that? They are depriving themselves of the higher ta..., a, the
higher taste. The higher fulfillment o..., that is available through spiritual
advancement. And devotional connection with Krishna. So, the point of the
"mūḍhāḥ" example is, purport, Prabhu..., Prabhupada gives analysis, is that,
actually, people work hard simply for animalistic pleasures. And they do not
have to work so hard. But they keep working hard. You know. So, nowadays, people
have so much stress because of, you know, overwork. And most of this over...,
overwork is because of, you know, self-created duties. Self-created duties
means one sets up one's own goals. And then, one pursues those goals. And one
gets oneself into trouble because of that. So, that is "mūḍhāḥ".

        na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ
        prapadyante narādhamāḥ

So, "mūḍhāḥ" is a person who is just caught up in the, you know, working hard
for sense pleasure. For the same things that the animals get, one just works
hard, hard, hard. And does not think. "narādhamāḥ", Prabhupada explains.
"nara-adhamāḥ". "adhamāḥ" means lowest. "nara" is human being. So, that person
is the lowest among the human beings. What does this refer to? This refers to
those, m..., m..., human beings who have no spiritual inclination. See, what
makes human beings human is their spiritual potential. So, human being, what
ess..., you know, there may be a s..., particular physical form, that also makes
human being, that characterises human beings. That is t..., that is true. But
then, more than that, from the scriptural perspective, m..., the soul ca..., the
human form means a particular level of consciousness. And that consciousness
involves, you know, the capacity for spiritual realisation. So, if we consid...,
consider the continuum. Continuum is a wide spectrum of consciousness. Of levels
of consciousness which human beings can have. So, the highest are those who have
the most evolved spiritual consciousness. They have love for Krishna. Then,
those who are, have lesser and lesser connections of Krish..., for Krishna. They
will be in this continuum at different locations. So, at the, at lowest end of
the spectrum are those who have no interest in spiritual life at all. They are
m..., m..., they are just interested, they are just not interested in spiritual
life. So, they have sabotaged their own, they have destroyed their own spiritual
prospects by their lack of spiritual sensiti..., sensibility. They are, so,
Prabhupada says that:

"Those who are socially and politically developed but who have no religious
principles must be considered narādhamas."

So, they are socially and politically developed. But they have no religious
principles. That means that they are, they are not developing what makes them
distinctively human. So, that is what makes them "narādhamāḥ"s. So, you know,
"nara-adhamāḥ". And then, Prabhupada also makes this point.

"Nor is religion without God religion,"

That is the next sentence. What is not religion without God? You know. There
are, nowadays, m..., there are, there are religions which claim themselves to be
religions. But they do not acknowledge the existence of God. You know. In
today's, m..., cultural nomenclature, they may be called religions. But the
point is that they do not, they have defied the, you know, essential principle
of religion. That essential principle of religion is, you know, to obey God.

        dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītaṁ

What is "dharma"? "dharma" essentially means to follow the will of God, follow
the instruction of God. Hmm. Then, Prabhupada talks about how the "narādhamāḥ".
Now, what is the tragedy of the "narādhamāḥ"? Actually, all of us need God. And
when we are in the womb. You know. When the pain becomes excruciating, we
suffer. And we call out to Krishna at that time. So, when we call out to
Krishna, we beg for his mercy. And when we beg for his mercy. And we seek his
mercy. At that time, what happens, you know, that fervent call for Krishna helps
us to recognise Krishna. Realise Krishna's presence. And Krishna manifests His
presence to us. But after that, because, you know, the surrender to Krishna at
that time is immature. That means that we are surrendered, not because of free
will. We are surrendered because of, surrendered because of caution. Because of
force. So, when we surrender this way to Krishna, at that time, you know, that
surrender is not, you know, mature. Mature surrender means, we have the option
to not surrender. And still, we surrender. So, m..., m..., you know, later on,
when we come out of the womb, when we, when we, the pleasures of this world
present themselves again to us. And then, we become tempted. So, Prabhupada
reminds that there is a grievous suffering in the womb. And we have ourselves
prayed to Krishna. Please, help me Krishna. So, those people who are, you know,
under..., who, see, stay in illusion. Now, Prabhupada is talking to two
perspectives. One is, the human capa..., body has the capacity for spiritual
enquiry. And the, you know, soul when is in a human, you know, a human b...,
b..., embryo. In a human womb. At that time, the soul begins the spiritual call,
also. Begins the spiritual journey by calling out to the Lord. But then, puts it
aside. Neglects it for the sake of, you know, th..., the, you know, m..., for
the sake of the wordly pleasures. So, the difference between "mūḍhāḥ" and
"narādhamāḥ" is that the "mūḍhāḥ"s, they are so busy in sensual pleasure. That
even if they n..., have some spiritual inclination, they just do not give any
time for spiritual inclination. But "narādhamāḥ"s are so, like they are so much,
their spiritual inclination is so much relegated to the corner that it is almost
as if not present only. And then, Prabhupada says, by the mercy of Krishna, as
is manifested through Caitanya Mahaprabhu's mercy, through Jagai and Madhai,
even the "narādhamāḥ"s can be elevated. And then, a third category is
"māyayāpahṛta-jñānā". You know. You know. So, m..., you know, you know, we have
discussed about "māyayāpahṛta-jñānā" in our study of the, hmm, Bh..., you know, 
Bha..., a, a, Isopanishad. When we discussed, you know, you know, mantra ten. We
discussed, actually, hmm:

        andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti
        ye 'vidyām upāsate
        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u vidyāyām ratāḥ

So, "vidyāyām ratāḥ". Those who are in so-called knowledge. So, there, we
discussed, you know, different categories of people. So, w..., we discussed, you
know, you know, the 2.42-43 in the Bhagavad Gita. Which describes, you know,
"veda-vāda-ratāḥ". Those who follow Vedas, you know, but they think that the
goal of the Vedas is simply sense gratification. And then, there are those who
do not follow the Vedas. But who use their intelligence just for material
improvement. And the, you know, there, the purpose of knowledge is lost for
them. They have knowledge. But the purpose of knowledge has been stolen away
from, m..., them by "māya". "māyayāpahṛta-jñānā". So, the "jñānā" is there. But
the "jñānā" is stolen away by "māya". "māyayāpahṛta". So, this refers to all
kinds of intellectuals. So, they can be scientists. They can be philosophers.
They can be authors. They can be speakers. So, these people may have
intelligence. But unfortunately, the ultimate purpose of intelligence, they have
lost. And because of that, whatever they do, they stay caught up in illusion.
Just like a person who is in a jail. But the person uses the intelligence to
understand everything ex..., about the jail. Ok. When the person in jail,
suppose, you know, that person does a PhD about the, a, wall structure. And the
ceiling structure of the jail. Well, the, you know, you know, we can say that
knowledge is useful. But the most important thing is, if in a, I am in a jail,
how can I get out of the jail? You know. It is not necessary that I have to
break out of a jail. But is there a process by which I can reform myself and be
released from the jail? The important point is I need to come out of the jail.
So, same way, when we talk about material know..., material existence. The most
important knowledge is the knowledge that can free us from misery. That can
bring us liberation. So, what is that knowledge? That knowledge is what Krishna
gives in the Bhagavad Gita. And those people who are intelligent, and yet, they
neglect that knowledge. They are unfortunate. They are included in the criteria
of "māhayā...", "māyayāpahṛta-jñānā". And Prabhupada includes those who, these
people may study scripture, also. But they imple..., they interpret scripture
wrong. So, they may study Bhagavad Gita. And they write a commentary on Bhagavad
Gita. But, you know, the purpose of study of Gita is surrender to Krishna. And
when they reject that purpose. And they give some other concocted purpose, then
they are also falling in the category of "māyayāpahṛta-jñānā". And then, "āsuraṁ
bhāvam āśritāḥ". So, now, the "māyayāpahṛta-jñānā", their conclusions may be,
you know, misled. Their conclusion may be misleading. Their conclusions, you
know, may be anti-devotional. But they do not have, necessarily, an agenda
against God. It is just that they end up by their interpretations going against
God. They, they do not know the ultimate goal. But "āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ" are
those people who have a, har..., try to, deep within them, they have a, you
know, demoniac envy towards God. And they make their mission to defy, and
deride, and, you know, you know, you know, demolish other's, people's faith in
God. So, such people outright atheists. And they are not just atheists. They are
fanatical atheists. So, "āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ". What do we mean by fanatical
athiests? They say atheism is the only truth. And religion is the opinion of the
masses. So, religion is a delusion. Religion is a curse on the earth. Religion
is the source of all evil.

You know. Sort of people, they ju..., go again, they rale against God. So, they
are very unfortunate. An..., and they also do not surrender to Krishna. If their
whole purpose of life is to defy Krishna, how can they surrender to Krishna? You
know. So, Krishna gives different categories of people in this way. Who cannot
surrender to Krishna. Now, you know, these people stay on in material existence.
Now, we should not un..., we should not think that these are just four different
categoies of people. You know, we may ourselves have these tendencies in some
small way. You know. We may have some of the "mūḍhāḥ" tendencies. Some of the
"māyayāpahṛta-jñānā" tendency. Because of which, that, you know, we will be
checked and choked in our surrender to Krishna. We will not be, the force of our
surrender will be blocked. Or it will be constricted. Checked means it is not
allowed to move, only. Choked means allowed to move. But it is allowed to move
in a small size. Not completely. So, Prabhupada quotes "Yāmunācārya"'s, you
know, verse over here to explain how people cannot surrender to Krishna. These
kind of people. So, he is quoting here, you know:

“O my Lord! You are unknowable to persons involved with atheistic principles,
despite Your uncommon qualities, features and activities, despite Your
personality’s being conﬁrmed by all the revealed scriptures in the quality of
goodness, and despite Your being acknowledged by the famous authorities renowned
for their depth of knowledge in the transcendental science and situated in the
godly qualities.”

So, he is saying that, these "āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ", they do not have much
hope. Now, after this, you know, Krishna talks about those who surrender:

        catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ
        janāḥ su-kṛtino ’rjuna
        ārto jijñāsur arthārthī
        jñānī ca bharatarṣabha

So, "catur-vidhā". Four kinds of people. You know. "bhajante māṁ". So, Krishna
is not using the word surrender over here. He is using "bhajante". So, He says,
them, they begin the process by worship. By rendering devotional service.
Eventually, they will come to surrender. But right now, they are doing
"bhajante". What are the reas..., what are the reason? "janāḥ su-kṛtino ’rjuna."
"su-kṛtino". These are having some "su-kṛti". This "su-kṛ...", word "su-kṛti" is
const..., con..., contrasted the word "duṣkṛti". Which was there earlier.
"janāḥ". "duṣkṛtino". "su-kṛtino". "ārto jijñāsur arthārthī". Those who are
distressed. Those who are inquisitive. Those who are the seekers of wealth. And
those who are the seekers of knowledge. "jñānī". Now, among these four
categories, the scriptures give example. "ārto" is Gajendra. Was in great
distress. And he surrendered to Krishna. You know. "jijñāsur" are the Sanakadi
rishis. You know. Not all of them were already enlightened sages. They were
inquisitive. They wanted to know. Then, "arthārthī". There is Dhruva Maharaja.
He wanted a kingdom. And for that, he surrendered. Approached and started
negotiating. And "jñānī", you know, you know, it can refer to various people. It
can especially refer to the Kumaras. You know. Who actually had knowledge.
Their, their, first, the impersonal aspect of knowledge. But from there, they
moved forward. And keep going closer to Krishna. "ca bharatarṣabha". Krishna
says. Oh, Arjuna, He says, there are four kinds of people who start worshipping
Me. So, actually, "su-kṛtinaḥ". These people have talent. And it is not
impiously directed. It is piously directed. Because of some "su-kṛti", they,
you know, sa..., when they were this, trouble in this world, people take shelter
of different things when they get in trouble. M..., a person, you know, in
ignorance take shelter of drinking, smoking, violence. M..., and there is
trouble. A person in passion take shelter of money and sex. And things that can
solve my problems. What, what are the problem? Throw money at it. The problem
will get solved. And then, the person in goodness takes shelter of knowledge.
Tries to rationalise. Reason. And try to understand what is it. How should I
deal with this? And the person in transcendence take shelter of Krishna. And,
you know, Krishna, please resolve my mercy, misery. So, now, here, these people
not transcendental. These people are in goodness. So, in goodness, they do not
surrendering to Krishna. But they start worship of Krishna. Ok. God is there.
God is supreme. Maybe, He will resolve my misery. And in this way, they start
c..., you know, coming to Krishna. Now, Prabhupada explains that these are not
pure devotees. They are not pure devotees. What they are doing is, Prabhupada,
that is why he uses definition of pure devotion over here. And he says that they
are not pure devotees. But eventually, they will come to Krishna. And how will
mame they come to the level of pure devotion?

"When these four kinds of persons come to the Supreme Lord for devotional
service and are completely puriﬁed by the association of a pure devotee, they
also become pure devotees."

And Pra..., a, so, that means, you know, they may come to, they may start the
process of worship because of culture. Because of curiosity. Because of various
other factors. But what will raise them to the level of pure devotion is their,
is their, m..., association with pure devotees. So, in one sense, when they are
beginning, they are at the level of kanistha adikari. But from kanistha adikari,
how do they move to the level of madhyam adikari? When they develop appreciation
for devotees. And that ti..., at that time, the Lord becomes, you know, you
know, Ishvara becomes the object of their prema. In the sense the obj..., He
does not, He is not just a desire supplier for them. He is the object, becomes
the object of love for them. So, now, the next verse is, describe how this
happens. You know. M..., let us look at this. So, now, Krishna is describing,
among these:

        teṣāṁ jñānī nitya-yukta
        eka-bhaktir viśiṣyate
        priyo hi jñānino ’tyartham
        ahaṁ sa ca mama priyaḥ

"teṣāṁ jñānī nitya-yukta". You know. Among those people, the "jñānī" who is
"nitya-yukta". Who is constantly engaged. "eka-bhaktir viśiṣyate". That person
has one-pointed devotion. "viśiṣyate". It is the best, is the best. So, among
these four categories of people, all the others are coming for the fulfillment
of material desires. And because they are coming for the fulfillment of material
desires, their devotion is con..., not connected, considered to be very
elevated. But those who are, the, now, tho..., the person who is "jñānī". That
means the person has knowledge. Ok. There is some highest truth, ultimate truth.
So, it is beyond this material world. I want to know what is that truth. And I
want to develop knowledge of that truth. And then, ultimately, I want to connect
with that truth. So, that, you know, person is the best. So, you know, you know,
now, is Krishna referring to an impersonal "jñānī" over here? No. Because
"eka-bhaktir". Krishna is saying that person has bhakti. And not just has
bhakti. "eka-bhaktir". As was seen in 2.41:

        vyavasāyātmikā buddhir
        ekeha kuru-nandana

So, what makes our intelligence played in this direction, that direction, that
direction, what makes our intelligence played is the, you know, material
desires. So, when the "jñānī" has already understood that this material world
does not have much to offer. I want to seek something that is beyond the
material world. So, that "jñānī", you know, when focuses on the Absolute Truth,
then "eka-bhaktir". You know. The purpose is not anything material. Purpose is
to develop devotion. So, "nitya-yukta". So, that is why that person's, you know,
d..., devotion is not occasional. It is perennial. "nitya-yukta". You know. For
one who goes to the Lord with material desires. You know. When there is trouble,
oh, God, help me. When trouble is over, thank you. Bye-bye! It becomes like that
for God. We may not literally say bye-bye to God. But we say by.., farewell at
least to serious devotional services that we might have been doing when we were
in trouble. But when a person is not motivated by anything material, then
"nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir". So, Krishna, when He is talking about here, you know,
here, He is not talking about impersonal "jñānī". He is talking about person who
has basically, you know, transcended, you know, you know, the arena of material
temptations and material tribulation. Understand there is nothing so dreadful in
the material world that I should get too agitated about it. There is nothing so
wonderful of the world which I should get too agitated about. Let me f..., stay
focused. And He says, among these "priyo hi jñānino ’tyartham". So, he is very
dear to Me. Because that person is aspiring for devotion. And not just devotion.
Pure devotion. "eka-bhaktir". "priyo hi jñānino ’tyartham". Exceedingly dear to
Me. "ahaṁ sa ca mama priyaḥ". He says. So, Krishna is talking about a bond of
love between the "jñānī" and Him. So, this "jñānī", because He does not have
material desires. When starts approaching Krishna. Then, you know, the, you
know, bond of love develops very quickly. Just like, when the wood is there,
which is not wet. When fire is put on it. Immediately, it is, blazes forward.
So, similarly, these "jñānī"s, you know, when the wood is not, you know, when
they do not have any material desires. Material desires are like the water which
makes the wood wed..., wet. So, when there are no material desires, then the
heart of this "jñānī" is not having any m..., distracting factor. So, once that
person gets attracted to Krishna. Then, so, the attraction to Krishna blazes
forward. Just it happened with, you know, the Kumaras. When they saha..., got
the fragrance of the tulsi leaves from the, m..., lotus feet of Krishna, that
attracted them. And they moved forward and surrendered to Krishna. So, now,
Krishna will describe that, actually, all of these people are c..., dear to Him.

        udārāḥ sarva evaite
        jñānī tv ātmaiva me matam
        āsthitaḥ sa hi yuktātmā
        mām evānuttamāṁ gatim

So, now, Krishna says, "udārāḥ sarva evaite". Actually, Krishna is saying, even
the others are good. Now, Krishna is using a very interesting word. "udārāḥ".
"udārāḥ". Now, the word "udārāḥ" often means charitable. So, why is the word
charitable being used over here? Because, actually, Krishna, we, ju...,
Rāmānujācārya explains in his commentary over here that the Lord is so hungry
for devotion that, you know, if we are desperate for something. And if somebody
gives us that thing. Oh, you are so kind. You are so charitable. We will say
that. So, the Lord is so hungry for devotion that if somebody comes and offers
devotion to Him. Even if that devotion be mixed. Even if that devotion be
motivated. Does not matter. Krishna says. I am so happy that you are offering
your devotion to Me. And He says, oh, you are so charitable. "udārāḥ". So, that
is the l..., actually, it is large-heartedness of the Lord that He calls these
devotees as large-hearted. That they are mixed devotees. But He call "sarva
evaite". So, all of them. All four. "ārto", "jijñāsur", "arthārthī", and
"jñānī". All of them are "udārāḥ". Because instead of going somewhere else when
they are in trouble, they are coming to Krishna. But He says, "jñānī tv ātmaiva
me matam". "ātmaiva". The, but the "jñānī" is just like Me. He is "ātmaiva". It
is a very deep glorification. Just like Me. "āsthitaḥ sa hi yuktātmā".
"āsthitaḥ". Such a person is situated in Me. And understand that I am the
supreme goal. "mām evānuttamāṁ gatim". Will attain Me. Understand Me to be the
supreme goal. And will soon attain me. The other category of people have not
yet understood Krishna to be supreme goal. They have their own goals of removing
di..., distress. Gaining wealth. Like that. But either way, all of them will
come to Krishna eventually. That will be the, that will be described in the next
verse. But important point over here is, "ā...", "sa hi yuktātmā". So,
Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura, in his commentary, explains that the "jñānī"s,
are s..., Krishna says, they are equal to me. But Krishna talks about the pure
devotee, when He is describing about Udd..., to Uddhava in the Srimad Bhagavatam
that, actually, the pure devotee is more dear to Me than Me Myself. So, the
"jñānī" is as dear to Me as Me. But Krishna says, the pure devotee is more dear
to Me than Me. So, we see over here, Krishna is slowly, but surely, revealing
His heart about how He loves those who choose to love Him. We will continue with
the discussion in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
