Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6cjG3wTUWfE
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_100_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_09_Text_15_to_21_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=zlImYC3D4aBEzPmJMimFaNTAA-58MTU0ODQ4ODc3NkAxNTQ4NDAyMzc2&v=6cjG3wTUWfE&event=video_description

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in Ninth Chapter. We discussed the two extremes in the previous verse. Those who
misunderstand Krishna. The mayavadis. "avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā". And "moghāśā
mogha-karmāṇo". 9.11 and 9.12. And those who understand Krishna properly. And
surrender to Him with love. That is "mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha". And, you know,
"satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ". Now, in-between these two, there is a spectrum of
other people. And Krishna will talk about them in 9.15. And elaborate about them
in the subsequent verses. So, let us look at 9.15:

        jñāna-yajñena cāpy anye
        yajanto mām upāsate
        ekatvena pṛthaktvena
        bahudhā viśvato-mukham

So, Krishna is telling here, you know, others who worship Him through knowledge.
"jñāna-yajñena cāpy anye". Others worship Him through "jñāna-yajñena". "yajanto
mām upāsate". So, Krishna is acknowledging that they worship Him. You know. You
know. And how do they do it? "ekatvena". "ekatvena" means through oneness.
"pṛthaktvena bahudhā". That the Supreme Lord manifests in many forms. And then,
"bahudhā viśv...". And then, "viśvato-mukham". "viśvato-mukham" is as the
universal form. You know. You know. So, now, actually, this verse will be a seed
for a lot of discussion. So, "pṛth...". You know. You know. What are these three
referring to? The "ekatvena" refers to the, you know, tho..., those who have the
conception of oneness. And they are here, Krishna is referring to them as b...,
b..., what is referring to is brahmavadis. The mayavadis already have been
talked about in, you know, 9.11 and 12. So, this will be addressed briefly by
Krishna. And Prabhupada will address it in the purport. And this "ekatvena" will
be elaborated again in the Twelfth Chapter. You know. When Arjuna asks the
questions amongst the pers..., personalists and impersonalists, who are better?
And then, "pṛthaktvena bahudhā", that refers to those who worship the devatas.
You know. You know. And, you know, the, of course, there can be demigod worship
with different conceptions. And we will discuss that. But that concept of
"pṛth...". "pṛthaktvena bahudhā" means that there are many. "pṛthak" is
different. And "bahudhā" is many. That there are many manifestations of the
divine. And we can worship different manifestations. That conception when people
have, that Krishna will elaborate in this chapter itself starting from verse 20
onwards till verse 28. Where He will contrast demigod worship with pure
devotional service. And then, "viśvato-mukham". "viśvato-mukham" refers to,
h..., the idea of the "viśva" being the "mukham" un..., the rupa, the Lord. That
there is a universal form. So, that will be mentioned briefly from verses 16 to
19 in this ver..., chapter. And then, later on, it will be elaborated again in
the Eleventh Chapter. And just prior to this, in 13-14 verses, what Krishna had
talked about pure devotional service. Krishna will talk about this towards the
end of this chapter. 9.29 to 34. And then, He will talk in the Tenth Chapter,
also. Till 10.11. After which, Arjuna will ask a question about Vibhuti Yoga.
And Krishna will answer that question. You know. So, this is an overview of, to
this verse is central to understanding the subsequent flow of the Gita. So,
here, "pṛthaktvena bahudhā" is elaborated immediately after that in the next
section of this chapter. "viśvato-mukham" is elaborated in this next section.
The "pṛthaktvena bahudhā" is elaborated in the section after the nex...,
immediate section. So, 16 to 19 will elaborate "viśvato-mukham". 20 to 28 will
elaborate on "pṛthaktvena bahudhā". You know. First, universal form is talked
about. Then, the, Kri..., you know, Kri..., demigod worship is talked about. And
then, this same "viśvato-mukham" will be talked about again in Ele..., Eleventh
Chapter. And "ekatvena" will be talked about in the Twelfth Chapter. So, what
are these three conceptions? See, when people want to be God conscious. You
know. It is not that suddenly, they start thinking about God. Their conceptions
evolve gradually. So, here, what are the three conceptions? So, one may think of
a, a round. I see this universe. It is so great. When I think about this
universe as so great. Then, I may start thinking that. Oh. Oh. Oh. That this
universe itself is sacred. It is using, universe itself is divine. And this can
be a form of pantheism. Pantheism means the idea that everything is God. So, one
may start worshiping the universe itself as God. And one may visualise different
aspects of the universe as, you know, as parts of that Absolute Truth.

So, here, the concept is that bigness is associated with greatness. And
greatness is associated with God. That which is, so, God is the greatest. So,
therefore, He must be the biggest. And the biggest thing that we see in the
world is the universe. So, you know, therefore, you know, the Sun and the moon
are the eyes, are my, are the eyes of Absolute Truth. The mountains are the
bones of the Absolute Truth. These sort of conceptions are talked about. And
that is what the meditation is. And of course, there are certain sacrifices,
also, which are performed in Vishvarupa upasana. That we will discuss in next
part. You know. You know. Next few verses. But the point here is that in the
vastness and the pervasiveness of the universe, one conceives of the Absolute
Truth. Then, "pṛthaktvena bahudhā" is the idea that, yes, ok, this universe is
vast and m..., m..., m..., huge, and sacred. In one sense. But beyond, but, you
know, ultimately, the universe is temporary. So, one's consciousness evolves
further. And one thinks that, actually, beyond this, there is some reality. And,
you know, you know, you know, or rather, beyond this, there are some, you know,
beings that are manifested. So, you know, who are controlling the various
aspects of the universe. So, "pṛthaktvena bahudhā" refers to, yes, there is
some ultimate reality. And that ultimate reality is manifesting, you know, as
the, you know, you know, various controllers. Now, how it is manifesting as a
various controllers, that may not be clear. But one sees a rain. And one think
there must be a controller for the rains. One think the Sun. You know. One
thinks about the Sun. And one thinks there must be a controller for the Sun. So,
in this way, one starts thinking that there are w..., so many awe-inspiring
features in nature. And they must require some, you know, controllers. And, you
know, is, and one is not very clear. But one think this, they must also be
having some connection with the Absolute Truth. This is how one comes to the
concept of polytheism. So, from pon..., pantheism to polytheism. Pantheism is
the idea that everything is God. Polytheism is that there are many Gods. So,
"pṛthaktvena bahudhā". And then, after that, one starts thinking that, actually,
you know, everything in the material world is temporary. There must be some, you
know, reality which is ultimately eternal. And, you know, and one starts
thinking, I also have a longing for eternity. And one thinks beyond the changes
of this world. There must be some sub..., cha..., unchanging substratum. And I
and that unchanging substratum are the same. That is how one concep..., con...,
comes to the conception of spiritual oneness. And that is "ekatvena". So, you
know, "bahudhā viśvato-mukham". You know. "viśvato-mukham" is the idea that
nature itsel..., you know, that the universal form is a mani..., is, you know,
to be worshipped. Then, the idea is that the various manifestations of the
controll..., various manifestations of the Absolute Truth as the controllers,
you know, the universal controllers have to be worshipped. And after that, you
know, the idea, beyond this, is spiritual reality. And I am, you know, you know,
one with that spiritual reality. So, "ekatvena". One worships them. Now,
Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura explains that this hierarchy progresses from
downwards to upwards. That means "viśvato-mukham" is the lowest. Then,
"pṛthaktvena bahudhā" is intermediate. And "ekatvena" is highest. Why? Because
the conception is moving from material towards s..., spiritual. First, one is
basically thinking of material bigness in terms of size. You know. After that,
one is thinking of the controllers. One is thinking about consciousness. And
then, after that, one is thinking about the spiritual consicousness, the
maya..., I, in the form of oneness that lies beyond and below matter. Not below.
Below in terms of underlying matter. Unifying matter. Controlling matter. So, in
that sense, there is, this is the evolution of thought.

Now, Srila Prabhupada explains it oppositely. And we will look at this. You
know. You know. So, when, now, let us understand this once again. Vishvarupa
upasana, when it happens, this is re..., this is "viśvato-mukham". So, in
Vishvarupa upasana, what happens? The Vishvarupa, the aspects of the universal
form are used as material, meditation tools to reach the Absolute Truth. So,
one conceives the Absolute Truth in terms of, you know, the bigness of the
universe. We will discuss about Vishvarupa a little later. Then, then, "pṛthak",
now, this "pṛthaktvena bahudhā", the various manifestations. Now, different
people can do it in different way. But one particular way might be as Pratika
upasana. Pratika upasana. That means that one considers the demigods as symbols
of Brahman. So, one thi..., as pratika. As representative. As symbols of
Brahman. And worships the demigods accordingly. And "ekatvena". What is
mentioned over here is, that is Ahangropasana. Ahangropasana is, you know, one
worships oneself. Thinking of oneself as the Absolute Truth. Now, those who are
like this. Those who are Ahangropasanas are not mayavadis. Because they do not
offend the Krishna's form. That is something very important to understand. That
these Ahangropasanas, they, you know, may conceive of themselves as one with the
Absolute Truth. But conceiving of oneself as one with the Absolute Truth is in
and of itself not mayavada. And it is not necessarily always offensive. What
makes mayavada offensive is the notion that Krishna's form is material.
Krishna's form is illusory. Krishna's form is false. And that one has to go
beyond Krishna's form. That notion is what is offensive. And that is the notion
that one needs to go beyond. Or one needs to give up. You know. The idea that
one has to go beyond Krishna's form to some higher reality is offensive
conception. So, you know, these are the Ahangropasanas. And then, beyond that,
after that, there is another, you know, you know, way of looking at this
which Srila Prabhupada uses. So, I will explain the hierarchy now, of these
three. You know. So, from the philosophical perspective, you know, you know, ok,
so, to explain these different perspectives, let us look at it from the
perspective of philosophical perspective. You know. You know. The mayavadis can
be said to be better than the karmis. Why is that? Because the karmis are
engaged in sense gratification. But the mayavadis are detached from sense
gratification. So, if you know, con..., if we consider from the perspective of
the level of philosophical insight. The mayavadis have understood to some extent
that this material world cannot provide happiness. So, they have, we could say,
in one way, a greater philosophical insight. So, many of the mayavadis may be
renunciates. They may learn, be learnt in the scripture. And they are pursuing
the Absolute Truth. So, from the philosophical perspective, they may, they may
be philosophically more, you know, sophisticated. Philosophically more
insightful than the karmis. So, in that sense, you know, with mayavadis may,
also, some of the mayavadis may also live life in goodness. So, when they lead
life in goodness. Even they lead live in goodness. Then, you know, karmis will
be living life in passion, also. So, in that sense, from that perspective, we
could say the mayavadis are sligh..., more evolved. But then, this is the one
perspective. But the other perspective is the devotional perspective. That the
devotional perspective is, one's position is not determined so much by where one
is. But by what one's attitude towards Krishna is. So, that means, if one is
blasphemous of Krishna. One is offensive towards Krishna. Then, in that sense,
the mayav.., the, actually, the, you know, k..., karmis may become better than
the mayavadis. Why? Because the karmis have a greater chance of coming closer to
Krishna. Because they are not offensive towards Krishna.

The mayavadis, you know, have a greater chance of coming closer towards Krishna.
Because they have, they do not have such a great, good chance because they are
offensive to Krishna. In fact, what they think is they cannot come to, closer to
Krishna because their goal is to go beyond Krishna. So, because of their
offensiveness, for them to make devotional advancement is generally difficult.
That is why we have to understand, you know, consider these two different
perspectives. So, same way, when we consider these two different perspectives.
What Srila Prabhupada explains is that the Ahangropasana, so these three, these
three hiearchy level which, you know, which Chakravarti Pada has explained that
the Vishvarupa upasanas are the lower. Then, there is "e...", "pṛthaktvena
bahudhā". And there is Ahangropasana. So, this is with respect to, say,
philosophical understanding. That one understand that there is a spiritual
reality. And that spiritual reality should be worshipped. So, from the
conception of one's con..., capacity to conceive of the Absolute Truth in terms
of eternal existence. You know. And spiritual existence. The "ekatvena" is
higher. But then, if you turn it around. Look it from the devotional
perspective. And the conception of worship is most prominent in Vishvarupa
upasana. And least prominent in Ahangropasana. Why? Because if I am worshipping
myself, then actually, it is, you know, you know, it is a paradox of terms. It
is a sort of self-contradiction. What do you mean by that? I worship myself. If
I say, I am my own God. And I worship myself. It is not, it is quite an
antithesis of devotion. So, it is not very theistically evolved, or theis..., 
devotionally conducive conception. So, higher than that is the conception of
"pṛthaktvena bahudhā". Oh, there the, there, there is the devatas. An..., and
they should be worshipped. So, you know, but b..., higher than that is the
conception of there is one Absolute Truth. And that Absolute Truth is manifested
in the Vishvarupa. And I should worship that. So, the concept of worship, which
is conducive to devotion is most prominent in Vishvarupa upasana. And least
prominent in Ahangropasana. And that is why from that perspective, when Srila
Prabhupada explains this hierarchy, he focuses on the devotional perspective
throughout his purports. Because devotional service is the ultimate conclusion
of the Bhagavad Gita as we will see in its progression. It is especially clear
in 18.66.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

So, here, by focusing on the devotional perspective, you know, where worship is
critically important. And for that, the conception of, you know, the difference
between worship and worship w..., are important. So, Ahangropasana is the
lowest. And then, you know, there is Vishvarupa upasana. And then, you know,
there is "pṛthaktvena", there is Vishvarupa upasana. So, let us look at Srila
Prabhupada's purport which explains things from this perspective. So, Prabhupada
explains here that, you know, you know:

"Out of the above three, the lowest, those who worship themselves as the Supreme
Lord, thinking themselves to be monists, are most predominant."

So, these are widespread conception today, also.

"Such people think themselves to be the Supreme Lord, and in this mentality they
worship themselves. This is also a type of God worship, for they can understand
that they are not the material body but are actually spiritual soul; at least,
such a sense is prominent."

So, here, what Srila Prabhupada is saying is that this is also a type of God
worship. So, it is important that that means Ahangropasana because it also
involves some kind of upasana. It involves another conception of eternal
existence. It involves the conception of worship. So, it is also a type of God
worship. So, you know, when this is clearly not referring to mayavadis. This is
referring to something different. And it is one type of brahmavada. So, now, let
us look at Vishvarupa upasana. Which is described from the next sec..., se...,
next set of verses. 16 verse onwards. Let us look at it. So, Krishna explains in
the next verses what He has talked about in 4.24, He will give more rela...,
bold understanding in 9.16. Let us look at it.

        ahaṁ kratur ahaṁ yajñaḥ
        svadhāham aham auṣadham
        mantro ’ham aham evājyam
        aham agnir ahaṁ hutam

So, "ahaṁ kratur ahaṁ yajñaḥ". You know. "ahaṁ kratur". So, here, actually,
Krishna is talking about the various elements of the sacrifice. He says, I am
the Vedic ritual. I am the "sva...", "yajñaḥ", so, "kratur" refers to the Vedic
ritual. "yajñaḥ" refers to the Puranic rituals. "smṛti" sacrifice. That means
there are sacrifices which are mentioned in different scriptures. And
accordingly, the scriptures, whatever the sacrifices are mentioned, they
sometimes are different technical names. So, you know, you know, you know, in a
general, non-technical sense, we can say "kratur" refers to sacrifice.
Specifically, "kratur" refers to sacrifice mentioned in the four Vedas. The
four Vedas. And "yajñaḥ" refers to sacrifice which men..., mentioned in "smṛti"
scriptures. Krishna is saying, I am both the sacrifices. "svadhāham". I am
what is offered in it. So, "auṣ...", oblation. Then, I am the healing herb. You
know.

        svadhāham aham auṣadham
        mantro ’ham ...

Whatever the mantra that are chanted, I am that mantra. "aham evājyam". So, when
the melted butter, the ghee is offered. That is also I am. "aham agnir ahaṁ
hutam". I am the fire. So, basically, you know, Krishna is helping us to see
that when we perform our fire sacrifice, it is not just some material elements
interacting. It is actually, ultimately a manifestation of the Absolute Truth.
Now, you know, we will see the evolution of thought in the Bhagavad Gita. In
4.24, what did happen was, all the elements of the sacrifice were identified
with Brahma. What was 4.24?

        brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir
        brahmāgnau brahmaṇā hutam
        brahmaiva tena gantavyaṁ
        brahma-karma-samādhinā

So, there, it is described that all the elements of the sacrifice are Brahma.
But here, what is described? That is accepted. But here, the thought is taken
further. And it is said that it is actually "ahaṁ". All of it, I am that. "ahaṁ
kratur ahaṁ yajñaḥ". I am all this. So, what is the point over, what is the
point over there? That when the nishkama-karma-yogi is performing sacrifices.
At that time, nishkama-karma-yogi does not know what is that Absolute Truth.
But, you know, as one moves forwards, one starts understanding what that
Absolute Truth is. So, here, when the person is a devotee, from the devotional
perspective, it is clear that the, ultimately, all the elements of the "yajñaḥ"
are manifestation of Bhagavan Sri Krishna. So, of Krishna, Himself. So, Krishna
makes it very clear here. "ahaṁ kratur ahaṁ yajñaḥ". So, what was mentioned
there, you know, you know, in terms of the seeker's level at that time as Brahma
is now clearly specified as "ahaṁ". This is how the, you know, sac..., you know,
the thought of the Bhagavad Gita is progressive. And it is revealed in the same
concepts in a more Krishna centered way. Now, Krishna explains how He pervades
all aspects of existence. So:

        pitāham asya jagato
        mātā dhātā pitāmahaḥ
        vedyaṁ pavitram oṁ-kāra
        ṛk sāma yajur eva ca

So, "pitāham asya jagato". That I am the father of this whole universe. Of all
living beings within this universe. And not only I am the father. "mātā dhātā
pitāmahaḥ". I am the mother. I am the sustainer. And I am the grandfather, also.
"vedyaṁ pavitram oṁ-kāra". So, "vedyaṁ". Ultimately, all the object of knowledge
that we have, it is ultimately He. "vedyaṁ". "pavitram oṁ-kāra". So, I am the,
now, "oṁ-kāra". The sacred song. Syllable. And the purify, Prabhupada says that,
I am, here, I am "pavitram". So, whatever purifies us, that is also Krishna
only. And then, "ṛk sāma yajur eva ca". And I am also the Vedas. So, what is the
point over here? You know. What is the connection with what has been going on?
Actually, the point is, in Vishvarupa upasana, one starts conceiving of
everything in the universe. As ultimately, connected with and manifesting the
Absolute Truth. So, here, also, same point is made. "pitāham asya jagato". That
actually I am the father of all living beings. So, in this world, we have
different supports. Different inspirations. Different shelters. And Krishna is
saying, I am all of them. So, I am the father. I am the mother. I am the
grandsire. So, now, is this to be taken literally? You know. Sometimes, people
have this conception that, you know, when some devotees, you know, start
praticing spiritual life. And sometimes, their parents oppose. So, when their
parents oppose, then, the parents say, you should obey us. "matru devo bo pitru
devo bo". So, you know, you know, I, is Krishna supporting something similar
over here? That the mother is God? Father is God? Yes. The mother and father are
God. But in what sense? You know. Is that statement "matru devo bo pitru devo
bo" a literal statement? If it were that the mother and father are God. Then,
we would have two Gods. Not one God. And then, if the mother wants the son to
become a doctor. And the father wants the son to become an engineer. So, which
God is the son to follow? The mother God or the father God? You know. If the
moth..., mother and father have a conflict. You know. Whose side is the son
supposed to take? Do Gods have conflicts among themselves? So, the point is not
to disrespect the parents, obviously. The point is recognise sta..., statements
in their context. The context is that, actually, the mother and the father are
manifestations of the Absolute Truth. They mani..., they, you know, in this
world, there are many things which sustain us. Which help us. Which help us.
Which, you know, assist us in our onward journey. Materially as well as
spiritually. You know. You know. So, whoever is, help, does in any way, we are
grateful for that. But at the same time, we also recognise that there is
something which is to be, you know, the ultimate reality. So, we are grateful to
our parents. But here, the point that Krishna is making is that ultimately
whoever are the shelters in this world, whatever is benefiting us, it is
ultimately a manifestation of Him. It is who, He who is benefiting us through
those things. So, it is He who is, you know, giving us shelter. So, it is
Krishna who is giving us His love through these things. It is Krishna who is
giving us shelter and strength through the mother. Through the father. Through
the grandfather. It is He who is the, giving us knowledge. It is He who is
purifying us. It is who has given us the Vedas. So, in the sense that ultimately
everything is coming from Him. Everything gets its potency from Him. This verse
is to be understood. And we will see this concept repeated again in the
Fif..., Tenth Chapter in terms of "vibhuti". At that time, also, we will discuss
it further. So, here, when Krishna is talking about this particular, you know,
spiritual vision of the Vedic "yajñaḥ" sacrifices. The focus is on seeing
everything as connected with Him. So, here, now, Srila Prabhupada's purport, you
know, you know, you know, you know, you know, seems to, might seem a little
confusing. So, Prabhupada says:

"these living entities who appear to be our father, mother, etc., are nothing
but Kṛṣṇa."

So, then, Prabhupada says further:

"Not only are our father and mother parts and parcels of Kṛṣṇa, but the creator,
grandmother and grandfather, etc., are also Kṛṣṇa. Actually any living entity,
being part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, is Kṛṣṇa."

So, the point is, that Prabhupada is emphasising the point, he talk..., you
know, emphasising the philosophical principle of "Achintya-Bheda-Abheda". The
part, you know, is non-different from the whole. Because the part also is a
manifestation of the whole. And part contains, you know, part is qualitatively
similar to the whole. So, in that sense, every living entity is also Krishna.
So, after describing this, you know, you know, you know, and then, you know, you
know, Krishna will move forward. And describe how the, again, He emphasising
the same principle in next verse. That whatever gives us shelter is ultimately
He only.

        gatir bhartā prabhuḥ sākṣī
        nivāsaḥ śaraṇaṁ suhṛt
        prabhavaḥ pralayaḥ sthānaṁ
        nidhānaṁ bījam avyayam

So, here, He explains. "gatir bhartā". "gatir" is the, He is the ultimate
destination. He is "bhartā". He is the maintainer. You know. And then,
"prabhuḥ". He is the Lord. He is the master. "sākṣī". He is the indwelling
witness. He is, He knows everything that we are doing. "nivāsaḥ". He is the
shelter. There, ultimately, we are all desiring "śaraṇaṁ". He is ultimate object
of refuge and surrender for us. "suhṛt". He is our greatest friend. "prabhavaḥ
pralayaḥ sthānaṁ". That, you know, you know, you know, actually, when creation
takes place, it unfolds from Him. When dissolution takes places, "pralayaḥ
sthānaṁ". Where addressed, now, that is "sthānaṁ". Ultimately He only. "nidhānaṁ
bījam avyayam". He is the resting place of everything. And "bījam avyayam".
"bījam avyayam" refers to, He is the imperishable seed. Krishna has talked about
the concept of "bījam avyayam" earlier, also. In the, you know, you know,
Seventh Chapter when He talked about how He is the essence of everything.

        bījaṁ māṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        viddhi pārtha sanātanam

So, you know, you know, you know, "bījaṁ", "sanātanam". We discussed the concept
of imperishable seed. Normally, when a seed, you know, you know, gives a rise to
a tree, the seed no longer exists. But Krishna is such that, you know, from Him,
so many living entities come. From Mahavishnu, so many universes come. But
Krishna remains as He is. Krishna never gets depleted. So, "bījam avyayam". You
know. You know. Now, from Him, we can say, from father, also, many sons can
come. But that, you know, but that does not mean the father does not get
depleted. You know. Father is going to grow old. Get diseased. And eventually
succumb, you now, to time. So, but Krishna is "avyayam". So, this is actually a
verse which, you know, very wonderfully explains what is God. How does it
explain what is God? These are re..., in, we can have a definition of God in
terms of He is the generator. Organiser. Destroyer. He is the source of
everything. He is the Absolute Truth. Yeah. But in terms of relationship with
us and the things around us. This is very beautiful my, verse to meditate on the
Absolute Truth. "gatir bhartā prabhuḥ sākṣī". You know. In this world, so many
different people give us love. They may give us kind..., you know, the, ch...,
kindness to us. They may grant us shelter. As devotees, we feel grateful to
whoever helps us. And at the same time, we also recognise that it is Krishna who
is helping us through them. When Srila Prabhupada, you know, you know, was on
the Jaladuta, you know, going to, you know, America. At that time, he went into
diary. And the extracts of the diary, you know, are there in "līlāmrta".
And the diary has also been published as a separate book. So, there, Prabhupada
mentions that, you know, he, he, he writing in his diary on the early days of
his stroke before he gets the heart attack. So, he says that, you know, in this
food, in this co..., you know, ship, there is abundant, you know, supply of
vegetables and grains so that I can have vegetarian food. Although, most of the
sailors, you know, here are non-vegeterians. But they have arran..., they have
arranged for adequate stock of vegetables. So, Prabhupada had got some simple
cereals for himself. And just planning to eat just that if there was no
vegetarian food available. Prabhupada was prepared for that. You know. But here,
is, so, he is grateful. And he is writing, you know, than..., thanks to Lord
Krishna for enligthening Sunthi Muraji from within her heart to make all these
arrangements. Let us see Prabhupada's, you know, consciousness. Now, he knows
this, this f..., ship belongs Sunthi Muraji. And she has arranged it. But
Prabhupada is understanding that how is, Prabhupada is not just appreciating
Sunthi Muraji. He is also appreciating Krishna. You know. Krishna is within the
heart of Sunthi Muraji. And Krishna has given her the intelligence that this is
a swami who is a vegetarian. And he is going on a ship. So, we should arrange
for something, things properly. So, a devotee does not just see Krishna, you
know, and His, does not just see material things at the material level. But a
devotee also sees things beyond the material level to the devotional level. So,
Prabhupada was of course a respectful and grateful to Sunthi Muraji for the help
that he provided. She had provided. But along with that, he also saw the hand of
Krishna over there. That is how, as devotees, you know, when others help us, we
should be able to see both. We should be able to see the hand of Krishna as well
as the, you know, you know, be grateful, you know, to however is helping us. How
we will be able to express that gratitude will vary from time, place,
circumstance. But the important point is, we understand that, you know whatever,
however is doing for us, it is ultimately Krishna doing for us through that
person.

You know, some people may say that, when a devotee gets sick. Then, devotee is,
do..., d..., go to doctor. And take op..., do operation. And doctor saves life.
Actually, yes, we are under..., we are grateful to doctor when doctor strives
and helps to save a devotee's life. At the same time, we understand the ultimate
decision maker is not the doctor. It is Krishna. So, we are grateful to the
doctor. But we are also grateful to Krishna for His help. In this way, there is
this multilevel understanding of how things are acting. You know. So, then,
Krishna now continues to explain how the various uni..., universal
manifestations are connected with Him.

        tapāmy aham ahaṁ varṣaṁ
        nigṛhṇāmy utsṛjāmi ca
        amṛtaṁ caiva mṛtyuś ca
        sad asac cāham arjuna

So, "tapāmy aham". "vid...". So, He says, it is I who give heat. "ahaṁ varṣaṁ".
It is I who cause rains. And what, how, what about rains? "nigṛhṇāmy utsṛjāmi
ca". It is h..., I who hold back rains. And it is I who send forth rains.
"amṛtaṁ caiva mṛtyuś ca". He says, I am immortality. And I am death. "sad asac
cāham arjuna". I am death. And I am birth. "sad asac cāham". So, what is the
point he..., being talked about over here? Basically, I am, "sad asac" can be
matter and spirit. It can be in cause and effect various places. The point here,
again, we see, everything in the universe as connected with this Absolute Truth.
So, even from the point of view of material science, you know, the Sun is
critical for existence. And, you know, you know, not, the Sun gives heat and
light. So, without heat, you know, we would not be able to survive. So, Krishna
is saying it is actually I who give the heat energy. It is I who manifesting as
the heat energy. And similarly, we need water. So, it is Krishna who is
providing water. And Krishna is withdrawing water. Now, here, Krishna is taking
the conception, you know, into something broader. So, till now, He was, in the
previous verse, it was more in terms of positives. You know. "gatir". I am the
shelter. I am the well-wisher. I am the maintainer. I am the destination. You
know. So, we see God in the positives of the world. But what about the
negatives? In this world, there are positives as well as negatives. So, what
about the negatives? Actually, so, we may say that rains come. It is good. But
when the rains do not come, we may say that is bad. So, if the rains coming as
by due to God's will, then is the rains not coming, also, by God's will? So,
here, the point which we have to understand is that God is neutral. That has,
Krishna has talked about already in 9.9. "udāsīna-vad āsīnam". That whatever
creation, maintenance, destruction happens, He is like a judge. Oversee, but
not, you know, having an emotional agenda against anyone. He is un..., He is
detached, unbiased, neutral. But the point is, we see the positive and the
negative, both as manifestations of the power of the Absolute Truth. So, when
rains come heavily. And there are huge floods. You know. The sheer, when we want
to, you know, when we want to use some water. You know. We may ha..., use a
hose. And we can discharge some amount of water. You know. There is a big fire.
Then, we may get a big hose. And a fire brigade company might have a, you know,
big, big hose. So, it is a shore. Large quantities of water. But who can shore
as much water as the rains can? You know. When there are torrential rains. The
sheer amount of water that comes around. And that floods the area is amazing.
So, in the context, it may have a distractive result. But the point is, when we
see it as a display of power. Then, we understand, it is awesome. So, a devotee
learns to see. You know. God in both the positives and the negatives of the
world. We may see. The, we know that, Prabhupada when he, you know, you know,
was in Calcutta. And at that time, the bombs were falling. The Japanese
were bombing Calcutta. Because they wanted to attack from the East. And conquer
India. So, at that time, you know, their bomb shelters made. And all the people
started going and staying in the bomb shelters. And Prabhupada, you know, you
know, wa..., you know, Prabhupada, that decided, if he used to go, and
Prabhupada wanted to do worship of his deities. So, he would make them
"Kachori"s. And offering the Kachori"s to the deities. And he was thinking when
the bombs were falling. He would hear the bombs falling. He says, this is also
Krishna coming, is also Krishna coming. But then, he said, Prabhupada said, this
is not a very pleasant form of Krishna.

So, devotees sees Krishna in everything. But at the same time, a devotee also
recognises. At material level. Certain manifestations of Krishna are positive.
Certain manifestations are negative. Now, when we say, Krishna is coming. What
does it mean? Is it that Krishna is on the side of the Japanese? When the
Japane..., and Krishna is against the Indians? And the Britishers? And Krishna
is ka..., destroying them through the bombs? No. Krishna does not have any
specific agenda in such situations. The point is the destructive force. The
sheer destructive force. And the arrival of death. Death ultimately, you know,
is the greatest conqueror in the world. You know. People, person may become very
powerful. Very strong. But then, dea..., when death comes. You know. Tuck. In
one sweeping blow, that person and everything that person has cherished is
knocked down. So, in that sense, death is grea..., very powerful. So, death,
the sheer power of death overpowers the power of the most powerful con...,
conqueror in the world. And that power of death is a manifestation of Krishna.
So, one is sh..., s..., able to see death, also. So, when we talk about
"am...", "amṛtaṁ caiva mṛtyuś ca". That, the, you know, that, Kri..., it is
Krishna who gives us immortality. You know. It is Krishna who comes as
mortality. It is contrasting. Isn't it? You know. You know. How can the same,
same God b..., give, be immortality and mortality, also? So, actually, Krishna
comes. And descends. And gives us message. And displays His pastimes. So that we
can attain immortality. You know. So, He exists immortality. He exists
immortally. And He invites us to exist at the level of immortality. In spiritual
existence. And devotion to Him. But the, for those who choose otherwise, then
He, you know, ac..., appears as death. And He continues their journ.., you know,
He arranges for the, oversees the continuation of their journey in the cycle of
birth and death. So, in that sense, You know. Krishna is both "amṛtaṁ caiva
mṛtyuś ca". "sad asac cāham arjuna". "sad asac cāham". That I am the temporary.
And I am the etern..., I am the material. And I am the spiritual. This has been
elaborately and technically analysed by the various acharyas. I will not go too
much into that technical analysis here. It suffices to say Prabhupada simply
translates this as I am matter and spirit. So, why matter and spirit?
Specifically, because we had talked about in 7.4 and 7.5 how matter and spirit
are both energies of Krishna. And then in 7.6, Krishna has said that whatever
exists in ex..., in material existence, is essentially combination of both. And
both come from Him. So, "sar...", you know: 

        etad-yonīni bhūtāni
        sarvāṇīty upadhāraya

So, A, whatever exists, it is a combination of matter and spirit. And
ultimately, Krishna says, for matter and spirit, I am the, you know, you know:

        ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ
        prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā

That I am the beginning. And I am the end. I am the sustenance, also. So, in
that sense, Krishna is, you know, helping us to see everything that we find in
the mani..., material manifestation. The positive and negative. With a spiritual
vision. So, here, Krishna describes Vishvarupa upasana. Whatever we m..., see
manifesting in the universe, how to see it connected with Him. So, now, you
know, you know, Krishna is revealing something very important over here. Which
is often not known to those who are doing Vishvarupa upasana. What is that? When
the normal people do Vishvarupa upasana, they do not necessarily know that this
Krishna whom they are worshipping through the Vishvarupa. They, that, through,
that is why in the Bhagavatam, when Vishvarupa upasana is talked about. It is
talked about at the first step in God realisation. And from that first step,
later steps will come. So, it is the first step. Because one starts thinking of
God in terms of His greatness as manifested in the gigantic universal
manifestation. So, but here, Krishna is helping the Vishvarupa upasana. Upasaka
understand that, actually, all this is connected with Me. And all this is
ultimately going to lead to Me. So, I am the ultimate goal of all this. So, now,
Krishna will talk about the Pratika upasakas. "pṛthaktvena bahudhā". Those who
worship the devatas. So, Krishna says, they are also worshipping Me. But
indirectly.

        trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā
        yajñair iṣṭvā svar-gatiṁ prārthayante
        te puṇyam āsādya surendra-lokam
        aśnanti divyān divi deva-bhogān

You know. So, "trai-vidyā". "trai-vidyā" refers to the three Vedas. Krishna
has just earlier referred to, you know, the "ṛk sāma yajur eva ca". I am these
three Vedas. So, now, "trai-vidyā māṁ". So, now, what do these Vedas teach? They
actually teach the doing of karma-kanda rituals. By which, one can attain
Svarga. "trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā". "soma-pāḥ". "soma-pāḥ" means those
who, you know, drink "mā...". "soma". "soma" rasa is one, you know, kind of
"amṛtaṁ". Not exactly the same "amṛtaṁ" as what was God from the churning of the
milk ocean. But this is kind of, this is a drink which is, you know, which is
conducive to the attainment of svarga. That means when there is, sacrifices are
performed. At that time, you know, soma is also there as the part of sacrifice.
And by drinking that, one gets "puṇyam". So, now, in this world, there is
intoxication. And when people drink, when people take intoxication, then what
happens? You know. First of all, a person who thinks that, you know, something
which is intoxicating will make me happy is foolish. And then, when the person
drinks, that makes the person even more foolish. So, it is like squared up, a
foo..., foolishness squared. And what happens is, and it leads to, people lead
to terrible Tama Guna. You know. When people get drunk, it is like a temporary
spate of madness. Which people choose to undergo. You know. When the person
becomes drunk. At that time, the person may speak in, you know, incoherently.
They walk into a wall. May sort of, you know, fall down. And the, by the stride
of street. May even, you know, drive over a, may drive a car crazily. And run
over somebody. May, you know, do all sorts of terrible things. You know. If you
observed carefully, neutrally, dispassionately. We would see that a person who
is drunk is non-different from a person who is mad. So, alcoholism is like, you
know, temporary self-induced madness. It is a self-induced form of intensity.
Self, not just self-induced. Self-chosen. So, one chooses it. And then, it comes
upon oneself. So, often, many alcoholics, when they are not taking alcohol, they
are sober normal people. But when the urge for alcohol comes, when they just
become like a h..., terribly diff..., terribly different person. So, you know,
that is the effect of material intoxication. But here, Krishna is talking about
something entirely different. So, some people compare soma with, and they take,
say, this soma is also similar to, you know, intoxication. And even Vedic
rituals, intoxicants were taken. Actually, soma is entirely different. See, in
normal alcohol and other intoxicants, they take our consciousness down towards
Tama Guna. You know. Whereas soma takes our consciousness upwards towards
Sattva. So, and actually, it, you know, you know, you know. It is also very
enjoyable. It is also delicious. And also, you know, stimulates the senses for
enjoyment. But it is all within the framework of dharma. So, "soma-pāḥ
pūta-pāpā". That is why what happens? It is said, you know, you know, these
people, they drink, you know, soma. "pūta-pāpā". They become purified of "pāpā".
"yajñair iṣṭvā". They are actually worshipping Me through "yajñair". "trai-vidyā
māṁ". Word is important. They are worshipping Me through "yajñair iṣṭvā".
"trai-vidyā māṁ" was in the first line. "yajñair iṣṭvā". And what is their goal?
So, you know, to go to Svarga, one has to acquire adequate "puṇyam". So,
"svar-gatiṁ prārthayante". So, by doing these "yajñair". By drinking the soma,
as a part of the "yajñair" sacrifice, one is, you know, "prārthayante". Is
praying. Aspiring for going to heaven. "svar-gatiṁ". You know. You know. And
then, "te puṇyam āsādya". When they acquire adequate "puṇyam", then what
happens? "surendra-lokam". So, then, they attain, you know, you know,
"sura-indra". So, Indra is referred to here as "sura-indra". The Indra of the,
the king of the Gods. That is Indra loka. And there, "aśnanti divyān". They
enjoy celestial delights. So, the word "divyān" can have different meanings
based on the context. See, the word "divyān", when it is used in 4.9:

        janma karma ca me divyam

There, "divyam" refers to transcendental. Whereas here, "divyān" refers to
celestial. Now, what is the difference between, you know, celestial and
transcendental? See, the three levels of existence. There is terrestrial.
There is celestial. And there is transcendental. You know. Or we could say
spiritual. So, terrestrial is earthly. That the, terra..., you know, terra core,
or terra, we say, this is terraform. Underground. So, the earth. Terrestrial is
that which is referred to, you know, that which connect with the earth. Then,
celestial is that which is connected with the higher level. The skies. The
higher levels of existence. The heavens. And then, the spiritual or the
transcendental refers not just to the higher material. But that which is higher
than matter itself. It is not the higher material levels of existence. But
the higher than material levels of existence that are talked about. You know.
So, therefore, here, you know, the Bha..., Bhagavad Gita will lead us. In the
next verse, we will see. Bhagavad Gita lead..., tells us, do not seek for higher
material happiness. Seek higher than material happiness. What is the difference?
Seek higher material happiness means, ok, you know, ok, I, in a senses and this
ma..., earthly planetary systems are not so attractive. You know. The people's
bodies are not so attractive in this world. What? Attraction is also very
short-lived. Attractiveness is also very short-lived. But in the heavens. People
are beaut..., far, far more beautiful. Far, far more handsome. And they stay
b..., good-looking also very long time. So, I will go. And enjoy over there.
However, there also, everything is temporary. So, we will see, the verses will
tell us. That do not seek higher material happiness. Seek higher than material
happiness. That means, you know, seek for that happiness, which is a higher than
material. Which is ultimately spiritual happiness. You know. So, here, the word
"divyān" refers to, you know, you know, the higher material happiness. It refers
to celestial. It does not refer to spiritual. "divi deva-bhogān". "divi
deva-bhogān" refers to, "divi" refers to heavens. So, the word "divi" and
"bhuja" are often contrasted in the Vedic context. That "divi" is the heavenly.
And the "bhuja" is the earthly. So, "divi deva-bhogān". "deva-bhogān" is that
which is enjoyed by the devatas. So, here, people are aspiring to go and enjoy
in the heavens. Now, Krishna has talked about this karma-kanda. And going to
heavens for enjoying. Earlier also in 2.42 and 43. And there, He has, you know,
said that people who think, who want this are "avipaścitaḥ".

        yām imāṁ puṣpitāṁ vācaṁ
        pravadanty avipaścitaḥ

So, in 2.42, He has said that, these are "av...". They are not very
discriminating people. But here, Krishna is not trying to give it under
discriminating capacity by telling them, you know, by te..., actually, they
are also worshipping Me only. But the problem is, they are not worshipping Me
directly. They are worshipping Me indirectly through the manifestation of
devatas. And their desire is not to come to Me. Their desire is to go to
heavens. So, Krishna is telling over here that even the karma-kandi rituals are
also worship of Him. But the problem is, because it is not done in consciousness
of Him. So, it does not lead to the attainment of Him. So, what happens? You
know. For such people, you know, you know, you know, you know, those who go to
the heavenly planets? They will go to the heavenly planets. But afterwards, what
will happen? That is described in the next verse.

        te taṁ bhuktvā svarga-lokaṁ viśālaṁ
        kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti
        evaṁ trayī-dharmam anuprapannā
        gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante

So, "te taṁ bhuktvā". H..., there, enjoy. They will enjoy. "svarga-lokaṁ
viśālaṁ". And what they will enjoy is, "viśālaṁ". Huge. Giant. Large happine...,
amounts of happiness they will enjoy. As compared to the earth, you know, what
they enjoy is enormous. But then, "kṣīṇe puṇye". The "puṇyam" is getting
exhausted. And once the "puṇyam" gets exhausted. "martya-lokaṁ viśanti". They
will come back to this ma..., earthly planetary system. And in this way, what
happens? So, this is, this specific jour..., you know, destination of those
people. But overall, what is the nature of this journey? "evaṁ trayī-dharmam".
So, in this way, those who follow "trayī-dharmam". "trayī-dharmam" will, refers
to, in the previous verse, the word was used, "trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ
pūta-pāpā". So, "trai-vidyā" is, you know, you know, that whi..., which is
talked about in the three Vedas. So, "trayī-dharmam" can refer to the followers
of the three Vedas. "trayī-dharmam" can also refer to those who are doing
dharma, artha, kama. So, they just get caught in dharma, artha, kama. And they
do not aspire for moksha at all. So, the, these are three levels in the three
"Puruṣārtha"s. "evaṁ trayī-dharmam anuprapannā". So, those who follow this,
"gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante". So, "gata-āgatam". That means, you know, birth and
death. So, they just go on in this. "kāma-kāmā labhante". So, "kāma-kāmā". So,
"kāma-kāmā" is interesting word. Which has come earlier, also, in the Bhagavad
Gita. So, "kāma-kāmā" is desirer of desire. Desirer of enjoyment. Desirer of
lust. You know. So, those who desire sense enjoyment. "labhante". So, they will
get. What do they get? "gatāgataṁ". They continue on cycle of birth and death.
So, Krishna has told earlier in 2.72. "na kāma-kāmī". Where He has said:

        āpūryamāṇam acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ
        samudram āpaḥ praviśanti yadvat
        tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarve
        sa śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī

So, who will get peace? One who, one whom desires come in. Like, rivers come
into ocean. But one does not get disturbed by them. You know. You know. That
person will attain pea..., peace. And not the person who is "kāma-kāmī". One who
is a desirer of desires. So, "gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante". So, here, Krishna is
telling very carefully. And very clearly that ultimately, the whole system of
demigod worship, centered on karma-kanda is futile. It may lead to some
temporary benefit in terms of enjoyment. But actually, for an intelligent
person, anything that gives a result, you know, that is less than eternal is
less intelligent. Because we all want ever-lasting happiness. And as long as we
aspire for anything other than, you know, you know, et..., eternal happiness, we
are selling ourselves short. We are cheating ourselves. We are depriving
ourselves. We are underutilising our potential. We are, you know, going for less
than the best. You know. When the best is possible for us, why should we go for
the less than the best? Also, sometimes, the best may be, you know, if we want
to take a new house. Then, we would want to take the best house. Isn't it? Now,
of course, the best house may not be affordable for us. The best house may, may,
in some way, not be convenient for us. But if we had a choice, other factors, if
they could take care of themselves. Then, we would naturally go for the best.
So, similarly, Krishna is telling over here, why not go for, you know, that you
know, we, as souls, have the capacity go, we go for the best. And the future
verses will revive, reveal how, you know, you know, you know, that, actually,
worshipping Him. And attaining eternity is not all that difficult. It is not
beyond our means. But Krishna will tell that, this process is very easy as
compared with this "trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā". As compared with this,
going this big, big, complex rituals worshipping Him. He is much easier. "patraṁ
puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ". It is much much easier. But, you know, here, Kri..., you
know, so, that Krishna will tell that. But here, the point is, that those who
get some, those who do "puṇyam". And go to heaven. They may get some results.
But ultimately, those results are temporary. And that is why one should not get
too elated. Now, today, most people may not believe so much strongly in heavens.
And may not aspire for heavens. People, when they, you know, people, if they
are in hindu culture, when somebody dies, they write below the footnote.
Svargavasi. You know. Kailasavasi. Not so many people write Vaikunthavasi. But
people write at least Sargavasi or Kailasavasi. So, they write Sargavasi. But
religious, by writing Sargavasi, it is not that that person is going to go
to Svarga. So, people may have that sentiment. Oh, yes, that person has gone to
Svarga. But the point is, going to Svarga requires, you know, doing some
"puṇyam". And when people do not do "puṇyam", they will not go to Svarga. And
even if they go to Svarga, it is not that, they are going to stay there forever.
So, even Svarga is temporary. And here, Kri..., so, here, Krishna is talking
about a trajectory that is relatively rare in this world. And it is few people
who follow it. But even that is futile. That means the path of material dharma
of "puṇyam" is, Krishna is telling, it is ultimately futile. Because it keeps
one in the cycle of birth and death. So, we see that, actually, whatever we get
is a result of our past good karma. And our past good karma is, our past good
karmic credits are like a bank account. And if somebody is doing, you know,
some, you know, somebody has got some savings. And then, that person decides to
go to a hill station. Enjoy. So, then, the person who has gone to the hill
station might be enjoying. But what is happening? The bank balance is
decreasing. With every day of enjoyment. And as the bank balance is decreasing,
decreasing, decreasing, decreasing, what is going to happen? Tuck. That, one
particular point, the bank balance will end. And then, the person will have to
fall back to material existence, you know, will fall back to normal life. There,
again, the, you know, stress. And the strain. And the struggle for existence.
And the cutthroat competition. All that will come back. So, that is just a
temporary escape. Whereas, you know, and that is not lasting. So, in contrast,
if somebody aspires for something that is lasting. That is far more intelligent.

So, like that, a person may do some "puṇyam". And go to Svarga. Now, S..., in
Svarga, people do not act to their "puṇyam" credits. Svarga is a place where
whatever "puṇyam" one has acquired, that is exhausted. So, it is like, you know,
somebody is in ocean. And we are in a part of ocean where things are very
stormy. You know. Very, very stormy. Then, we look aside. Oh, that part of the
ocean looks very peaceful. You know. I just swim to that area. I make a lot of
efforts. And I swim to that area. Now, actually, even if it is temp..., calm
right now. Is any part of the ocean going to permanently come? Waves are going
to come there. And the waves are going to toss me over there, also. So, trying
to get a better material situation is not going to work. Because ultimately,
everything in this material world is temporary. It is going to shake. Sooner or
later. So, even Svarga is not eternal. Somebody might seem to be in a very
comfortable material situation. Very wealthy. Very powerful. Very good-looking.
You know. There are, you know, there are business tycoons. Or sport stars. Or
movie stars. Who su...,, are, often, they dream in the envy of most people. But
what, you know, you know, sp..., spiritually astute person sees is that all
these people, it is like, every, all of us in material ocean. But somebody's 
situation is, you know, seated on a huge iceberg. Now, the iceberg may be cold.
But assume that the cold is not dis..., causing any discomfort. But the person
is safe from the waves and the turbulence. But as the Sun is rising, the
temperature is increasing. The iceberg is melting. Melting. Melting. Melting.
And when the iceberg melts, this person who was sitting so comfortably,
suddenly finds that, I was sitting so comfortably. Tuck. Just falls into the
ocean. So, like that, you know, all of us have some m..., you know, good karma.
Because of which, we are assuming karm..., comfortable situation. But then, that
good karma any moment may get exhausted. And tuck. We may fall back. Into the
material exis..., real world, material existence. And that is what is going to
happen to everyone. Sooner or later. Those who, you know, seem to be
comfortable, also. You know. So, those who go to heaven, it is like that for
them, also. They may temporarily in a comfortable situation. But after that,
tuck. They are going to fall back. So, that is why rather than trying for a
comfortable material situation. One should, you know, seek the comfort of the
spiritual destination. And that is what Krishna will, you know, talk about in
the next verse. And we will discuss th..., it in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
