Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=717AcOxTy7I
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=717AcOxTy7I&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_104_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_13_to_17_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=fD46_nFH0BwwjSWihfmtIYWDd5J8MTU0ODQ4ODkwNEAxNTQ4NDAyNTA0

Hare Krishna. So, for the second half of our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri
course, last Nine Chapters, we will look, we will start with a different prayer
to Lord Krishna, as the speaker of the Bhagavad Gita. I will tell this prayer.
And I will explain the meaning. And then, we will, you know, recite it at the
start of each class.

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

So, "prapanna parijataya". "parijat" is a tree whose flowers, you know, always
blossom. Their blossom never fades away. So, it is a tree which gives eternal
fragrance and sh..., shelter. So, like that, for the "prapanna". For the
surrendered soul, Krishna is the tree that gives shelter forever.

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye

"aika panaye". One of His hands. "totra vetrai". He is tak..., He takes the
stick for controlling the animals. That means that Lord who acts as a cowherd.
But now, that same Lord who is the shelter of the conditioned, of the
surrendered souls. Who is the cowherd, He has now:

        jnana mudraya krishnaya

He has now taken "jnana mudra". When He is speaking:

        gitamrita duhe namah

He is sharing the nectar of Gita with the world. So, we will start with this
prayer henceforth in our classes.

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

So, we have completed half of the Bhagavad Gita. Of the 18 Chapters. Nine
chapters are over. You know. We are in the heart of the bhakti section, still.
The Tenth Chapter begins again without any question from Krishna. You know. You
know. From Arjuna. Actually, Krishna is in a sense in ecstasy. You know. When He
is speaking the glories of bhakti, He does not need any spur from anyone. We see
even at the end of the Eighth Chapter, there is no spur. Krishna keeps speaking.
Just spontaneously. And the same happens at the start of the Tenth Chapter
itself. He is speaking about the glories of bhakti. And He presents this in a
different and mo..., more detailed perspective in this chapter. Especially with
respect to contemplating on Him through His manifestations in this world. So
that one can increase one's devotion to Him. Let us look at the overview of the
Tenth Chapter before we look at the verses. So, this is also one of the longer
chapters. It has 42 verses. So, 42 verses. Which was the longest chapter that
we have studied till now? The Second Chapter. Which had 72 verses. The longest
chapter in the Bhagavad Gita is the last chapter. 78 verses. Second longest,
longest is 72 verses. Then, after that, we were studying Third Chapter. Which
had 43 verses. You know. D..., of course, longer than that was Sixth Chapter
which had 44 verses. Third Chapter, 43 verses. And the Fifth Chapter also had,
you know, significant number of verses. That was 42. So, Tenth Chapter and Fifth
Chapter, both have 42 verses. But the longest chapter in the Bhagavad Gita is,
you know, you know, so, 78 chapt..., 78 verses, 18th Chapter. 72 verses, the
Second Chapter. 56 verses, the Eleventh Chapter which will be the chapter after
this. And then, 47 chapter..., 47 verses, Sixth Chapter. 43 verses, Third
Chapter. And 42-42 verses, this Fifth, and the, you know, not Fifth, sorry.
Fourth and the, you know, you know, Tenth Chapters. So, let us look at the Tenth
Chapter now. You know. So, no one know..., so, verses 1 to 7, no..., emphasise
the point that no one knows Krishna. Why? Because He act..., He is the source of
all. Then, 8 to 11, He is, what is famously known as the Chatur Shloki Gita. And
the theme of that is Krishna can be known only through bhakti by His grace. And
then, 12 to 18, Arjuna accepts Krishna's glories. And desires to hear more. He
asks, especially, he asks about the vibhuti of Krishna. And then, 19-42, 19-42,
Krishna describes His vibhutis how we can know Hi..., Krishna through His
vibhutis. That is the theme. So, this chapter is called vibhuti-yoga. Or as
Srila Prabhupada translates it in English as the "The Opulence of the Absolute".
You know. Now, the Seventh Chapter was the "Knowledge of the Absolute". The Ninth
Chapter was "The Most Conﬁdential Knowledge". So, "The Most Conﬁdential
Knowledge" is bhakti. And, you know, is Bhagavan. And the bhakti, by which the
Bhagavan is conquered. You know. So, now, the Tenth Chapter focuses on that same
theme of the glory of Bhagavan. So that one can actually, you know, enhance
one's bhakti. So if w..., we have a close friend. And we love that friend very
much. And then, suddenly, one day we come to know that friend is actually the
son of the Prime Minister of the, Prime Minister of the country. We will be
amazed. Oh. This friend of mine love him so, you know, love him so much. He is
such a glorious person, also. So that, when there is a combination of aishvarya
and madhurya, the affection goes to a very high level. Aishvarya-jnana means to
know how great the Lord is. Madhurya-jnana means to know how sweet the Lord is.

So, the, bovin..., both of them are there, the love goes to a much, much greater
level. It, there is a sweetness. And the greatness combined together. So, the
sweetness of the Lord has been talked about in the last chapter. When He talks
about "ananyāś cin...", how He, "yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham". "na me bhaktaḥ
praṇaśyati". "api cet ...", "api cet su-durācāro". "māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya".
Where He is talking about His love for His devotees. You know. In this chapter,
He will talk about His greatness. You know. And that enhances further our
attraction to the Lord. So, let us look at the verses now.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        bhūya eva mahā-bāho
        śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ
        yat te ’haṁ prīyamāṇāya
        vakṣyāmi hita-kāmyayā

So, "bhūya eva". "bhūya eva" means again. Certainly. "mahā-bāho", oh, very
powerful one. "śṛṇu me". Hear. "paramaṁ vacaḥ". Supreme words. "paramaṁ vacaḥ".
"yat te ’haṁ prīyamāṇāya". Because I, you are very dear. "’haṁ prīyamāṇāya". You
are dear to Me. Therefore, "vakṣyāmi". I speak. "hita-kāmyayā". Desiring your
benefit. You know. So, this is Krishna starting the chapter on a very intimate,
personal note. Now, in the previous chapter has ended with Krishna calling.
Arjuna, you devote yourself to Me. And I guarantee you will come back to Me.
That I have no doubt. So, now, Krishna is telling, I will, I will speak this
more to you. So, Krishna, when He is speaking the Bhagavad Gita, He is not
speaking like a, you know, college professor. Who is hired to teach a subject.
You know. The professor, that subject is just a tool for learning. And the
subject. And the professor does not really care much for the students. So,
Krishna is speaking a knowledge which is very dear to Him. And the s..., people
to whom He is speaking. They are also very dear to Him. So, He is saying,
"hita-kāmyayā". He, I am speaking this for your benefit. He is saying. This
knowledge will benefit you. And I love you. Krishna is telling. "prīyamāṇāya".
I, you are very dear to Me. And Krishna is telling about these words. What are
they, words? "paramaṁ vacaḥ". They are the supreme words. So, what is this
supreme knowledge? It is the knowledge of bhakti. Knowledge of the glory of
Bhagavan. Which leads to bhakti. So, supreme words. We will look again in the
Bhagavad Gita where these precise words, "paramaṁ vacaḥ" will come. But, you
know, here, when Krishna is saying, "bhūyaḥ". Again. What does again refer to?
Actually, in the previous chapter, also, He started by saying:

        rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ
        pavitram idam uttamam

He says "uttamam". Topmost. So, and the king of all knowledge. So, "par...",
similarly, what is? "rāja-vidyā". "paramaṁ vacaḥ". The king of knowledge. The
supreme words. It is similar tone. And actually, king, you know, is, you know,
you know, powerful. But then the, above the king can also be an emperor. But
Krishna is ensur..., assuring over here. "paramaṁ vacaḥ". You know. The supreme
words that I am speaking. So, in a sense, Krishna is telling, I am not going to
tell you anything new. But I am going to speak it again. Because I love you. And
I want your benefit. So, "bhūya eva". It is again, Arjuna. "śṛṇu". Hear. The
Seventh Chapter had also started with the word "śṛṇu". "tac chṛṇu".

        mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha
        yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ
        asaṁśayaṁ samagraṁ māṁ
        yathā jñāsyasi tac chṛṇu

"tac chṛṇu". Hear that. So, "śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ". Hear. So, Krishna is
drawing attention of Arjuna so that he will give hear, ears to His, this
message. So, Prabhupada explains the word Bhagavan. And then, Prabhupada makes
an important point in the purport that, you know, you know, you know:

"The more one hears about the Supreme God, the more one becomes ﬁxed in
devotional service."

And when he says, we should hear in the association of devotees. And then,
Prabhupada makes an int..., interest..., significant statement. If:

"Discourses in the society of devotees can take place only among those who are
really anxious to be in Kṛṣṇa consciousness."

It is a significant word. You know. Normally, desirous, eager to be, desirous to
be Krishna Conscious. Eager to be Krishna Conscious Prabhupada uses anxious to
be Krishna Conscious. Normally, we consider anxiety as something either
undesirable or a, something and it would, material things. Maybe, we have anxiou...,
maybe, we have anx..., you know, we are anxious about will we get a good
job or not. We will get a good spouse or not. We are anxious whether our health
will stay good or not. But how often are we anxious to be in Krishna
Consciousness? You know. When we are, you know, chanting. Are we anxious that I
have to hear the holy name? Actually, we reserve our anxiety for material
things. And we do not ha..., we are not really anxious about Krishna
Consciousness. But a devotee is anxious. Why? You know. At one lev.., w..., even
our Krishna Consciousness can be at various levels. Fear. Desire. Duty. And
love. So, at that level of fear, we may fear that, actually, what will happen to
be if I am not Krishna Conscious? Then, I will be Maya Conscious. And if I am
Maya Conscious, then I will continue on cycle of birth and death. Therefore, let
me be Krishna Conscious. I must be Krishna Conscious. That can be fear. Then,
there can be at the level of desire. Oh. I heard that in Krishna Conscioussness
there is so much happiness. So, I want that happiness. And therefore, I desire
to be Krishna Conscious. Duty. I have taken initiation. I have given my life to.
I am going to take initiation. Or I have taken initiation depending on our
situation. But I decided to practice Krishna Consciousness. You know. I am
chanting 16 rounds. I have to be Krishna Conscious now. Duty. And then, there is
love. In love, one does not want the forget the beloved. And one is constantly
anxious to remember the beloved, not just as an abstract theoretical object. But
as an object of service. When, you know, when we love someone. We are constantly
thinking about how can I please my beloved. How can I do something for my
beloved. So, even if a person is away from one's, th..., the, about the beloved,
that person will be thinking, how can I, maybe I will get some gift for, you
know, that person. Like that, a devotee is anxious to be in Krishna
Consciousness. So, i..., you know, a..., for our level, Chai..., Rupa Goswami
has said:

        Yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet

Somehow or the other be, you know, remem..., remember Krishna. So, whichever
level, we can apply for ourselves, we can apply and be Krishna Conscious. So,
Prabhupada says that, you know, you know, discourses among devotees can take
place only among those who are really anxious to be in Krishna Consciousness.
Not just anxious. Really anxious. Prabhupada says. You know. You pretend to be
eager. Yes. I am supposed to be eager. So, I will act as if I am eager. But
those who are really anxious to be in Krishna Conscious. Now, others can also
come and participate. But the Krishna Consciousness that is invoked in that will
not be very deep. And also, actually, the "bodh...", we will discuss in this
cha..., in chapter later. 

        bodhayantaḥ parasparam
        
The mutual englightenment. And the mutual upliftment. And the mutual joy that
comes about. When devotees are anxious to be Krishna Conscious. That is of a
different scale entirely. From, you know, ritualistic discussion of Krishna's,
you know, pastimes. So, here, Krishna is anxious. You know. "prīyamāṇāya".
"hita-kāmyayā". Krishna is anxious. That My devotee, and all souls are
potentially His devotees, they should not get m..., you know, lost. They should
not make wrong choices. And that is why in anxious, anxiety, Krishna is
speaking. Please understand. Please understand. This is most confi..., you know,
this is the co..., you know, highest words that I am speaking. Understand it. It
is for your benefit. I love you. So, let us look at what these words are. It is
Krishna is speaking with such intense affection.

        na me viduḥ sura-gaṇāḥ
        prabhavaṁ na maharṣayaḥ
        aham ādir hi devānāṁ
        maharṣīṇāṁ ca sarvaśaḥ

"na me viduḥ". I do not. You know. N..., I, I am not known. By whom?
"sura-gaṇāḥ". The various devatas. All the devatas. "prabhavaṁ". "prabhavaṁ" is
My origin. My origin, I and My origin are not known by the devatas. And what to
speak of devatas? Even the "maharṣayaḥ"s do not know Me. So, normally, the
devatas are in svarga. And they are themselves worshipable. And exalted for us.
But even the devatas worship the "rṣī"s. You know. Indra bows down to
"Bṛhaspati". So, the devatas are high in terms of power. But the "ṛṣi"s are high
in terms of knowledge. Renunciation. And devotion. So, in, you know, generally
renunciation here. Not all the "rṣī"s will be devotees. Some are. You know. All
of them are religious. But not all of them devotees. But Krishna is telling
that, devatas and even the "maharṣī"s do not know Me. Why? "aham ādir hi
devānāṁ". I come before them. "maharṣīṇāṁ ca sarvaśaḥ". Even all the "maharṣī"s,
they all come after Me. I come before them. You know. You know. So, Krishna is
revealing here that, you know, what He is going to speak, others do not know
about it. In fact, no one knows about Him. Because He is s...:

        sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

He is, so, cause of all causes. So, Krishna has already talked about "ādyam".

        kaviṁ purāṇam anuśāsitāram
        aṇor aṇīyāṁsam anusmared yaḥ
        sarvasya dhātāram acintya-rūpam
        āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt

That is one verse which described how the yogi meditates on the Absolute Truth
with various qualities. So, there are various other case, places where Krishna's
qualities are, you know, talked about. But, you know, there itself, you know,
you know, that is one of the very clear verses, which, till now, has described
Krishna's glories as, is talking about multiple qualities in one verse. And
there, the word was used as "purāṇam". He is old. Old. But "purāṇam". You know.
Now, He is telling. Krishna is reiterating this point and expanding it. I am
older even than devatas. And I am older than the "rṣī"s, also. Krishna has
referred to this earlier, also, in the Fourth Chapter. When He said that I gave
this knowledge to Sun God. "imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ". In 4.1. So, Krishna is coming
harking back to the same theme. And emphasising that, actually, no one knows
Him. So, this is a significant point because, of two reasons. One is, it, you
know, you know, it demonstrates how, you know, Krishna is the original person.
That even those who are considered powerful and worshipable in this world, are
also, you know, not comparable with Krishna. And Prabhupada quotes about how
from various other sources. "Brahma-saṁhitā". And other place. Where similar
themes are there. In the "Bhāgavatam", also. The same point is in:

        muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ

That, actually, by that Absolute Truth, even the suras get bewildered. And we
see in the Bha..., you know, Tenth Canto of the Srimad Bhagavatam. Brahma.
Indra. You know. M..., all of them get bewildered about Krishna. They cannot
understand Krishna. Because they think He is just simple cowherd boy. You
know. You know. You know. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada, you know,
Prabhupada writes. The Lord cannot be known by interim..., they can limit...:

"They can speculate to the limits of their imperfect senses and can reach the
opposite conclusion of impersonalism,"

"or they can imagine something by mental speculation,"

But they cannot...

"but it is not possible to understand Kṛṣṇa by such foolish speculation."

But now, Prabhupada, you know, makes an interesting point.

"The conception of God as some ruling power or as the impersonal Brahman can be
reached by persons who are in the inferior energy of the Lord, but the
Personality of Godhead cannot be conceived unless one is in the transcendental
position."

So, what is Prabhupada saying over here? Actually, we can corr..., correlate
this, you know, with the, you know, Paramatma. And the Brahman conceptions
roughly. The conception of God as some ruling power. Or as the impersonal
Brahman. So, the imp..., Paramatma is the overseer, is the controller of this
world. And the impersonal Brahman is all-pervading effulgence. So, actually,
these are two primary conceptions of God. That are present in the various
theistic traditions in the world. Yes. God is some, you know, some being, some
thing that controls the world. You know. There is some organising power. Or, you
know, you know, there is, all, all-pervading spirit. In which we have to merge.
The broad two conceptions of God. Of course, there can be many speculations. But
if we look at overall, they are two broad conceptions. Now, in most religions,
even if God is talked about as a person. But still, His personal attributes are
not talked about much. And overall, He is manifested more t..., as a power than
as a person. In the Old Testament. When, you know, you know, God rescues, you
know, the jews. How does He do it? By extraordinary displays of power. But not
even one's discord manifest Himself in person. The Moses sees a bush that is
burning. And the bush keeps burning. And burning. And burning. And burning. And
the fire never gets extinguished. And then, he understands. Oh, this is God
manifesting. Or when the je..., you know, the jews are being taken away from
Egypt. And they are trapped betw..., you know, bet..., between the egyptian
soldiers and behind. And the sea hurd. The sea parts. And that is considered an
act of God. So, God manifests primarily as power. You know. When in, you know,
practically, never is God manifested as a person. And, you know, you know, no
one, no, it is not described how God looks like. So, what Srila Prabhupada is
explaining is that generally, we may, if we speculate, then, or if we, you know,
think by ourselves, we may think of God as a, as some ruling power. Or as an
impersonal Brahman. But by our own reasoning. And our own thinking. And our own
speculation. We cannot contr..., cri..., conclusion of personality of Godhead.
Of, you know, you know, blue, black-complexioned. You know. You know.
Peacock-feather-wearing. Flute-playing. You know. Charming cowherd boy. That we
cannot come to. F..., to come to that conclusion, we need the mercy of Krishna
manifesting through His devotees. That, through the process of bhakti-yoga. So,
and one has to not just get that. But by, by getting that, one has to rise to
the transcendental position as Prabhupada mentions. Then, we can, you know, know
Him. So, after describing that I am the origin of all. I cannot be known by all.
Then, Krishna says, but still, you know, if you come to know Me, there are great
benefits available. So, first, He describes, here, in 10.3, one half of the
benefits. And 10.7 will describe the second half.

        yo mām ajam anādiṁ ca
        vetti loka-maheśvaram
        asammūḍhaḥ sa martyeṣu
        sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate

You know. You know. So, what is described? "yo mām ajam anādiṁ ca". So, first
thing is, understand that I am beyond the dimension of time. There is no
beginning. And there is no end to Me. "yo mām ajam anādiṁ ca". No beginning. No
end. Now, actually, the atma is also "ajam anādiṁ". You know. And even, Brahmaji
is also called as "ajam" sometimes. So, what is special about you? You know. He
says. "vetti loka-maheśvaram". Oh, the atma is never "loka-maheśvaram".
Brahmaji is also not "loka-maheśvaram". He may be the "maheśvaram", you know,
may be the Lord of Brahma loka. But not of all the planets. So, "vetti
loka-maheśvaram". One who is the master. The ka..., of all, all the "loka"s.
"sarva-loka-maheśvaram". Krishna has used the same phrase. "loka-maheśvaram".
Same compound word in 5.29 in the Bhagavad Gita. So, one who understands My
position. I am beyond time. And I am the controller of everyone. I am the, you
know, Supreme Being. "asammūḍhaḥ sa martyeṣu". You know. So, "asammūḍhaḥ". One,
such a person is undeluded. So, "mūḍhaḥ" is one who is deluded. "asammūḍhaḥ" is
one who is free from delusion. "sa martyeṣu". "sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate". "sa
martyeṣu". So, among the, you know, actually, all the people in this world are
"martya". All of us are meant for death, ultimately. You know. We are born with
a death sentence on our head. We cannot see the date of the death sentence. We
do not, you know, know when we are going to die. But we know we are going to
die. "sa martyeṣu". But what happens? "sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate". So, when we
come to know Krishna, what will happen is, we will become free from all sins.
Krishna has also talked about this in 4.10. "pūtā".

        bahavo jñāna-tapasā
        pūtā mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ

By knowing about Me. "pūtā". The people, many have become purified in the past.
Krishna is telling here, "sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate". How does knowledge about
Krishna purify? Actually, impurity essentially means misdirected desires. That
our desires are, you know, directed towards worldly objects. And that is, of
course, when they are sinful, you know, that is even worse. But even if our
desires are not sinful. Still, misdirected desires constitute in impurity. So,
when we come to know Krishna, you know, knowing Krishna is not just theoretical.
It is transformational. So, our heart becomes attracted to Krishna. And attra...,
being attracted to Krishna is the supremely pure desire. And as this pure desire
becomes stronger and stronger, "sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate". Then, you know, we
become free from sinful reactions. That Krishna will talk about little later.
But just knowledge of Krishna itself is purifying. Just hearing about Krishna,
you know, that itself purifies. Even if immediately, our bhakti towards Krishna
is not awakened by hearing about Him. But just hearing about Him, also, purifies
us. You know. You know. So, now, you know, Prabhupada explains in the purport
how, you know, he takes one by one the terms. He says, how can the Lord be
"ajam". He was born from "Devakī". So, he says, actually, "ajam", you know, you
know, "jatas", you know, so, actually, the s..., wor..., wherever, you know, the
"Bhāgavatam" uses the word "ajam", soon in that contex..., "janma" for the
Absolute Truth, you know, the "Bhāgavatam" uses, contextualises. For example,
in the Se..., passage, when the birth of, you know, Krishna, the "Bhāgavatam"
uses, the, thus the unborn Lord Vishnu took birth. What does that mean?
Actually, this is just a lila. The Lord is eternally the Supreme. But just for
our, for the sake of, you know, pastimes, He manifests in this world through a
particular way. Yah. Then, Prabhupada explains in the purport that "sarva-pāpaiḥ
pramucyate". He is elaborating. You know. So:

"The conception that there are things auspicious and inauspicious in the
material world is more or less a mental concoction because there is nothing
auspicious in the material world. Everything is inauspicious because the very
material nature is inauspicious. We simply imagine it to be auspicious. Real
auspiciousness depends on activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in full devotion and
service."

What does this actually mean? You know. You know.

        ... bhadrābhadra-jñāna, saba — ‘manodharma’
        ‘ei bhāla, ei manda’, — ei saba ‘bhrama’

So, actually, "Caitanya-caritāmṛta" also says the same point that, you know,
"‘ei bhāla, ei manda’". You know. This is good. This is bad. "ei saba ‘bhrama’".
You know. It is ultimately a dream. Why? Because if I dream. And I get a very
pleasant dream. I will, I get a very horr..., horrid dream. Actually, when I
wake up, neither matter. And from the state of, from the perspective of waking
up. The dream is just a dream. It is false. So, like that, whether we have good
dreams. Or bad dreams. Ultimately, it does not matter. Because the real life is
after we wake up. And waking up is the ultimate goal, you know, of life. Not to,
the goal of life is not to get a good dream. They are, goal of, the goal of life
is to wake up. Be rejuvenated. And move forward with life. So, similarly, in
the material existence, our primary goal should not be to try to just create
better situations. It is to wake up from this dream. That is why the idea that
when we are separated from Krishna, something is good. That itself is maya. In
the "Bhāgavatam", also, the same point is said. You know.

	ṛte ’rthaṁ yat pratīyeta
	na pratīyeta cātmani
	tad vidyād ātmano māyāṁ
	yathābhāso yathā tamaḥ

That if one, something appears meaningful. But if it is disconnected from
Krishna, then that actually is maya. So, maya means, when we feel something is
valuable. But f..., it is not connected with Krishna. So, same way, if we think
this is good. This is auspicious. A poor person thinks that, oh, wealth is very
auspicious. But one does not see the connection with Krishna. Then, it is not
necessarily auspicious. That wealth can become, cau..., cause the person to go
deeper into maya. So, essentially, what is auspicious is our connection with
Krishna. And to the extent, we can use things of this world, in ser...,
Krishna's service, to the extent, they can also bring actio..., auspiciousness
in our life. So, "sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate". One will become free from all sinful
reactions. Now, Prabhupada also mentions that:

"Anyone acting under the direction of the Supreme Lord is actually a sannyāsī
and a yogī, and not the man who has simply taken the dress of the sannyāsī, or a
pseudo yogī."

So, Prabhupada is explaining that, you know, actually, we do not have to
necessarily give up our activities. We can dovetail them in Krishna's service
under the guidance of a spiritual master. So, rather than thinking that, so,
this is auspicious. So, I will do it. Or this is inauspicious. I will give it
up. That is what the karma-kandis and the jnana-kandis think. The karma-kandis
think that, oh, this is "punya". I will do this. Then, I will go to Svarga. And
enjoy. And the, you know, you know, jnana-kandis think, oh, this is all bhandana
karak. It is all going to cause bondage. Therefore, I will not do it. So, rather
than thinking in terms of auspicious, inauspicious. A devotee thinks of how
can I best serve Krishna. And under the guidance of a, you know, of guru, sadhu,
shastra, devotee serves Krishna. Then, that brings ausp..., you know,
auspiciousness. So, now, you know, you know, what is happening in this chapter?
First verse, Krishna said that, this is, Kri..., I will tell you, this is, you
know, the supreme knowledge. Second verse, He says is, actually, you know, you
know, even the devatas and the "rṣī"s do not know Me. Third verse says that
actually, those who come to Me, they will become free from "papa". Now, Krishna
will describe about Himself in the next few verses. So, He is going to
emphasise, elaborate on the point of how He is, you know, the origin. He is
prior to even the "rṣī"s and devatas. He is their origin. He explains that in
this verse by describing He is, how He is the origin of everything in this
world. Even the abstract qualities. See, in this world, there are things among
things. By, by things, we can refer to non-living things as well as living
things. We can refer to people, also. So, there are things. And there are
conceptions. There are, so, there is existence at the physical level. And
existence at the subtle level. So, the qualities that are there. So, Krishna
describes that, you know, all the qua..., the various qualities that are there.
They also come from Him, only. That He describes in this verse. These two set of
verses together.

        buddhir jñānam asammohaḥ
        kṣamā satyaṁ damaḥ śamaḥ
        sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ bhavo ’bhāvo
        bhayaṁ cābhayam eva ca

        ahiṁsā samatā tuṣṭis
        tapo dānaṁ yaśo ’yaśaḥ
        bhavanti bhāvā bhūtānāṁ
        matta eva pṛthag-vidhāḥ

So, you know, "buddhir jñānam asammohaḥ". So, actually, Krishna, you know, now,
"buddhiḥ" is intelligence. Now, Prabhu..., you know, "jñānam" is knowledge. So,
now, it is interesting, Prabhupada explains the difference between intelligence
and knowledge. So, he says:

"Intelligence refers to the power to analyze things in their proper perspective,
and knowledge refers to understanding what is spirit and what is matter."

So, "jñānam" is more in terms of understanding things in their constitution.
What, this is matter. This is spirit. This is the Supreme. Prabhupada will
el..., you know, you know, actually, when Prabhupada says, knowledge refers to
understanding what is matter. And what is spirit. This is based on 13.3 in the
Bhagavad Gita. Where Krishna says that. You know.

	kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ
	yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama

So, "kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ". That knowledge, "kṣetra" refers to s...,
field. Which is matter. And "kṣetrajña" refers to the knower of the field. That
is spirit. You know. That is, so, in that, you know, spirit, there can be the
soul. As well as Supersoul. Both. So, here, Prabhupada says matter and spirit.
In other places, he says, matter, spirit, and the controller of both. That is
knowledge. So, 'M'. 'S'. 'C'. You know. Those who get an "MSC" degree means to
know matter, spirit, and controller. That is real knowledge, actually. So, that
is knowledge. You know. When we understand things in their composition. But
then, to, an, intelligence means to understand things in their interaction.
It is to analyse things in their proper perspective. That means ok, you know,
when I have to do certain things, this is more important. This is less
important. You know. So, to prioritise. To re..., rearrange. To harmonise. All
that requires not just knowledge. It requires intelligence. And that
intelligence is, you know, also coming from Krishna. And knowledge come from
Krishna. Intelligence also coming from Krishna. "asamm...". "buddhir jñānam
asammohaḥ". So, "asammohaḥ" refers to freedom from doubt. So, "mohaḥ" is doubt.
Or illus..., sorry, it is more of illusion. So, doubt, Prabhupada combines here
both. Doubt and delusion. And he calls, "asammohaḥ" is freedom from doubt and
illusion. So, that also comes from Krishna. Actually, how things work is that
ultimately, all of us have certain spectacles. With which we look at the world.
You know. Even if we do not have physical spectacles, all of us have conceptual
spectacles. Conceptual spectacles means we have brought up, we have been brought
up with cer..., you know, we came into this world with certain conditionings.
And we acquired some further conditionings while living in this world. And we
see everything accordingly. If I have red glasses, I see everything red. So,
similarly, we have certain conditionings which taint our vision. So, you know,
you know, you know, if somebody gi..., if I, I, if I am wearing glasses which
are opaque. I will not see anything. If I am wearing glasses which are
red-tainted, I will see, re..., everything red. If I am wearing glasses that
are transparent, I can see everything as it actually is. So, you know, Krishna
is telling over here that, you know, ultimately, it is I, you know, it is,
some people are free from doubt. Some people are, you know, some people are
enlightened. So, that quality of enlightenment, "matta eva pṛthag-vidhāḥ". As
the last line, "matta eva pṛthag-vidhāḥ". All these qualities come from Me. So,
it is by the grace of Krishna that we will become free from doubt. And
Prabhupada explains how, you know, you know, you know, you now, one should, you
know, you know, one should strive to become free from doubt by the cultivation
of knowledge. So, here, Prabhupada mentions that, actually, what is satya?

"Satyam, truthfulness, means that facts should be presented as they are, for the
beneﬁt of others."

And Prabhupada says:

"Facts should not be misrepresented."

And then. You know. You know. You know, Then, "Satyam", Prabhupada elaborates,
that "Satyam" does not mean necessarily that to speak that which is pleasing to
others. You know. If it is necessary to speak something that is displeasing to
others. We should be ready to do that, also. If it is necessary. So, Vidura, we
see that he spoke strongly so that he could get "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" to be detached.
So, when it is required, we should be ready to speak strongly. But we s..., we
see also that Vidura, also tried to use, you know, softer means of counsellor.
"Satyam" means not just the words that are truthful. But "Satyam" also means
that the words which take a person towards the Absolute Truth. So, we spea...,
we try to speak words in such a way that they take people towards Krishna.
"buddhir jñānam asammohaḥ". Then, "kṣamā satyaṁ damaḥ śamaḥ". So, these are
various qualities. Prabhupada elaborates on all of them in his purports. And we
can read them. I will not go into all of them here. "kṣamā" is, you know,
Prabhupada translates here as forgiveness. So, you know, you know, "damaḥ
śamaḥ" is sense control and mind control. Controller of the senses. Controller
of the mind. So, this "damaḥ" and "śamaḥ" will come again in the qualities of a
brahmana in the 18th Chapter, also. So, what this refers to is, "damaḥ" means
we do not engage in bad activities. Sensual activities. You know. So, that is
good. We do not fall for sense gratification. But better still is that, we do
not, you know, let the mind itself get agitated. You know. The mind is not
agitated. Then, it is even better. Then, with, there is no question of falling
for sense gratification. So, a devotee should, you know, be best as to have the
mind in the control. If not, then, at least, at the physical level, we avoid,
you know, giving into sense gratification. Now, it is interesting. "sukhaṁ
duḥkhaṁ bhavo ’bhāvo". So, till now, Krishna has talked about positive
qualities. In terms of, say, freedom from illus..., from illusion. Forgiveness.
Truthfulness. But now, He says, actually, even happiness and distress. And
"bhavaḥ" and "abhāvaḥ". That means birth and death. Then, "bhayaṁ cābhayam".
So, now, He starts in Ten point, you know, 4C and D. He talks about the
dualities that are, characterise this world. And He use three dualities. You
know. You know. First is, you know, happiness and distress. Then, is, life,
birth and death. And then, fear and fearlessness. He says, they also come from
Me. Now, normally, it is easy to understand that the, when, when we, Krishna
says, the good comes from Me. So, if Krishna is saying that even, you know,
misery comes from Me. Or when Krishna says that even the fear comes from Me.
What does it actually mean? It simply means that Krishna's influence pervades
all of existence. That whatever we are experiencing in life, ultimately, it
comes from Krishna. And, you know, you know, it is not that Krishna sends fear
our way. Actually, based on our karma, whatever reactions we get, you know, we
are meant to get, Krishna sends them to us. And we also make choices. But
actually nothing exists that is outside the jurisdiction of Krishna. So, the
sun, you know, the standard example is that the sun does not create
shadows. But when a person tuns..., you know, turns away from the sun, then,
person experiences shadows. So, do the shadows come from the sun? In...,
indirectly, yes. Directly, no. Sun does not send out shadows. But if the sun
were not there, there will be no shadows, also. So, the dualities of this world
are coming from Krishna in the sense that He has made the overall arrangement,
you know, within which this duality is function. Now, Krishna wants to give us
the supreme stability and ecstasy that is beyond the dualities. But how do we,
how will we reach that? We will reach that when we take shelter of Krishna. But
till then, we understand that whatever we are experiencing in this world,
ultimately, it is an arrangement of Krishna. It is coming from Krishna.
Specifically, it may come to us because of our particular karmic reactions. But
it is coming from Krishna. As we read in the Seventh Chapter, Prabhupada says in
the purport, nothing is outside the jurisdiction of Krishna Consciousness. You
know. You know. You know. You know. And then, Prabhupada says, what is misuse of
thinking power?

"One should not spend one’s time pondering over earning money. That is a misuse
of the thinking power."

So, you know, the min..., you know:

"The mind should be used to understand the prime necessity of human beings,"

So, you know, you know, we, mon..., we, do not we have to earn money? For a
living, yes. Dharma. Artha. Kama. Moksha. Artha is one of the "Puruṣārtha"s. It
is important part of life. But the point here is, one should not be obsessed
with that. We will talk, see the 16th Chapter how obsession with, you know,
earning money.

        idam adya mayā labdham
        imaṁ prāpsye manoratham
        
That is the charateristic of the demoniac people. So, you know, a devotee,
whatever is required. A devotee will put the amount of thought necessary. And
the amount of time necessary for earning a livelihood. But that is not the
default thought of a devotee. You know. Prime necessity of our life is to revive
our spiritual connection with Krishna. To develop love for Krishna. And the mind
should be used primarily for that. And, you know, you know, that Prabhupada
explains "sukhaṁ" and "duḥkhaṁ" here from a devotional perspective. He says
that, you know, you know, you know, that which is painful. So, a devotee should
understand, what is painful? Not just that which gives me physical pain. But
that which takes me away from Krishna, that is painful. And I should avoid that.
And that which is favorable, I should accept that. And then, Prabhupada
explains m..., each of these qualities, is, from quite a transcendental
perspective. So, "Ahiṁsā":

"Ahiṁsā, nonviolence, means that one should not do anything which will put
others into misery or confusion."

So, misery is psychological. Or physical. Confusion is intellectual. So, when we
mislead people, that is also a form of "Ahiṁsā". And Prabhupada explains that,
therefore, the best form of nonviolence is to share Krishna Consciousness with
them. Prabhupada concludes this with, purport with the:

"That which furthers the future spiritual happiness of the people in general is
called nonviolence."

So, that is nonviolence means to help people practice Krishna Consciousness. And
then, Prabhupada similarly explains each of these characteristics, you can read
all of them. Now, after this, after describing all these qualities, you know,
you know, Prabhupada concludes:

"Of whatever we ﬁnd, good or bad, the origin is Kṛṣṇa. Nothing can manifest
itself in this material world which is not in Kṛṣṇa. That is knowledge; although
we know that things are differently situated, we should realize that everything
ﬂows from Kṛṣṇa."

So, the important point is here to see the connectedness of creation. With
Krishna. So, with the, with the, a devotee does not abstract, you know, does
not, you know, unintelligently worship everything as Krishna. But devotee sees
the connectedness of everything with Krishna. And then, accepts those things
which enable that devotee to go closer to Krishna. So, after describing this,
now, Krishna will describe how, so, He has described with the qualities, how
they come from Him. Now, He describes other people. How the inhabitants of the
universe, ultimately, come from Him. That He describes in next verse. So:

        maharṣayaḥ sapta pūrve
        catvāro manavas tathā
        mad-bhāvā mānasā jātā
        yeṣāṁ loka imāḥ prajāḥ

You know. You know. So, He describes the word "maharṣayaḥ sapta pūrve". So,
there is "sapta", "rṣi". His order. Seven great sages. And then, you know, prior
to them, you know, prior to them are the "catvāro manavas tathā". "catvāro" is
the four other great sages. Then, "manavaḥ", you know, the Manus. "mad-bhāvā
mānasā jātā". They come from Me, from the mind. "yeṣāṁ loka imāḥ prajāḥ". And
from them, all the, you know, universe has become populated. You know. You know.
So, here, you know, Prabhupada explains who are the, who are these referring to?
The "sapta", "rṣi"s? So, in the "Bhāg...", when we study the Bhakti Vaibhava
course, we study the whole, in detail, the, how the various living beings
originate. But the important here is f..., that Krishna is establishing how
ultimately everyone comes from Him. Ultimately, everyone comes from Him. So, you
know, you know, you know, you know, you know, actually speaking, the whole
uni..., everybody in the universe, you know, we know Brahmaji is the first
being. And then, from Brahmaji comes the, the four kumaras. So, that is
"catvāro". The four great sages. And then, after that, there were various people
that were born. So, Brahmaji, he gave birth to Rudra. Rudra was not suited to,
you know, you know, Rudra, you know, if the demons and other ghostly beings
started coming from him. So, he realised that these cannot help me to populate.
So, he told, Rudra, Brahmaji told Rudra to go away and do tapasya. And then, he
begot other people. So, he begot the m..., you know, the Seven sages. Then, he
begot Manu. And then, Manu's daughters were married to the some of the sages.
And that is how the universes eventually pro..., you know, became populated. So,
basically, you know, more important than the technical specifics is the general
principle over here. The sp..., general principle is, everyone comes from
Krishna. So, Prabhupada writes here that this is:

"genealogical synopsis of the universal population"

Genealogy. Genealogy refers to the study of, you know, races. And origins of the
ancestors. That the studying of how, who has been born from whom. That
genealogy. You know. We will see that in the "Bhāgavatam", especially in the
Eighth and Ninth Cantos. Although throughout the "Bhāgavatam", also at other
places, the genealogy is often talked about. Wherein how this person was
born from this. And this. And this. And ultimately, how Lord Rama was born in
the "Raghuvamsha". How Krishna is born in, in the "Yaduvamsha". Like that. The
ancestors are also described. So, here, Krishna is giving that same genealogical
synopsis. You know. Now, He is, important is that He is, you know, sha...,
explaining it from a transcendental origin perspective. That people may think,
oh, I know my ancestor, twenty generations ago, my ancestor was the king of, of
South India. We may say. We are very proud of that, say. Yes, that may be so. But
ultimately, if we want to be proud of our ancestors. You know. We should go all
way back to the root. Many people have the fascination of going back to the
roots. Let us go back to my roots. But actually, if we want to go back to the
roots, our original roots are not material. They are not even ancestral. They
are spiritual. So, if we want to go back to the roots. We have to go back all
the way back through ancestors to Krishna. To who lives this spiritual level of
reality. So, Krishna is taking our, you know, fascination, those who f..., who
have fascination. Our fascination further roots all the way back to the original
root. So, the, in fact, the only root. We discussed, "bījam avyayam" is the
imperishable seed. So, what He has explained, what He has stated in abstract,
that I am the imperishable seed of all of existence. He has stated, stated that
twice in this till now in Bhagavad Gita. Now, He is explaining it in a little
more detail. This is how from Me, everyone comes. So, you know, you know, the
"Bhāgavatam" elaborates this theme. And here, Krishna is not going into
specifics. He is giving us the principle. The principle is that He is the source
of everything. And now, let us go forward. Now, Krishna tells what will happen.

        etāṁ vibhūtiṁ yogaṁ ca
        mama yo vetti tattvataḥ
        so ’vikalpena yogena
        yujyate nātra saṁśayaḥ

So, "etāṁ vibhūtiṁ yogaṁ ca". One who understand this "vibhūtiṁ" of Mine. What
is the "vibhūtiṁ"? That I am the source of all qualities. And I am the source of
all things. All people. "vibhūtiṁ yogaṁ ca". So, Pra..., you know, you know,
Prabhupada again translates "yogaṁ" over here as mystic power. Prabhupada has,
used this translation for "yogaṁ" in se..., 9.5. When He said:

        paśya me yogam aiśvaram

Just behold My mystic p..., opulence. So, mystic power. And mystic opulence. So,
"et...", this "vibhūtiṁ" and "yogaṁ". One who understands this. "mama yo vetti
tattvataḥ". You know. "tattvataḥ". Where has this word come earlier in the
Bhagavad Gita? It has come most famously in 4.9.

        janma karma ca me divyam
        evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

Do know Me in truth. Krishna is saying. So, then, what happens to those people?
He says, they will come back to Me. So, similarly, He is saying, you know, He is
giving a result before that. Which will lead to that. What will happen? "so
’vikalpena yogena". You know. So, with "avikalpena". "vikalpena" means
diversion. Division. Alternative. Like that. "avikalpena". Actually, there is no
other alternative. No other distraction. Or division. With con..., con..., with
no distract. Concentration. Once we understand, actually, Krishna is the source
of everything good. Krishna is the one from, one, whom, for whom I have been
seeing or searching all the time. Whatever attracts Me to anyone in this world,
ultimately, I am attracted to Krishna. When I understand this. And "so
’vikalpena yogena". So, here, we see that the word "yogaṁ" is used in the sense
of both meanings in the same verse. You know, first, do you remember we discussed the
two meanings of the word "yogaṁ"? "yogaṁ" essentially means connection. But
connection can happen in two ways. When we do sadhana. And strive for a
connection with Krishna. And another way is that when Krishna reveals His glory.
So that it, it facilitates us. It helps us in developing the connection with
Him. So, here, the first point is, Krishna is telling, "mama", "yogaṁ". "etāṁ
vibhūtiṁ yogaṁ ca". One who understand this "yogaṁ". So, this, when Krishna is
telling. His power. What is His power? He is the source of everyone. His glory
is so great. That even the devatas, even the "maharṣi"s do not know about Him.
This, Krishna has, telling. This is my opulence. And this is my power. "vibhūtiṁ"
and "yogaṁ". So, Krishna is revealing this so that we can increase our
attraction to Him. You know. So, one who, so, that is the wo..., meaning in
terms of, that is the, you know, we, word "yogaṁ used in terms of revelation.
Revelation that facilitates connection. And in, "yogaṁ" can also refer to
spiritual practice. It can be meditation. It can be contemplation. It can be
action. It can be devotional service. Whichever yoga. It can be jnana-yoga.
Dhyana-yoga. Karma-yoga. Bhakti-yoga. Which facilitates connection. So, Krishna
is saying "so ’vikalpena yogena". That, you know, without considering any
alternative, one will fix wholeheartedly in Krishna. One, one, sorry, the,
wholeheartedly in Krishna. "’vikalpena yogena yujyate". One will become engaged
in the, say, "nātra saṁśayaḥ". Of this, there is no doubt. There is no doubt of
this. Why there is no doubt? Because once one understands Krishna. Then, one
understands that, actually, there is no reality beyond Krishna. I should just
surrender wholeheartedly to Krishna. So, actually, there are two emphasising
words here. "avikalpena". And "na". "saṁ...", "na". "atra". "saṁśayaḥ". So, both
are saying nothing else. Like we have the famous "harer nāma" verse. "nāsty eva
nāsty eva nāsty eva". No other way. No other way. No other way. Like that.
"avikalpena". And then, "asaṁśayaḥ", "na", " saṁśayaḥ". So, same point. This is
what will happen. So, actually, knowledge of Krishna will increase our
attraction for Krishna. You know. And Krishna is telling that by understanding
more and more about Him. Our mind will become fixed. We will be engaged in such
a way that nothing will distract us from Krishna. We will become fixed in
Krishna. So, here, essentially, Krishna is saying the same theme in the first
part as in 9.3. In 9.3, He says, you know, one who knows my position. And here,
also, Krishna says. My position. But He has revealed more of His glory, in 4 to,
verses 4 to 6. So, there, in 9.3, He said, by knowing My, about Me:

        sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate

One will become free from sinful reac..., you know, one, from sins. But here,
Krishna is saying something more. Actually, freedom from sins is not the
perfection of life. You know. The perfection of life is, you know, spontaneous
devotion to Krishna. And Krishna says, that is what will happen to it. "so
’vikalpena yogena". Wholeheartedly will engage in devotional service. Actually,
if we engage wholeheartedly, undistractedly, you know, you know, doubt, without
any doubts, you know, unhesitantly in devotional service, then that sort of
devotional service will itself lead to perfection. It will lead to the supreme
perfection of, of pure devotion. And that pure devotion will take us back to
Krishna. For an eternal life of ecstasy. So, therefore, this itself is a great
blessing. When we are able to fix our mind on Krishna wholeheartedly. So, we may
wonder. Is this the exaggeration? Krishna has not talked much. Not saying that I
am the source of all qualities. And source of all people. How just knowing this
can lead to such an effect? You know. Actually, when we hear this, for us, these
are just passing verses that we hear once. But if we contemplate on them, they
are quite, you know, serious, you know, assertions with profound consequences on
our world view. And on our life mission. You know. If we understand that Krishna
is my source, too. Krishna is the source of everyone. And Krishna is my source,
too. Krishna is the source of everything. So, Krishna is not just some
hystorical person who existed five thousand years ago. Nor He is just a hindu
God. He is actually the same Absolute Truth who is talked about by the great
sages and saints throughout history across all of, you know, the various
religious traditions. So, He is that Supreme Lord. And He is manif...,
He mani..., He reveals Himself in the highest reality in such an endearing
way. Then, how can one not fall in love with such a person? Naturally, one will
fall in love with such a person. So, that is what, "so ’vikalpena yogena". When
we ponder on this. "tattvataḥ". When we understand in truth. Then, we will fall
in love with Krishna. And actually, if we are not falling in love with Krishna,
then that, that means we have not yet understood the truth, only, properly. Now,
so, of course, that does not mean that, we have not understood it at all. We
have some understanding of it. But we have to deepen our understanding. So, you
know, you know, now, when Krishna has talked earlier about, you know, various
qualities:

        ahiṁsā samatā tuṣṭis
        tapo dānaṁ yaśo ’yaśaḥ

So, when He has talked about this, the important point in talking about these
qualities is that, actually, you know, whatever good we see, that also comes
from Krishna. Whatever bad we see, that also comes from Krishna. When we
understand this, actually, Krishna is the source of everything. So, let me fix
the mind on Kri..., Him, only. We become, you know, f..., inspired towards that.
So, Prabhupada writes in the purport:

"The highest summit of spiritual perfection is knowledge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead."

So, you know, you know, generally, the mayavadis think that, you know, that
personality of Godhead is not, is not, knowledge of personality of Godhead is
not the summit. They think it is a ladder. And knowledge of impersonal Brahman
is the summit. But Krishna is saying, you know, no. Actually, one who knows Me,
in this way, as the sour..., as the person who is the sour..., as a
transcendental person who is the source of everything and everyone. One who
understand this, that person fixes the mind on Me. So, again, Krishna is not
talking about anything unborn within Him. So, Prabhupada, based upon Him,
further that, all religions talk about the greatness of God. But the specifics
that elaborate on the greatness of God, that are present in the Vedic tradition.
We will see this, also, in the Eleventh Chapter when Krishna will descr..., you
know, will exhibit the Virata rupa. It is extraordinary. So, you know, you know,
you know, you know, you know:

"When one factually knows the opulences of the Supreme, there is no alternative
but to surrender to Him."

Why no alternative? It is not that our free will is taken away. But that,
actually, we understand, this is, this is, this is the best thing for me.
Intellectually. Emotionally. Spiritually. In all ways, you know, we understand
that, actually, there is, this is the best thing for me. So, alternatives are
there. But the alternatives lose their appeal. The alternatives lose their
appeal. When we understand, such a, you know, God is such a wonderful all, you
know, all-attractive person. And that wonderful all-attractive person loves Me.
He understand this. Then, how can we not love Him? You know. It is just natural
that we will fall in love with Him. So, at the very least, you know, we should
give ourselves, we should make God, peop..., you know, at least, one of the
alternatives on people's, you know, people's menu cards. You know. For most
people, they do not know anything about God at all. You know. For them, God is
just some image in a temple. Or some conception that some people believe in.
They are just caught up in material things. But actually, beginning by just
telling people a little bit about God. So, in their menu card, at least one
alternative is God. Ok. Let me try God out. But when we come to Krishna
Consciousness. Krishna Consciousness is much more than trying God out. Actually,
we understand that everything else that I have tried out that has failed me. And
whatever I have not tried out, also, there is no need to try that out. Because
this is tried and tested.

        bahavo jñāna-tapasā

Many others have pra..., practiced in the path. And many others have become
puriied and liberated by the knowledge of Krishna. So, Prabhupada explains:

"All this particular knowledge is required in order to increase one’s interest
in the loving devotional service of the Lord."

Actually, we need this knowledge so that we can increase our devotion. So, how
does, you know, normally, when we say, jnana does not lead to bhakti? That
refers to personal jnana. But when we talk about, you know, jnana which is about
Krishna. That jnana, or, you know, of Krishna increases our bhakti. Because when
we understand how great He is. How wonderful He is. Then, naturally, that
attracts us more to Him. And Prabhupada says, one should not neglect this
knowledge.

        siddhānta baliyā citte nā kara alasa
        ihā ha-ite kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa

Krishna Dasa Kaviraja Goswami described in "Caitanya-caritāmṛta" that do not
think that, oh, this is all philosophy. Do not need for me to know this. Now, do
not be lazy about it, saying like this. Why? "ihā ha-ite". Because by
understanding thus the philosophy, the glories of Krishna, what will happen? You
know. "kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa". The mind will become wholeheartedly fixed on
Krishna. You know. Determinedly fixed on Krishna. So, in the next class, we will
discuss how this knowledge can be acquired through, in the form of Chatur Shloki
Bhagavad Gita.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
