Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YSOXcjxlqd4
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_113_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_11_Text_36_to_50_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=bjLghsP1KTCJ8xfrwi3RqMagcY98MTU0ODQ4OTM1MEAxNTQ4NDAyOTUw&v=YSOXcjxlqd4&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now going to start with Arjuna's prayers. So, until now, we started with
Arjuna's request. Then, Krishna's description of the universal form. Arjuna's
request was verses 1 to 4. Verses 5 to 8 was Krishna's description of the form
that He was going to reveal. Then, 9 to 14 was "Sañjaya"'s description of the
form that was being shown. Then, 15 to 31 was Arjuna's description of what he
was seeing. We had discussed the division within that, also. Which concluded
with an inquiry. A reverential, fearful inquiry. Who are You? And then, in the
last class, we discussed how, you know, the Lord responded, 32 to 35. He told
him how, you know, become My instrument, essentially. Vi..., your victory is
guaranteed. Act on My behalf. And then, you know, the camera moves backwards.
And now, "Sañjaya" speaks one verse. That now, you know, you know, Kri...,
Arjuna while trembling in fear is speaking verses. So, Arjuna speaks prayers to
the "viśva-rūpa". You know. Eleven prayers. Let us loo..., have an overview of
that. Before we go into those prayers. So, 36 to 46 are the prayers. So, thr...,
first three are glorification. 36 to 38. Then, next two, 39 to 40 are the
offering of obeisances. Then, 41 to 44 is apology. He is begging the Lord.
Forgive me for taking You for granted. For being so intimate to You. And then,
last two, 45 to 46 are request. These are request actually to show the "saumya
rupa". To first show the chaturbhuja rupa. And then, the "dibuja rupa". The
saum..., you know, so, let us look at these one by one. Let us go to 36:

        arjuna uvāca

        sthāne hṛṣīkeśa tava prakīrtyā
        jagat prahṛṣyaty anurajyate ca
        rakṣāṁsi bhītāni diśo dravanti
        sarve namasyanti ca siddha-saṅghāḥ

So, "sthāne hṛṣīkeśa". So, it is rightly done that. "sthāne" means, and ju...,
the "sthāne" means position. So, "sthāne" means at the right position. So, it is
rightly done. Everything is rightly done. What has happened? "hṛṣīkeśa". Oh,
Lord. You are the controller of the senses. So, earlier, Arjuna had not been
able to place what is this particular form? You know. So, the, earlier, we
discussed, he could not identify the "kalarupa". But now, that he has identified
the "kalarupa". Then, he is, you know, now, knowing, ok, this is the same
Vishnu. This is the same Supreme Lord. So, now, he is using familiar describers,
also. "hṛṣīkeśa". "sthāne hṛṣīkeśa tava prakīrtyā". Your glories. What happens
when Your glories are spoken? "jagat prahṛṣyaty anurajyate ca". That the whole
world becomes, whole universe becomes delighted. "jagat prahṛṣyaty". "anurajyate
ca". So, you know, "pra...", you know, "anurajyate". So, actually, two things
happen when we glorify the Lord. We become joyful. And we become attached to the
Lord. And actually, wha..., you know, when we glorify the Lord, these two
results come out naturally. Our joy increases. And our attraction to Him
inclea..., increases. And then, on the other hand, so, this is for those who are
devotionally inclined. Those who are pious-minded. But then, you know, "rakṣāṁsi
bhītāni diśo dravanti". But those who are de..., demoniac-minded. Those who are
"rākṣasa"s. "bhītāni". "bhītāni" means fearfully. "diśo dravanti". They run
away. "dravanti" is to flee. They run away in vari..., di..., you know,
directions. Various directions. And then, "sarve namasyanti ca siddha-saṅghāḥ".
And all the "siddha"s, they are offering obeisances to You. And all this is
rightly done. So, that means, the general people become delighted when the Lord,
you know, Lord's glories are sung. And the demons flee. And the, those who are
saintly, they start pray..., they start offering obeisances. And welcoming the
Lord. And, you know, respect, oh, showing respects to the Lord. So, all this is
appropriately done. Now, what is the point of this verse coming just after this?
You know. Just after the response of the "viśva-rūpa". So, now, Arjuna is able
to make sense of what he had seen. You know. Actually, he saw initially that
actually everybody was "pravasan...", "pravyathitāntar-ātmā". That all the three
"loka-trayaṁ". "pravyathitās tathāham". The word "pravyathitās" is used twice in
the, you know, series of verses from 15 to 31. 20th. And again, I think, 24th
verse. So, "pravyathitaṁ". Disturbed. Disturbed. So, actually, what, he is now
thinking back. And he is saying, actually, when the Lord appears, what happens?
They are typical reactions. Now, those typical reactions may not happen when the
Lord appears in a very fearsome form. So, but in general, this is what happens.
And he says, this, the, the demoniac become fearful. The jub..., you know, the,
the general people become jubilant. And they, series start offering prayers.
This is all "sthāne". This is all rightly done. Actually, there are, in, in the
Vedic, you know, culture, there are different kinds of raksha mantras. So, you
know, you know, there are mantras to protect oneself from bad omens. From ghosts.
Similarly, there are mant..., mantras to protect oneself, protecting oneself
from "rākṣasa"s. So, this verse is a part of the "rākṣasa" raksha mantras. So,
that this is meant to, that, that by speaking this verse, the "rākṣasa"s, you
know, fly. Go away. Then, you know, he further says in the next verse. Every...,
now, everybody is glorifying. So, he says, why should they not glorify? Because
You are ultimately, You are supremely glorious.

        kasmāc ca te na nameran mahātman
        garīyase brahmaṇo ’py ādi-kartre
        ananta deveśa jagan-nivāsa
        tvam akṣaraṁ sad-asat tat paraṁ yat

So, "kasmāc ca te na". "kasmāc". Why should they not? "nameran mahātman".
"nameran" means offer obeisances. "mahātman". Oh, Supreme Lord. Why should they
not offer obeisances to You? Why? "brahmaṇo ’py". "garīyase brahmaṇo ’py
ādi-kartre". So, "garīyase". You are greater than "brahmaṇo". So, the word
"brahmaṇaḥ", you know, we have to be careful at what, what it means at different
places. It can refer to the Brahmanas. It can refer to the Brahman. Brahman. The
brahmayoti. Or it can refer to Brahmaji. So, here, it refers to Brahmaji.
"brahmaṇo ’py ādi-kartre". So, actually, You are greater than "Brahmā", also.
Because "Brahmā" is considered to be a creator. But You are greater than
"Brahmā". You are the Supreme Creator. You are the "ādi-kartre". And "ananta
deveśa jagan-nivāsa". You are "ananta". You are unlimited. You are "deveśa". So,
You are the Lord. You know. The, the controller of all the Gods. Not only are
the controller of the all Gods. But You are the shelter of the whole universe.
And then, he says, "tvam akṣaraṁ sad-asat tat paraṁ yat". "tvam akṣaraṁ". You
are "akṣaraṁ". You are infallible. You are imperishable. "sad-asat tat paraṁ
yat". So, in this world, there are causes and effects. So, causes produce
effects. And effects, you know, become causes for future chain of effects. And
like that, this whole material existence goes on in a chain. But he says, You
are transcendental to all this. You are not mixed up in all this. "tvam akṣaraṁ
sad-asat tat paraṁ yat". You are beyond all this. So, you know, in the first
verse, he said, ok, whatever reactions I am seeing, they are appropriate. And
this verse, he says, yes, You are supremely worshipable. Even for Brahmaji. You
are the shelter of the whole universe. And You are the, transcendental to the
universe. Then, after describing this, he further goes and says. You know. So,
what is happening here? After the, you know, you know, the glor..., first, there
is glorification going on. After the glorification, there will be obeisances
offered. So, we will see now, the obeisances will begin from the next verse.
36-38, three verses are the verses of, you know, glorification.

        tvam ādi-devaḥ puruṣaḥ purāṇas
        tvam asya viśvasya paraṁ nidhānam
        vettāsi vedyaṁ ca paraṁ ca dhāma
        tvayā tataṁ viśvam ananta-rūpa

So, "tvam ādi-devaḥ". You are the original God. "puruṣaḥ purāṇas". You are the
original primeval person. "tvam a...", you know, "tvam asya viśvasya paraṁ
nidhānam". You are the shelter of the whole universe. Supreme shelter. "vettāsi
vedyaṁ ca paraṁ ca dhāma". So, "vettāsi vedyaṁ ca". "vettāsi" means You are the
knower. And You are the knowa..., knowable. You are the person who knows
everything. And You are the person, You have to be known by everyone. You know.
This is interesting relationship. That actually, everything about everyone,
Krishna knows. Because He is omniscient. He is present as Supersoul in the
heart. And "abhijñaḥ svarāṭ".

        ’nvayād itarataś cārtheṣv abhijñaḥ svarāṭ

He is directly and indirectly cognizant of everything. So, now, when He is
cognizant of everything directly, what does it imply? It implies that He knows
everything. So, the, "vett...", "vettāsi". So, He is, knows everything. At the
same time, you know, we can know so many things in this world. You know. We can
know about, we can take a mic in front of us. And, you know, somebody can do a
PhD thesis in the mic itself. You know. What should be the composition of the
mic. What should be the angular alignment of the mic. What should be the, you
know, resonance or, what should be the mic's, you know, strength. And so many
things we can, parameters, we can use to try to understand how the ideal mic
should be. And all this knowledge can be useful. But it is not ultimate
knowledge. It is not the knowledge that can grant us, you know, supreme
happiness. It cannot take us out of material existence. So, the only:

        tam eva viditvāti mṛtyum eti
        nānyaḥ panthā vidyate ’yanāya

So, in the Shrutis, it is, says, "tam eva viditvān". Only by know Him, knowing
Him, "āti mṛtyum eti". One goes beyond "mṛtyum". Otherwise, "nānyaḥ panthā
vidyate ’yanāya". Otherwise, there is no path to go, no way to go beyond this.
So, therefore, what happens? You know. So, he is saying, "vettāsi vedyaṁ ca".
So, You are the supreme object to be known. Actually speaking, many objects can
mean, mean, used, can be made objects of knowledge. But none of those know...,
objects of knowledge can benefit us as completely as knowing about Krishna.
"paraṁ ca dhāma". And You are the supreme shelter. And then, "tvayā tataṁ viśvam
ananta-rūpa". "tvayā tataṁ". And You have manifested. By You, the whole universe
is pervaded. "tvayā tataṁ viśvam ananta-rūpa". "tataṁ" is pervaded. "viśvam".
So, You are the, having "ananta-rūpa". It is, so, here, now, it is interesting,
you know, the "viśva-rūpa". So, what does it actually mean? Is that universe
God? The universe is the form of God. So, what does it mean? Is it like this Lord
is the soul? And the universe, Lord is a soul? And the universe is the body of
the Lord? Or what does it mean? So, "tvayā tataṁ viśvam ananta-rūpa". So, it
says "tvayā". By You, the whole universe is pervaded. But then, after then, he
says, "viśva-rūpa". So, actually, "viśvam" is Your "rūpa". So, actually, this
is, in this revelation, the, it is mystical. Is it that the Lord is not just the
soul within the universe? That He is always there. You know. The Supersoul who
is present in our body. That is "Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu". Similarly, the
"Garbhodakaśāyī Vishnu", you know, the Supersoul in the whole universe.
Supersoul of the whole universe. That is always true. But in this particular
form, it is not just that the Lord is pervading everything as the Supersoul.
That is also, that definitely true. "tvayā tataṁ viśvam ananta-rūpa". Yes. You
have pervaded the universe. But then, You are manifesting as this "ananta-rūpa",
also. You are manifesting as this unlimited form. Unlimited form. And then, he
de..., goes on to describe, now, he starts offering obeisances. So, in first
three verses were glorification. Praise. Now, there are obeisances.

        vāyur yamo ’gnir varuṇaḥ śaśāṅkaḥ
        prajāpatis tvaṁ prapitāmahaś ca
        namo namas te ’stu sahasra-kṛtvaḥ
        punaś ca bhūyo ’pi namo namas te

So, "vāyur yamo ’gnir". So, now, here, you know, he is controlling, he is
conveying that, actually, whatever are the manifestations of power in this
world. Ultimately, they are the Supreme Lord. That does not mean that there is
an absolute oneness. But there is a, you know, there is a connection in the
sense that those are the vibhutis of the Lord. And the Lord's power is
manifested through them. So, "vāyur yamo ’gnir". So, wind. Then, you know,
"yamaḥ" is the controller. It can refer to Yamaraja. "’gnir". Fire. "varuṇaḥ
śaśāṅkaḥ". The God of water. Moon. "prajāpatis tvaṁ prapitāmahaś ca". So,
"prajāpatis" refers to, you know, Prabhupada translates it "Brahmā". And the
great-grandfather. So, here, you know, now, he says "namo namas te ’stu
sahasra-kṛtvaḥ". Therefore, "sahasra-kṛtvaḥ". I offer obeisances many, many
times to You. "sahasra-kṛtvaḥ". And after offering obeisances to You again and
again, you know, "sata" is hundred. "sahasra" is thousands. So, thousands of
obeisances are offered to You. And then, because You, all these devatas are
worshipable. But You are the source of the power. And the glory of all the
devatas. So, if you offer obeisances once, twice, thrice to the many devatas. To
the, all the different devatas. If You alone, You are manifested one time, then
we offer obeisances to You, also. So many times. "sahasra-kṛtvaḥ". And even that
is not enough. Therefore, "punaś ca bhūyo ’pi namo namas te". I offer You
obeisances thousands of times. And yet again, I offer You obeisances. And now,
we will describe, normally, when we go to a temple, you know, we will offer
obeisances to the deities. But here, when the, he is offering obeisances
"viśva-rūpa". Where does he offer obeisances? The "viśva-rūpa" is everywhere. If
you look at the front. You will look at the back. You will look at the right.
You will look at the left. So, everywhere, "viśva-rūpa" is there. So, where do
you offer obeisances? So, therefore, he will say in the verse. I offer
obeisances from the front. From the back. From lef..., from all directions, I
offer You obeisances. That is the next ver..., pra..., verse in the prayers.

        namaḥ purastād atha pṛṣṭhatas te
        namo ’stu te sarvata eva sarva
        ananta-vīryāmita-vikramas tvaṁ
        sarvaṁ samāpnoṣi tato ’si sarvaḥ

"namaḥ purastād". "namaḥ purastād" means from the front. "atha pṛṣṭhatas te".
From behind. "atha". So, from front, from behind, I offer obeisances. "namaḥ
purastād atha pṛṣṭhatas te". "namo ’stu te sarvata eva sarva". "namo ’stu te
sarvata". I offer obeisances from all directions to You.
"ananta-vīryāmita-vikramas tvaṁ". "ananta-vīryā". "ananta-vīryā" is Your
strength is unlimited. "amita-vikramaḥ". And "vikramaḥ" is force. The force by
which wonderful things are done. Your force is "amita". It is unlimited.
"āmita-vikramas tvaṁ". So, basically, You are incredibly power. Therefore, I
offer You obeisan..., I offer obeisances from front. From back. From all
directions. Because You are everywhere right now. And "sarvaṁ samāpnoṣi tato ’si
sarvaḥ". You know. So, You are "sarvaḥ". You are everything. But in what sense
are You everything? It is not a simplistic equalisation of everything with God.
He says "sarvaṁ samāpnoṣi". Actually, You pervade everything. And therefore, You
are everything. So, in that sense that everything is an abode for You.
Everything is an arena where You pervade. Therefore, it is that You are
extraordinary. "sarvaṁ samāpnoṣi". "sarvaṁ samāpnoṣi". You pervade everything.
And "tato ’si sarvaḥ". "tato ’si sarvaḥ". Therefore, You are everything. Now,
here, you know, now, Prabhup..., you know, Prabhupada quotes from the "Viṣṇu
Purāṇa " in the verses. He says, you know, 1.6.69:

        yo ’yaṁ tavāgato deva
        samīpaṁ devatā-gaṇaḥ
        sa tvam eva jagat-sraṣṭā
        yataḥ sarva-gato bhavān

So, "yo ’yaṁ tavāgato deva". "tavāgato" means in front of You. Whoever comes.
"samīpaṁ devatā-gaṇaḥ". So, even if he is one of the devatas, that can order be,
human beings when approach You. But even if there is a devata who approaches,
actually, "sa tvam eva jagat-sraṣṭā". You know. You are the creator of the whole
universe. And because You are the creator of the universe. You are creator of
everything. And everyone within the universe. "yataḥ sarva-gato bhavān". And
"sarva-gato bhavān". So, in that sense that, actually, You are all-pervading.
Because You are the creator. And controller of everything. So, You are
all-pervading, also. So, after all these offering obeisances, so, now, Arjuna,
He is thinking, you know, I was, I behaved so intimantely..., intimately with
this Absolute Truth. I treated Him like a friend. So, now, he is offering
obei..., apologies.

        sakheti matvā prasabhaṁ yad uktaṁ
        he kṛṣṇa he yādava he sakheti
        ajānatā mahimānaṁ tavedaṁ
        mayā pramādāt praṇayena vāpi

        yac cāvahāsārtham asat-kṛto ’si
        vihāra-śayyāsana-bhojaneṣu
        eko ’tha vāpy acyuta tat-samakṣaṁ
        tat kṣāmaye tvām aham aprameyam

So, "sakheti matvā". I thought of You as friend. And "prasabhaṁ". "prasabhaṁ"
means that was presumptuous on my part to do like this. "sakheti matvā prasabhaṁ
yad uktaṁ". "prasabhaṁ yad uktaṁ". So, "uktaṁ". I, I presumptuously addressed
You as what? "he kṛṣṇa he yādava he sakheti". "he kṛṣṇa he yādava he sakheti".
So, I addressed You as, oh, "Kṛṣṇa". Oh, "Sakha". Oh, "Yādava". So, Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura explains that what is the meaning of this? He says that,
actually, you know, you know, you know, I thought that I, I am a member of the
ruling dynasty. I am a king. But you are not a, the king. You are simply a, a
member of the royal family. You know. "Ugrasena" is the king. Your grandson and
you are just one member among the many "yadus". So, actually, I have done a
favor to you by befriending you. That is how I was thinking. You know. "he
kṛṣṇa". You know. So, I would say, You are, you are not Yaduraja. You are not,
you know, the, you know, you are the greatest among the "yadus". You are just
one of the yadus. "he kṛṣṇa he yādava". So, oh, Krishna, You are "Yādava".
Actually, I thought that I have done a favor to you by making you a "sakha".
Because I was un..., I was a great, I thought that I am a greater ksatriya than
You. So, you know, you know, he says, actually, this was such a terrible error
of m..., judgement from me. What was it? "ajānatā mahimānaṁ tavedaṁ". "ajānatā".
I did not know. "mahimānaṁ tavedaṁ". Your glory, I did not know. And then, "mayā
pramādāt praṇayena vāpi". So, when I spoke this, what, what, when I, I thou...,
thought of myself as superior to You. And I spoke presumptuously to You. What
was the reason for such presumptuous behavior? He, he says, he says, it could be
"pramādāt". It could be "praṇayena". "pramādāt" means it could be madness. It
could be love. So, here, when, you know, Arjuna is, you know, you know,
apologising to the Lord. He is not making another presumption of claiming that I
love You. He says, love is a possibility. It could be madness, also. Whatever it
is, he says I beg forgiveness from You. So, here, we see that the rasa is
changing. We generally do not see that in the sakhya-rasa in Vrindavan, ever,
the gopas apologising to Krishna. You know. Their relationship were very close.
They tease Krishna. They wrestle with Krishna. Sometimes, they defeat Krishna,
also. So, actually, in the Gopala Champu, Jiva Goswami describes that after
Krishna defeated all the wrestlers of Kamsa. You know. He defeated, h...:

        musti kasura chanurah
        malla yuddha visaratah

All those who were malla-yuddha visaratah. In wrestling, they were all experts.
And He defeated all of them. So, after defeating them, you know, some of them
were destroyed. Some of them, f..., remaining fled. Then, Krishna called all His
friends on the, you know, on the wrestling arena. And He wrestled with them. And
just to increase the waxation of, you know, Kamsa, Krishna was defeated by His
wrestling friends. By the gopas in wrestling, Krishna was defeated. He says, oh.
Kamsa was mortified. He said, you know, my trained champion wrestlers, they were
killed by those children. And these children are defeated by other children.
What is going on over here? So, we, the, actually, the "sakhya-rasa" of the, you
know, you know, of vrajavasis, is called as visrambha sakhya. It is very
intimate sakhya. So, you know, their sakhya is very rarely, if ever, you know,
covered over by knowledge of Krishna's divinity. For them, Krishna is just a
lovable child among them. So, whereas Arjuna, now, he is actually praying to the
Lord. Offering obeisances. Bowing down. And seeking abs..., seeking forgiveness.
So, this is called as "gaurava-sakhya". Where this awe, awareness of the
greatness of the person. There is "gaurava-sakhya". There is "visrambha sakhya".
So, this is "visrambha sakhya". Which is the vrajasis exhibit. So, Arjuna is
exhibiting here "gaurava-sakhya". Now, of course, from our point of view, is,
sakhya itself is a very exalted platform. So, these sort of, you know, subtle
differences are just to understand how, how, you know, you know, relishable and,
and intricate the, and intimate. Not intricate. Intimate. The relationships in
Vrindavan are. But overall, the point is, here, that Arjuna is offering
obeisances. And begging forgiveness. And then, he is, further describes. You
know. What was so bad? It was not just that I addressed You with derision in my
mind. But actually, even in the pre..., even other times, also. "yac
cāvahāsārtham asat-kṛto ’si". "cā". "yac cā". Along with that, "hāsārtham". For
the sake of joking, what did I do? "asat-kṛto ’si". "asat-kṛto". That means I
acted improperly. So, what was that? You know. "vihāra-śayyāsana-bhojaneṣu".
So, "vihāra". So, they were friends. So, sometimes, they would lay down
together. "vihāra-ś...". They would play together. "śayyāsana-bhojaneṣu". They
would sit together. They would take food together. So, at that time, what would
happen? "eko ’tha vāpy acyuta tat-samakṣaṁ". So, sometimes, in, you know, we,
when we are alone, I spoke, you know, teasingly to You. I made fun of You. I
derided You. Of course, it is all out of love. But then, you know, you know,
sometimes, I devou..., I did it even in the presence of others. You know.
Sometimes, when friends meet, there can be, there can be little banter. You
know. Just friendly talk. Light talk. There may be teasing. There may be mutual
joking. And fun over there. But at other times, there are other kinds of talks,
also. Which will, which will be much more serious. "yac cāvahāsārtham asat-kṛto
’si". "asat-kṛto ’si". This is, what I spoke was not appropriate. "eko ’tha vāpy
acyuta tat-samakṣaṁ". So, You are "acyuta", my dear Lord. I can comm..., I am
not, I am not "acyuta". I can commit mistakes. You do not commit mistakes. So,
You please forgive me for my mistakes. "tat-samakṣaṁ". "tat kṣāmaye...", you
know, you know, "tat kṣāmaye tvām aham aprameyam". So, "tat kṣāmaye tvām".
Please forgive me. I ask "kṣāmaye" for that. So, Arjuna, you know, you know,
when he understands how great his friend is. And how powerful is, he is thinking
that actually I have acted erroneously. I have acted grievously by talking so
intimately with Krishna. So, please forgive me.  "tat kṣāmaye tvām". So, after
requesting Arjuna to forgive, then he is now further, Ar..., giving the rationale
why You should forgive. So, he is saying:

        pitāsi lokasya carācarasya
        tvam asya pūjyaś ca gurur garīyān
        na tvat-samo ’sty abhyadhikaḥ kuto ’nyo
        loka-traye ’py apratima-prabhāva

So, "pitāsi lokasya carācarasya". So, You are the father of all the world. And
in the world, You are the father of the "cara". And the "acara". Of the moving.
And the nonmoving. Everyone. You know. "tvam asya pūjyaś ca gurur garīyān". So,
"pūjyaś ca". "pūjyaś" means worshipable. "tvam asya pūjyaś ca gurur garīyān".
So, You are more worshipable. You are the most worshipable among all worshipable
people. "garīyān". You know. Glorious. "na tvat-samo ’sty". There is no one
equal to You. Therefore, "abhyadhikaḥ kuto ’nyo". Where can there be anyone
greater than You? So, he is saying how foolish I was? To think that You are just
a "Yādava"? And I am greater than You? It is, that is such an absurd idea I had.
He says, actually, nobody can even be equal to You. How can somebody be superior
to You? So, and then, he says "loka-traye ’py apratima-prabhāva". In fact, Your
"prabhāva". Your power. Your influence. It is "apratima". It has actually no
comparison. No parallel. He is, Prabhupada translates that, You are immeasurably
powerful. Oh, immeasurable power. "loka-traye ’py". Actually, there is no
comparison. Not just on earth. But in all the three worlds. We see, now, the
"Virata rupa" is pervading all the vi..., all the vision. All the lokas. All, 
everything is included within Him now. So, His power is far greater than
anyone's else power. So, here, he is saying, the implication will be that,
actually, you know, it is a mistake that I am a child. So, "pitāsi". You are the
"pitā". You are the "pitā". I am the child. So, please forgive me. So, now,
Prabhupada quotes some verses to establish how, actually, the "na tvat-samo ’sty
abhyadhikaḥ kuto ’nyo". So, there is no one equal to or superior than Him. Now,
so, "na tvat-samo ’sty abhyadhikaḥ kuto ’nyo". So, actually, if nobody can be
equal. How can anyone be superior to Him? So, Prabhupada quotes from
"Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad" for that.

        na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate
        na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

So, the first is not directly related. He does not do any work. But second is,
"na tat-samaś". There is nobody equal to Him. "cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate". Nowhere
can we see anyone greater than Him. And then, Prabhupada quotes from the Gita,
also. The famous verse. "tatt...", "vetti tattvataḥ". We should know Him in
truth. You know. And then, therefore, now he concludes his request for, you
know, apolo..., apolo..., for forgiveness with a, with obeisances. And with an
example of how, the, three examples in fact of how within intimacy things can be
forgiven.

        tasmāt praṇamya praṇidhāya kāyaṁ
        prasādaye tvām aham īśam īḍyam
        piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuḥ
        priyaḥ priyāyārhasi deva soḍhum

So, "tasmāt praṇamya". Therefore, I offer obeisances to You. "praṇidhāya kāyaṁ".
"praṇidhāya kāyaṁ". That means I will lay down and offer obeisances to You.
"prasādaye tvām aham īśam īḍyam". "prasādaye tvām". Have mercy on me, my dear
Lord. "aham īśam īḍyam". You are the "īśam". You are the controller. You are the
most worshipable person. "īḍyam". "prasādaye tvām". You know. So, You are
worshipable. You are controller. And You can forgive me. So, I offer obeisances.
I bow down to You. Please forgive me. And then, he gives two examples. Three
examples. "piteva putrasya". So, and whenever there is intimacy, earlier, he
says that, here, said that, "mayā pramādāt praṇayena vāpi". So, I, it could be
my, either be or, maddness, out of love. So, now, Arjuna is telling, actually,
it was out of love. And in love, how sometimes, you know, there can be some
intimate speak. Speech. Which is not to be considered offensive. So, he gives
examples. "piteva putrasya". That just a fath..., just a father, you know, when
the son speaks, the son behaves slightly inappropriately with the father. The
father forgives. "sakheva sakhyuḥ". So, just as when there are friends closer
you. And friends may taint each other. May tease each other. And that is, also,
you know, forgive, they forgive each other. And then, "priyaḥ priyāyārhasi deva
soḍhum". "priyaḥ". "priyāyāḥ". So, actually, when, you know, you know, very
loving husband and wife are there. So, at that time, you know, you know, the
lover forgives the beloved. So, the beloved may speak within, within love. The
Lord may get angry. And chastise. Speak strong words. So, at that time. Or
speak, you know, in, in the lo..., intimacy of love, may speak, you know, you
know, in a teasing way. So, the, you know, if somebody else could have spoken
that. So, for example, you know, in love, somebody says. You know. You are a
rascal. You know. You are a rascal. Now, the word is strong. But as spoken with
love, so the, you know, so the emotion, so, of the, there is actually no anger
over there. You know. Somebody says angrily, I love you. You know. The very
words are, say, I am angry with you. And I love you has no meaning when said
like that. Isn't it? So, you know, actually, sometimes, even within love, when
there are some, some inappropriate words spoken, actually, the, the love is so
great that the inappropriate words, you know, do not matter. And we overlook
those inappropriate words. Because we see the heart that is there. Generally
speaking, when there is love. There is trust. And when there is trust, then, you
know, you know, then, you know, one sees the intentions beyond the actions. And
even if the actions, actions are not proper, one sees the intentions. And one
understands. Yes. Ok. That person actually meant well. But somehow, some words
came out wrong at that time. Some actions went out wrong, went out, went wrong.
So, generally speaking, we see the good intentions. And overlook the bad
int..., bad actions. When there is trust. But when there is no trust, at that
time, even when there are good actions, we wonder what are the intentions.
Maybe, this person is doing some flattery. You know. This person is doing sick
offenses. So, that person can extract something out of me. So, at that time,
when the person, when, even if the person does good actions, when there is no
trust, then everything in the relationship is like walking in a landmine. You
know. When we are, if we are walking in an area, on a war field or somewhere
where we suspect, these enemy may have put some mines. So, just put one step.
And boom. Or there might be a big explosion. And in my, our leg might be blown
off. Or even our head might be blown off. Disasters can occur.

So, actually speaking, when the, you know, you know, trust level is low among
people, at that time, one just does not see, one, ev..., one, everything is
suspect. So, bad actions, immediately, we infer. Oh, this person, you know,
wants to put me down, only. And bad actions, immediately, we infer there must be
bad intentions. And we do not, you know, take into f..., account at all the fact
that there might be accidental, you know, accidentally wrong, wrong actions that
might have happened. We just assume. Bad actions. Ah, there must be bad. I knew
that person, only. That person hates me. That is why that person does like this.
And then, even when there are good actions. Then, what happens is, one still
suspects. What is the, there must be some ulterior motive. So, here, he is
saying, actually, but when there is love, in love, naturally, there are actually
good actions, only. You know. When a, two people love each other. Then, they
speak sweetly. They behave kindly. They care for each other. But at times, you
know, you know, when there is a love. And sometimes, there is a bad action, that
is also forgiven. So, he is saying, out of love, my dear Lord, please forgive
me. We, even if I had spoken inappropriately. Just as a son forgives, you know,
just as parents forgives the f..., son. Just as, you know, you know, friend
forgives the friend. Just as a lover forgives the beloved. Similarly, please
forgive me. You know. So, now, in one sense, these may seem like the three
rasas: vatsalya, sakhya and madhurya. They seem to be. The last two are similar.
But the first is not. In vatsalya, the Lord is the son. The Lord is a ch..., and
the devotee is the parent. But here, it is saying. This is a father forgive the
son. So, this is the, first part is the opposite of vatsalya. So, here, he is
talking about the normal, you know, in the western religions. To the large
extent, this idea is there. And it is not alien to the Indian religious
tradition, also. It is also there. You know. That, also that the idea is that
God is the father. And we are his chidlren. So, "priyaḥ priyāyārhasi deva
soḍhum". So, like this, my dear Lord. "deva soḍhum". Please tolerate whatever I
may have done wrong. And forgive me. Forgive me. So, "kṣāmaye tvām", we have
talked in an earlier verse. Now, he is emphasising, please forgive, my dear
Lord. So, as devotees, you know, whenever possible, you know, we should act upon
a positive way. And by positive, you know, positive actions, by positive, you
know, you know, pos..., interactions, then we create trust, good trust level.
And when there is good trust level. Then, even if there are accidental slips, we
understand, ok, this is just accidental. It does not matter so much. And we keep
moving forward in our spiritual life. "adṛṣṭa". So, now, in, you know, now, he
is, now, the, actually, the next two verses, he is making a request. These two
prayers. Let us look at those prayers.

        adṛṣṭa-pūrvaṁ hṛṣito ’smi dṛṣṭvā
        bhayena ca pravyathitaṁ mano me
        tad eva me darśaya deva rūpaṁ
        prasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa

So, "deveśa jagan-nivāsa". This part had come earlier, also. "prasīda". You
know. You are, you know, the Lord of the Gods. And "jagan-nivāsa". You are the
shelter of the universe. But here, the context is slight..., "adṛṣṭa-pūrvaṁ".
So, earlier, in the, you know, while, in Arjuna, in Krishna's self-description
of what he is going to see, is the first time, the word "adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi" had
come. That this is never, this what you are going to see is, nobody has seen
this. Now, Arjuna is repeating that. Yes, Krishna. What You have showed me is,
it is extraordinary. It is some, not just extraordinary. It is unique. You have
not showed this to anyone. "adṛṣṭa-pūrvaṁ hṛṣito ’smi dṛṣṭvā". "hṛṣito ’smi
dṛṣṭvā". "hṛṣito" means actually, you know, to see things that You have giv...,
You have bestowed such a grea..., extraordinary, unparallel, unique mercy on me.
And You have revealed so..., something so rare. And special to me. I am so, I am
"hṛṣito ’smi dṛṣṭvā". You know. I am seeing this "hṛṣito". I am becomi..., I have
become jubilant. I am delighted. I am engladdened. But the same time, "bhayena
ca pravyathitaṁ mano me". Actually, still, my mind is, you know, by fear, it is
"bhayena". "pravyathitaṁ". It is tormented. So, why is it tormented? Why is it
tormented? Because, you know, yes, seeing this "kalarupa". And in this
"kalarupa", things were so fearsome. So deadly. Seeing all the blood coming out.
The heads getting smashed. The blood being leaked. And the teeth coming out. And
it is so, so phew, it is gruesome form. So, "bhayena ca pravyathitaṁ mano me".
So, you know, you know, earlier, he had said, actually, when the fir..., before
the "kalarupa" was seen, the, the "viśva", "viśva-rūpa" was being seen.

        vismitāś caiva sarve

So, that time was "smitāḥ". Amazement was there. But that amazement, the, the,
you know, soon changed into agitation. Trepidation. And then, you know, mortal
fear there was. So, he is saying, I am troubled by fear now. So, what You have
shown is very rare. And special. But still, I am, you know, you know, fearful.
"tad eva me darśaya". You know. Please show me, my dear Lord. "darśaya deva
rūpaṁ". Oh, God, show me the form. Which form? "prasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa".
So, you know, you know, please show me Your, now, form. Now, which form? "tad
eva me darśaya deva rūpaṁ". "deva rūpaṁ" means Your form as the, Prabhupada
translates as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So, here, You showed me the
"viśva-rūpa". I am grateful to You for that. But please show me the, you know,
You..., the, fo..., fo..., Your form as the Supreme Lord. So, the point here is,
this request is significant. You know. Normally, in this world, biggest thought
to be better. You know. If somebody has a TV with two channels. And then, that
person gets such a TV with hundred channels. When will, you know, will people
say that, oh, please, you know, I do not want this. Give me this TV with two
channels. Generally, the more, the more it is, the better it is. That is what,
how the idea is in material world. So, you know, somebody has seen a form of God
with two hands. Then, now, the, after you see a hand with, form with hundreds,
thousands of hands. So, now, we may wonder, the bigger is better. Isn't it? Such
an awesome form. But as Prabhupada said, you know, a devotee is not interested
in a godless display of opulence. You know. We cannot reciprocate love with
that. So, therefore, Arjuna is saying, please show me Your form as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Please have mercy on me. Oh, "prasīda deveśa
jagan-nivāsa". You are the Lord of the universe. So, please show me, you know,
that form. The normal form. So, you know, it is described that actually, you
know, he is asking for the, you know, survisa, "Chaturbhuja". You know. So, that
request comes in the next verse. So, he, what does he want to do? He wants to,
you know, why does Arjuna asking for this surva, "Chaturbhuja"? Actually, he
wants to make sure that, you know, there is no doubt about the divinity of
Krishna. So, yes, Krishna shows the "Virata rupa". And then, Krishna shows the
"Vishnu rūpa", also. In that way, it is clear that whatever other forms are
there, the, Krishna can manifest all those forms. And in that sense, Krishna
i..., Krishna is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is
established. So, Arjuna wants to establish that beyond any ambiguity.

        kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ cakra-hastam
        icchāmi tvāṁ draṣṭum ahaṁ tathaiva
        tenaiva rūpeṇa catur-bhujena
        sahasra-bāho bhava viśva-mūrte

So, "kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ". "kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ" means, so, "kirīṭi" refers to the
crown. "gadinaṁ" refers to the "gada". And "cakra-hastam". "cakra-hastam" refers
to the chakra. "Sudarshana Chakra". In the hand. "hasta" is hand. So, "gada" and
"cakra" are, are two of the symbols of Vishnu. So, by talking about these
symbols, it is included, is understood that also the other symbols are referred
to. And then, "icchāmi tvāṁ draṣṭum". I desire to see. "ahaṁ tathaiva". That
kind of form. And if it is not clear, he makes it even clearer. "tenaiva rūpeṇa
catur-bhujena". "tenaiva rūpeṇa". That form which is "catur-bhujena". And then,
he is saying, you know, "sahasra-bāho bhava viśva-mūrte". So, he is saying that,
oh, my dear Lord, you know, You are "viśva-mūrte". And as "viśva-mūrte", You
have "sahasra-bāho". That means You have, right now thousands of mouth. But
then, from among the thousands of mouth, please display the mouth which are, you
know, fou..., the form which has four, four arms. So, now, when he requests
this, what happens? In, the next verse is significant. Because "Sañjaya" con...,
concentrates the description. And he makes it, you know, very short. But before
Arjuna, before Krishna reveals the form, Krishna responds to Arjuna. Let us see
how Krishna responds to Arjuna. So, Krishna, in a sense, a little bit teases
Arjuna over here. So, how does it happen? He says Krishna, you know, Krishna
tells Arjuna. Arjuna, see, you only requested to see this form. And I have shown
it to you. And this form is so rare. Nobody else has seen it. You know. Why do
you want to see that other form? To see this form, only. Now, this is so rare.
So special. So, Arjuna says no. No. No. I do not want to see this form. I asked
You. And I am, I am grateful to you. That, but I, it does a mistake. You know.
Your form is so fearsome. I do not want to see it anymore. So, he says, Krishna,
this form is so rare. By study of Vedas. By this. By that. You cannot get this
form. This is so rare. He says, no. No. I will never again ask You for this
form, my dear Lord. Please do not show it to me. It is so fearsome that he
becomes frightened. It, like, earlier, I gave the example that somebody is
watching a movie. And then, it is a horror movie. And some ghastly creature is
destroying, devouring everyone on the screen. And suddenly, you find that the
destruction is happening not just on some, just se..., sets in the screen. The
destruction is happening in the, in the room where you are staying, only. You
know. The room. The walls. And the other people in the room. They are all
getting devoured. And then, you feel, you know, what kind of terrible horror
channel is this? I do not want to see it. And you try to turn off the channel.
Turn on the channel so that you, you, you browse and go to another channel. And
then, the remote freezes. You cannot change the channel, only. You know. You
want to chann..., hey, I do not want to see this. It is horrible. It is as if I
am next time, I am going to be destroyed. So, but, tuck. You cannot, just cannot
move forward. So, when, Arju..., for Arjuna. he has himself asked. Please show
me the "viśva-rūpa". And he sees the "viśva-rūpa". And after that, he is not
able to, you know, digest it. It is so frightening. And he says, my dear Lord, I
do not want this. Krishna says, no, see it. It is so special. No. No. No. I do
not want to see it. It is enough. Enough. I do not want it. So, like that,
Arjuna says, begs to Krishna. So, that is what is happening in the dialogue
which is implied in the three verses. Next three verses. So, this is, the next
verses are actually the response of Bhagavan. Of, until now, the, all the word
used is Bhagavan. Until now, it is the "viśva-rūpa" speaking, only. So, 30 to
33, 34 was also "viśva-rūpa" speaking. And now, also, it is the "viśva-rūpa"
speaking. So:

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        mayā prasannena tavārjunedaṁ
        rūpaṁ paraṁ darśitam ātma-yogāt
        tejo-mayaṁ viśvam anantam ādyaṁ
        yan me tvad anyena na dṛṣṭa-pūrvam

So, "mayā prasannena". By Me, happily. "tavārjunedaṁ". So, happily, oh, Arjuna,
have I shown you. You know. Unto you, what have I shown? "rūpaṁ paraṁ darśitam
ātma-yogāt". "ātma-yogāt". By My own mystical potency, My, My internal potency,
I have shown you the form which you have asked for. And it is "paraṁ darśitam".
It is actually a great form. It is transcendental form. "tejo-mayaṁ viśvam
anantam ādyaṁ". "tejo-mayaṁ". It is effulgent. It is blazingly effulgent.
"viśvam". It pervades the entire universe. It is "anantam ādyaṁ". All these are
the same, similar appetites to what Arjuna himself has used to glorify the
"viśva-rūpa". So, Krishna is trying, trying to drive home the point, actually,
this is very rare what I have shown you. And then, again, to emphasise it. "yan
me tvad anyena na dṛṣṭa-pūrvam". You know. You know. The, what I have shown you.
"tvad anyena". Apart from you. "na dṛṣṭa-pūrvam". I have not shown it to anyone
else. You know. You know. So, it is so rare. So special. So, Arjuna, I happily
have shown this form to you. And this form is supreme. It is original. It is
extraordinary. And actually, apart from you, no one else have I shown it to you.
So, after, now, you know, Prabhupada mentions how Duryodhana was shown. But he
was not shown the "kalarupa". You know. You know. This form is not different
from what was shown to Duryodhana. So, now, after this, He will describe,
actually, that this form is very rare to see. So, it is, cannot be seen by any
ordinary means:

        na veda-yajñādhyayanair na dānair
        na ca kriyābhir na tapobhir ugraiḥ
        evaṁ-rūpaḥ śakya ahaṁ nṛ-loke
        draṣṭuṁ tvad anyena kuru-pravīra

So, "na veda-yajñādhyayanair na dānair". By not, by not, by the study of the,
you know, by doing of "veda-yajña". By doing sacrifices. Mentioned in this
verse. "adhyayanaiḥ". "adhyayanaiḥ". By the study of Vedas. "na dānair". By the
giving of charity. And then, similarly, "na ca kriyābhir na tapobhir ugraiḥ".
That not by the performance of "kriyā". "kriyā" refers to karma-kanda activities
or rel..., pious activities. Nor by the performance of great austerity.
"tapobhir ugraiḥ". "ugraiḥ" is severe austerities. By none of these can one know
the Supreme Lord. You know. And one of the "kriyā", here, He is talking about
not knowing the Supreme Lord in the form of the "Virata rupa". "evaṁ-rūpaḥ". So,
at this point, "evaṁ-rūpaḥ" refers to the form which is still being manifested.
And that form is the form of the "Virata rupa". "śakya ahaṁ nṛ-loke". Actually,
on the earthly planetary system, I cannot be seen like this. "draṣṭuṁ tvad
anyena kuru-pravīra". So, "kuru-pravīra". Oh, best among the Kuru warriors.
Apart from you, nobody has seen it. So, Krishna is describing, He is building up
to the point that ev..., the visions of the Lord are not very easy to see. To
get the darshan of the Lord. And those darshans, they do not come because of any
material endeavors. Now, we may wonder actually, "veda-yajñādhyayanair na
dānair". All these are material endeavors. Well, the word "material" can have
various connotations. The word "material" can be as contrasted to spiritual. And
in that sense, you know, that which is mat..., that which is not spiritual will
be material. But often, we use the word material in terms of materialistic. And
generally, materialistic would refer to those people who live in passion and
ignorance. So, those who live in goodness, they have human sensitivity. And they
have the human thoughtfulness and discrimination. So, their activities can be
material. Or they can be spiritual. That, you know, that quote, you know, that,
you know, two possibilities are there for everyone. But in general, those who
are in passion, ignorance would mostly act materialistically. So, you know, you
know, you know, "tvad anyena kuru-pravīra". Apart from you, nobody else has seen
this form. It can be seen only through mercy. Now, after describing this,
Prabhupada basically explains all the characteristic in the purports. All the
words, the words in the purport, he explains many of them systematically. And
now, Arjuna, you know, ark..., act..., actually, the main point of both the
verses is that actually, this is such a rare form. It cannot be seen by anyone.
So, why do you want to give it up? So, here, Chakravart..., you know,
Chakravatipada explains that Arjuna says in his mind that he is responding to
Krishna. Krishna, no, I do not want see this form. Please, please free me from
this. So, then, Krishna will respond to that. And then, this is, this verse is
Kri..., Krishna's response.

        mā te vyathā mā ca vimūḍha-bhāvo
        dṛṣṭvā rūpaṁ ghoram īdṛṅ mamedam
        vyapeta-bhīḥ prīta-manāḥ punas tvaṁ
        tad eva me rūpam idaṁ prapaśya

So, "mā te vyathā". That do not get into trouble. "mā ca vimūḍha-bhāvo". Let
there not be any bewilderment. You know. You know. You know. "dṛṣṭvā rūpaṁ
ghoram īdṛṅ mamedam". So, "dṛṣṭvā". Seeing this "rūpaṁ". "ghoram". One seeing
this "ghoram rūpaṁ". "īdṛṅ mamedam". The form which I am showing you. This
"ghoram rūpaṁ", on seeing it, let there not be any bewilderment. So, this is a
frightful "ghoram rūpaṁ". And let the "mūḍ...", the "mūḍha", let the
bewilderment, let the fear, all it go, let it go away. "vyapeta-bhīḥ".
"vyapeta-bhīḥ" means let the "peta", "vy...", fear go away. "prīta-manāḥ". So,
once the fear goes away, the "manāḥ" becomes peaceful. "prīta-manāḥ". "punas
tvaṁ". So, again, He is saying, it is so, the Lord is offering a sort of
blessing through all these statements. So, "punas tvaṁ". That you become
peaceful once again. Satisfied in the mind. And then, "tad eva me rūpam idaṁ
prapaśya". So, through His points over here, Krishna is reassuring Arjuna.
Actually, no. No. No. You are my dear devotee. There is no need for you to get
overwhelmed. There is no need for you to become fearful. "mā te vyathā mā ca
vi...", no fear. No bewilderment. Just the budd..., the form that will pacify
you. Please see that form now. That is what he tells in the verse. So, you
know, you know, you know, Prabhupada writes in the point that, purport that:

"A devotee is not much interested in the universal form, for it does not enable
one to reciprocate loving feelings."

Say, actually, you know, "Virata rupa" is "Virata" is, the "viśva-rūpa" is so
wild, per..., wild, you know, so all-pervading that just soon I, what do I love?
Whom do I love? What, how do I converse? Con..., what do I do actually to
express love? It was very difficult to reciprocate love. And Krishna is a
person. And we can talk with Him. We can offer our love to Him through practical
service. Now, this is a verse in which, again, what is happening? You know. You
know. The third time in the same chapter, the camera is now moving back to
"Sañjaya". So, first time, it happened from verse 9 onwards. Then, second time,
it happened just for one verse. In verse 35. And now, it is happening for the
third time when, you know, the events are to be described. See, when there are
conversations going on, unless the conver..., unless the, you know, persons
themselves narrate the events. They will not, it will not, unless they
themselves give a running commentary and, people will not be able to understand
what is happening. If they are only hearing about it. That is why, you know,
when if cricketers are playing a cricket match, then the cricketers are so busy
playing. They cannot offer a running commentary. Batsman sometimes say, oh, now,
the ball is balling. And now, I, I have hit a sixer. You know. Their attention
will get distracted. So, it is, normally, when we are doing actions, at that
time, we are not giving a commentary of the actions. We are only doing actions.
And someone else who observes, they can describe the actions. So, now, if there
is a recording done, say, you know, then actually my actions. And your actions.
Both can be seen. And then, they can be recorded. And reported. But if you are
only focusing on the conversation that is happening. Ok. This person said this.
This person said this. Then, at that time, that conversation cannot reveal the
action. So, to reveal the action, the camera has to be, the same camera is just
focusing only on the conversation. That camera moves backward to some, the
other, some other conversation, b..., in which, this action is seen and
described. So, therefore, you know, you know, now, in this verse, what happens
is, Krishna, actually, in one verse itself dis..., displays the "cari...", the
"catur-bhuja rūpa". And then, also, be..., di..., displays the "dibuja rūpa".
Let us look at how it happens.
        
        sañjaya uvāca

        ity arjunaṁ vāsudevas tathoktvā
        svakaṁ rūpaṁ darśayām āsa bhūyaḥ
        āśvāsayām āsa ca bhītam enaṁ
        bhūtvā punaḥ saumya-vapur mahātmā

So, "ity arjunaṁ". In this way, after speaking to "arjunaṁ", "vāsudevas
tathoktvā". That after speaking to Vasudeva, then what happened? "svakaṁ rūpaṁ".
One's own form. "darśayām āsa bhūyaḥ". "darśayām". After revealing, "āsa
bhūyaḥ". You know. So, "svakaṁ rūpaṁ". What does it refer to? Actually, Vasudeva
has many forms. And one of the forms is, you know, the, we know, you know, we
did show the diagram earlier in which, you know, actually, Vishnu comes, you
know, le..., Vishnu is, we see that actually, there is Krishna. Then, there is
Balarama. Then, Vasudeva. Sankarshan. Pradyumna. Anniruddha. Then, Narayana. And
then, after that Vasudeva. Sankarshan. Pradyumna. Anniruddha. You know. You
know. So, now, this Vasudeva expansion is a Vishnu murti in the spiritual world.
Then, you know, here, Vasudeva is being referred. That is not referring to the
Vasudeva expansion. It is referring to Krishna, only. Because He is the son of
Vasudeva. So, He is called as "Vāsudeva". Vasud..., from Vasudeva comes
Vāsudeva. So, "ity arjunaṁ vāsudevas tathoktvā". So, "Vāsudeva" spoke like this.
And then, "Vāsudeva" revealed. So, "svakaṁ rūpaṁ". So, actually, from Him has
come the "Vishnu rupa". So, He was the "Vishnu rupa". "darśayām āsa bhūyaḥ". And
then, you know, in this way, oh, my dear Lord, you know, my dear, my dear
devotee, do not be afraid. Do not be bewildered. "āśvāsayām āsa". "āśvāsayām".
Somebody, when he is anxious. You know. Some patient is very anxious. The
patient comes to doctor. Doctor says, everything will be alright. We know how to
treat. We will give the medicine. Things will become alright. "āśvāsayām āsa".
"ca bhītam enaṁ". "bhītam enaṁ". Actually, means, actually, Arjuna was fearful
at this point. So, what happens when he was fearful? "bhūtvā punaḥ". "bhūtvā
punaḥ". And then, after that, again, what did he become? "saumya-vapur mahātmā".
"saumya-vapur". That means the sweet form. You know. You know. That was
manifested. So, how is the sweet form manifested over here? The "saumya rūpa"
means, "saumya" is mellow. Soft. Sweet form. That refers to the form of the Lord
as the two-handed Krishna. So, that means, at the start of this verse, there is
"Virata rupa". Then, by the line, the first two line..., by the time, the first
two lines get over, and that the "Virata rupa" has changed to the "viśva-rūpa".
So, and the "Virata rupa" has changed Vish..., to "Vishnu rūpa". The
"chaturbhuja rūpa". And then, from "chaturbhuja rūpa", by the end of the third
and fourth lines, the "viśv...", "viśva-rūpa" changes to the, so, the
"viśva-rūpa" changes first to "Vishnu rūpa". And from "Vishnu rūpa" changes to
"Krishna rūpa". So, that "Krishna rūpa" is referred to as "saumya-vapur
mahātmā". You know. You know. You know. Now, Arjuna will speak. Arjuna's, what
does Arjuna say? So, he says, yes, now, I am seeing.

        arjuna uvāca

        dṛṣṭvedaṁ mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ
        tava saumyaṁ janārdana
        idānīm asmi saṁvṛttaḥ
        sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ

So, "dṛṣṭvedaṁ". "dṛṣṭvā". "idam". Seeing here. "mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ". The human form.
So, now, can Krishna's form be called as human form? Yes. Krishna's form can be
called as human form. Krishna's form cannot be called as material form. Human
form means that actually Krishna has two hands. Two legs. Krishna has a head.
Krishna certainly does not have the fo..., ca..., you know, canine form. A form
like a dog. Or a bovine form. A form like a cow. Krishna can, can some, some
incarnations in which He can have any kind of form. But His normal, original
two-handed form is a human form. So, to say that Krishna has a human form is not
offensive. To say Krishna has a material form is incorrect. And to say that
Krishna's material form is a, is there. But it is an illusory cover. And one has
to go beyond the form to the formless. That is not just incorrect. That is
offensive. So:

        dṛṣṭvedaṁ mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ
        tava saumyaṁ janārdana

So, the same word "saumyaṁ" is used. Soft. Gentle. Sweet. So, you know,
previously, in the 50th verse, Arjuna had, Krishna had said, now, or "Sañjaya"
had said. "saumya-vapur mahātmā". So, that Absolute Truth has now become
"saumyaṁ rūpaṁ". So, Arjuna has also concluded, confirmed in that. He says, yes.
Now, I am seeing Your "saumyaṁ rūpaṁ". "tava saumyaṁ janārdana". You are the
maintainer of all living beings. So, you have maintained me. I was filled with
fear. But now, You have ensured that my fear has gone away. "idānīm asmi
saṁvṛttaḥ". So, now, "saṁvṛttaḥ". I am settled properly. "idānīm asmi". I have
become situated. How? "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". "sa-cetāḥ". In my
consciousness, I have become settled. "prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". I have returned to
normal nature. To my own nature. So, what is that nature? At a material level,
it is the nature of ksatriya who is chivalrious. And fearless. At a spiritual
level, it is the natures of being a lov..., you know, a loving devotee, you
know, re..., rejoicing in the sung of the beloved Lord. So, both ways, he says,
now, I have returned back to my nature. "sa-cetāḥ". "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ".
So, Arjuna is seeing the form of the Lord. And after seeing the form of hte
Lord, which form is he seeing now? "saumyaṁ rūpaṁ". "idānīm". And when he sees
the "saumyaṁ rūpaṁ", he feels peaceful. He feels, you know, he feels relieved.
Because he had such a nightmarish sort of experience. He was seeing that ghastly
scene of, you know, everybody going to the mountain. Being and blood being all
around. It was quite a nerve-wracking scene. And Arjuna says, what has happened?
Now, that I am seeing Your normal form, then I am feeling peaceful. You know.
Like this, in our life, also. Sometimes, there are huge destabilisations.
Suddenly, something, this goes wrong. Some relative gets a disease. We lose our
job. Or health goes down. And then, we feel very disturbed. You know. What is
this? What is happening? But then, gradually, when we understand, you know,
Krishna is still there. Nothing has changed as far as my relationship with
Krishna is concerned. In the material world, things may change. But to the
extent we can see the unchanging reality under..., underlying the changing, to
that ext..., to that extent, what will happen? "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". To
that extent, we will become peaceful. So, Arjuna seeing the familiar form of
Krishna feels grateful. And he, you know, says that, that, he tha..., you know,
thanks. Confirms to Krishna. Yes. Krishna was concerned that "āśvāsayām āsa". He
wanted to, you know, reassure Arjuna that everything will be alright. So,
Krishna says yes. You know. So, Krishna wanted to reassure Arjuna. So, Arjuna
is saying, yes, that everything is alright now. Thank you. So, now, in the next
verse, Bhaga..., you know, Kri..., Krishna will speak. And that we will discuss
in the next four verses. That is the conclusion of this chapter which focuses on
bhakti. That we will discuss in our next class.
 
Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
