Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z3KBd9iGg7g
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=WoH9JDvIlWfeymjyJ2F2kF1Pjoh8MTU0ODQ4ODk1N0AxNTQ4NDAyNTU3&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_106_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_10_Text_12_to_18_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=Z3KBd9iGg7g&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We
discussed in the previous class about the Chatur Sloki Bhagavad Gita. And how it
gives the essence of the Gita. Based on its context and its content. You know.
So, the context was how it comes after Krishna has said that I am going to speak
the "paramaṁ vacaḥ". The supreme words. And Arjuna, you know, gives his
understanding. Conclusive understanding after that. And the content, it is, it
covers, sambandha, abhidheya, prayojana. It ho..., shows how jnana is a part of
bhakti. And it is integrated into bhakti. So, let us look at one more aspect of
this jnana. And then, we will move forward to, you know, the next verses. So,
sym..., there is a symbiotic relationship between knowledge and devotion. 10.8
describes knowledge leads to devotion.

    iti matvā bhajante māṁ
    budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

So, "iti matvā". One who understand this. What does one understand? That Krishna
is the Supr..., you know, source of everything. He is ultimate reality. So,
"bhajante māṁ". "bhāva-samanvitāḥ". Such a person acquires knowledge. And
becomes wholeheartedly devoted to Me. So, here, Krishna is telling that
knowledge will, you know, about Me, will lead to devotion. But then, in the
subsequent verses, 10.8 to, you know, 10.10 and 10.11, what does He say? He
says, you know, you know, devotion will lead to knowledge. So, He says, that if
you, "bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam", if you v..., de..., practice devotional service
to Me. Serve Me with affection. Then, "dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ". That knowledge
will give, and devotion will give knowledge. So, what, how is this going about?
First, Krishna says, knowledge leads to devotion. Then, devotion leads to
knowledge. So, what comes first? Actually, you know, you know, there has to be
some basic philosophical understanding about Krishna. But as we render service,
the knowledge deepens. And the knowledge increases our affection further. And
when we serve with affection, then Krishna gives greater knowledge to us. So,
there is symbiotic relationship between the two. This knowledge, which Krishna
is talking about, both in the beginning and in the end. This is the, got nothing
to do with impersonal jnana. Because the first knowledge, Krishna is talking
about is the knowledge of Krishna's glories. That is:

    ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo
    mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

You know. You know. You know. You know. I am the source of everything. I am
sustainer of everything. And then, after that, second knowledge that He has
talked about is "buddhi. You know. "buddhi".

    dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ
    yena mām upayānti te

This is also knowledge. Which enables one to come closer to Krishna. Way to
return back to Krishna. So, this is also bhakti, anukula jnana. So, bha...,
either way, Kri..., this knowledge, you know, of how glorious Krishna is. And
knowledge of how to go closer to Krishna. You know. This is not talking about
impersonal jnana. So, bhakti-yoga integrates within it jnana. But it is not
dependent on jnana. It is, bhakti-yoga in and of itself is independent of
jnana. Because bhakti-yoga is an independent process. And in fact, all other
processes depend on bhakti-yoga. So, you know, whatever knowledge is required.
Even when whatever knowledge is acquired. Say, for example, when we are studying
philosophy right now, are we do, doing, following the process of jnana-yoga? No.
We are doing:

    śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
    smaraṇaṁ ...

We are doing bhakti. So, our purpose is Krishna. Our process is Krishna. And,
you know, the source is also Krishna. That means, the knowledge, we are coming,
getting is not from some impersonal source. It is from Krishna Himself. And
then, our purpose is also not that we want to go to some light beyond Krishna.
It is Krishna. And, you know, you know, our, you know, process is also centered
on Krishna. We are discussing about Krishna. So, in that sense, it is not bhakti
pratikula-jnana. It is bhakti anukula jnana. So, now, after this, Kri..., Arjuna
speaks his, you know, you know, understanding of the essential me..., you know,
message of the Bhagavad Gita. So:

    arjuna uvāca

    paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma
    pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān
    puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam
    ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum

    āhus tvām ṛṣayaḥ sarve
    devarṣir nāradas tathā
    asito devalo vyāsaḥ
    svayaṁ caiva bravīṣi me

So, here, it is described, Arjuna is saying, "paraṁ brahma". So, you are the
Supreme Brahman. Now, the mayavadis and the impersonalists, you know, are very
fond of, you know, you know, speaking the, you know, Vedic aphorism. You know.
"Aham Brahmasmi". It is definitely true. We are Brahman. And this has bee
considered by Shankaracharya as one of the Mahavakyas of the Upanishads. This is
also fine. But then, you know, what is its meaning? It is not saying "Ahaṁ paraṁ
Brahmāsmi". It is simply "Ahaṁ Brahmāsmi". So, I am Brahma. That is definitely
true. But beyond my being Brahma, there is a higher reality. And that higher
reality is the reality of Krishna. Who is the "paraṁ brahma". So, I may say that
I am an Indian. And the Prime Minister of India may also say that my ancestor is
Indian. So, if I say I am an Indian. The Prime Minster is Indian. Therefore, I
conclude I am the Prime Minister. No. That is not correct. There is Brahm..., in
Brahma, also, there is, there is diversity amidst unity. You know. There is in
spiritual level. There is all, you know, you know, the unity of everything is
Brahman. But within that Brahman, there are levels of reality. There is
diversity amidst unity. So, then, "paraṁ", "pavit", "paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma".
"dhāma". "dhāma" means abode. You are the supreme abode. I, as Krishna has told
earlier in the Ninth Chapter.

    mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni

In one sense, everything resides on Him. And then, He is the supr..., so, you
know, in a, in the sense of the mentals of the universe, it, Krishna is
ultimately maintaining everything. Of course, He is not burdened as Krishna
has also stated in Ninth Chapter. When He said:

    na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni
    
We discussed that inconceivable relationship earlier. You know. But the
important point is that "paraṁ dhāma". He is the ultimate abode. He is ul..., He
i..., He, where, He, He is the, you know, abode for all of us. He is, He is
non-different from His abode. You know. You know. Goloka Vrindavan is once
non-different from Krishna. So, He is there, He want, that is where we want,
want ultimately to go. That is the supreme destination where we will become
happy. And He is also the supreme abode for our hearts' aspirations. You know,
we, we, you know, we pin our hopes on some person. Or some plan. Or something.
We think once I get my own house. Once I get my own car. Once I get that job.
Once I get that spouse. You know. We pin all our hopes on those things. Those
become the abode of our aspirations. Abode of our dreams. But actually, they are
all fallible shelters. They cannot give us permanent solace. That Krishna is
"paraṁ dhāma". So, "pavitraṁ" and "paramaṁ". So, "pavitraṁ paramaṁ" can be seen
as you are, you know, the purest and the greatest. So, "pavitraṁ" is actually,
we have discussed "apāpa-viddham". You know. That:

    asnāviram śuddham apāpa-viddham
    kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr
    yāthātathyato 'rthān vyadadhāc chāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ
 
So, "apāpa-viddham". "śuddham". Prabhupada had translated as, ant...,
prophylactic and antiseptic in the "Īśopaniṣad". In, you know, Mantra Five. You
know. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, "apāpa-viddham".

    sa paryagāc chukram akāyam avraṇam
    asnāviram śuddham apāpa-viddham

    kavir manīvi...
    r...
    sūḥ...
    parisūḥ...

    kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr

So, actually, this Mantra Eight, Mantra Eight, where it talks about the learned
person understands the Absolute Truth to be supremely pure. So, pure and
purifying. You know. Whatever impurities are there in the past, they will be
removed. And once we have Krishna in the heart, no further impurities will come
in, also. So, in this way, what Krishna is telling over here is, what Arjuna is
saying here about Krishna is that "pavitraṁ". You are pure. The, you are pure.
And "paramaṁ". So, the word "pavitraṁ" indicates that, now, now, Krishna will
not be having any sinful desires like we have. You know. That is not the context
of the word ""pavitraṁ" over here. "pavitraṁ" means, in general, any kind of
contamination. So, even from the view, point of view of transcendence. Even
goodness is a contamination. So, Krishna is uncontaminated by any of the modes.
"paramaṁ". He is the supreme being. "bhavān". So, "bhavān" is a respectful
address. You, oh Lord. You are all this in. So, "puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ". So, the word
"puruṣaṁ" is again, it is a very clear personalist designation. A personalist
reference. So, now, Krishna is clearly telling "bha...", Arjuna is clearly
saying "bhavān". To You, he is saying. He is not saying that, oh, there is some
personal light within You. Which is the supreme reality. He says, no. You are
the "paraṁ brahma". You are. And as if that were not clear enough. Just that
that the two people are standing in front of Vishnu. And having the discussion.
And one is referring to the other. And saying "bhavān". The, and He is also
using the very personal reference. "puruṣaṁ". And what kind of "puruṣaṁ" are
you? "śāśvataṁ". So, it is not that from the impersonal, some light has
manifested from, you know, so, from, you know, the impersonal light, some
personal form has manifested temporarily. No. "śāśvataṁ". You know. You know.
Eternally. This. And "divyam". And this form which you have, you who are my
Lord, You are transcendental. The word "divyam" is the same as Krishna has used
in 4.9. "divyam" for His pastimes. So, you know, you know, you know,
"ādi-devam". So, Krishna has earlier said that:

        aham ādir hi devānāṁ
        maharṣīṇāṁ ca sarvaśaḥ
        
In 9.20, He says, I have come before everyone else. So, He has, Krishna, Arjuna
is saying, yes, You are "ādi-devam". There are many Gods. But You are the
source of all God. And "ajaṁ". So, Kri...:

        yo mām ajam anādiṁ ca
        vetti loka-maheśvaram
        asammūḍhaḥ sa martyeṣu
        sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate

So, in 9.3, Krishna had said that, you are, you know, that one who understands
need to be "ajam" and "anādiṁ". That is beyond the dimension of time. Such a
person will become free from all sinful, all sins, will be unbewildered. So,
Krishna, Arjuna is saying the same thing. You are "anādiṁ". "ajam". So, sorry,
you are an "ajam". "ajam anādiṁ ca". So, He is also saying, you are "ajam". And,
you know, "ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum". "vibhum". You are the great. We discussed how
"anu" is used to refer to the jiva. And "vibhum" is used to refer to the Lord.
Now, you know, sometimes, when two friends are discussing. And one friend
speaks a, gives an eloquent speech. The other friend, you know, in just the mood
of, you know, friendly banter. He may say, hey, you are the greatest speaker in
the whole world. He just want to encourage the friend. And even among friends,
there might be some, some exaggeration, also. That is understood. So, is it like
that over here? That Krishna and Arjuna are friends. So, Arjuna just wants to,
you know, the Lord, you know, g..., eulogize even if it is not true. And even if
it involves some exaggerations. So, somebody might argue like that. This is like
this. But actually, you know, the, this discussion, which is happening, is a
very serious discussion. Right in the b..., start of the discussion. When it was
on a casual friend. When it was on, you know, you know, you know, friendly, you
know, front, Krishna did not give any instruction. Krishna says, come on.

        kutas tvā kaśmalam idaṁ

In 2.2 and 3, Krishna said that, ok, do not be, do not be weak-minded. Come on.
Back up. And fight. But then, Arjuna took that discussion to a deeper level by
saying, aha...:

        pṛcchāmi tvāṁ dharma-sammūḍha-cetāḥ

He says, I am going to, I am going, asking you what is "dharma". And, you know,
I am surrendering unto You.

        śiṣyas te ’haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam

He says, I am becoming your disciple. Instruct me. I am surrendering to You.
"prapannam". So, you know, Arjuna has taken that decision to a very serious
level. And if we look what Krishna has spoken from 2.11 onwards. Till 10.11. You
know. Actually, Krishna is not just having some, you know, friendly chit-chat.
Krishna has a, having very deep philosophical discussion. So, if we look at what
the nature of the discussion. You know. Then, we will understand that this is
not, it, it is most unlikely that it will be just some, you know, insubstantial
exaggeration. But, and, but Krishna, Arjuna, he also speaks something else which
counters this point. He says that, you know, sometimes, we may, so, often, we
may say, oh, my friend, you are the world cricket cha..., you are the world's
best batsman. Now, you know, one friend may say that to another person. But if
that says, you know, that, all the world's best cricket commentators, all the
world's best cricket experts. They all say the same thing. Say, oh, why would
they say the same thing? You know. They do not have to exaggerate. They are
experts in that subject. If they are saying it, then this person must really be
the, among the best batsmen in the world. So, now, Arjuna is saying that this is
not I will be who is saying this. Actually, the great authorities who have
studied the Vedic su..., you know, Vedic subject very exhausted, they are saying 
it. So, that he correlates here by saying that:

        āhus tvām ṛṣayaḥ sarve

"āhus tvām ṛṣayaḥ sarve". You know. The, all the great sages have said this. And
he gives specific names, also.

        devarṣir nāradas tathā

"Nārada" has said this. And:

        asito devalo vyāsaḥ

You know. And "asito devalo vyāsaḥ". Now, among these. "Nārada". And "Vyāsa".
You know. You know. Their names will come again in the same chapter when as the
vibhutis of Krishna.

        devarṣīṇāṁ ca nāradaḥ

Krishna will describe that among the sages, among the, you know, cel...,
celestial seers, I am "Nārada". And:

        munīnām apy ahaṁ vyāsaḥ

You know. Among the great "munī"s, you know, you know, I am "Vyāsa". He is
describing. So, they are also vibhutis of Krishna. The point is, you know, even
Krishna acknowledges their sp..., these, these sages' special position. And, you
know, you know, that is what Arjuna is also, you know, you know, now, so, now,
when Arjuna is quoting them. He is, you know, he is actually quoting very great
people over here. You know. And, now, if we, we study the Mahabharat, there are
many occasions where Arjuna has heard the same thing about Krishna from these
great sages. The Mahabharat is a massive book. Hundred and ten thousand verses.
You know. huge book. In fact, it is the word's longest poem. You know. Not just
the world's longest poem. You know. Before the western world came to know about,
you know, you know, the Mahabharat, you know, India the Northern sea, where
considered to be among the, you know, a longest poems. But the Mahabharat is
seven times longer than both these Germanic sagas. India the Northern sea. It is
massive. And in that Mahabharat, "Nārada" makes his appearances various points.
"Vyāsa" makes his appearance at various points. And they have all spoken the
glories of Krishna at various places. So, Kri..., you know, this is, now,
reading the Mahabharat. Then, Arjuna has also heard about it on various
occasions. So, he is saying, you know, "devarṣīṇāṁ":

        asito devalo vyāsaḥ
        svayaṁ caiva bravīṣi me

And You, Yourself have spoken this. You know. That means that, you know,
Krishna, he is saying, I am saying this. But what is the basis for my saying it?
Actually, it is not, it is not just my understanding. It is what the sages have
said. And it is, it is what you have said just now. So, how does this add to the
authority that You Yourself have said it. Krishna ha..., if Krishna is the
Absolute Truth. And then, He is speaking something, you know, while giving a
philosophical explanation of reality. Then, that has to be taken as an absolute
authority. In fact, Krishna's authority is the ultimate authority. Because He is
the Absolute Truth. So, in this way, you know, you know, you know, Arjuna is
giving the understanding that Krishna is the Absolute Truth. He is personal. He
is transcendental. He is eternal. He is pure. He is, you know, the Supreme
Brahman. And He is the ultimate truth overall. So, this is what Krishna is,
you know, Krishna's discourse had produced this understanding in Arjuna. And
Prabhupada gives various explanations of these terms. And, you know, so,
Prabhupada talks about the obstinate conviction. So, untu..., unfortunately, he
says, you know, you know, being able to understand this by through disciplic
succession. But:

"Unfortunately those proud of their academic education, despite so much evidence
in Vedic literatures, stick to their obstinate conviction that Kṛṣṇa is an
ordinary person."

So, you know, you know, you know, conviction in the right thing is good. You
know. Conviction in the wrong thing becomes obstinacy. And obstinacy can keep us
bound till our grave. And beyond our grave to, in our next lives, also. To, you
know, mistaken believes. So, Krishna is not an ordinary person. And it is only,
it is, you know, unfortunate that if some people are obstinate. You know. There
are evidences that the Vedic literature give. And then, further, there is the
experiential evidence whch we can get, also, if we devote ourselves to Krishna.
So, you know, you know, you know, you know, one time Srila Prabhupada was in a
morning walk. And he asked that devotees. Why do you consider, why do you
consider Krishna to be God? So, Prabhupada would oft..., sometimes, stake the
rule of atheist. So that he would speak. He said, why do you accept Krishna as
God? So, he said, the devotees started, you know, ok, they said that, you know,
Krishna, devotees gave different reasons. You know. The great acharyas have
accepted. Krishna has six opulences. Krishna is all-attractive. Krishna has
sweetness which other, other aspects, the sweetness and Krishna is very
special. So, Prabhupada said no. This is all this, I, so, he says, you know,
ok, if the Veda, the Bhagavad Gita says, you know, I do not belove, believe the
Bhagavad Gita. Prabhupada took the role of an atheists. Then, Prabhupada finally
said that, why do you accept Krishna as God? Prabhupada said, when we chant Hare
Krishna, we experience the ecstasy. That is why Krishna is God. So, the devotees
were surprised by this kind of answer which Srila Prabhupada. And they all
started discussing. And oh, is nice answer Prabhu..., answer Prabhupada
gave. And then, Prabhupada went to another part of the world. There, also, doing
morning walk. And, you know, Prabhupada raised the same question. You know. Now,
he says, why do you accept Krishna as God? And now, devotees are giving
different answers. And there is one devotee who had been in that earlier morning
walk, also. So, he will just waiting me. When will Prabhupada ask me? Then, I
will give the answer. So, finally, Prabhupada took. Yes? What is your answer? He
said. Prabhupada, when we chant Hare Krishna, we experience the ecstasy. That is
why Krishna is God. So, Prabhupada says, your ecstasy is an illusion. I do not
believe your ecstasy. This devotee was completely shaken. The morning, what is
this? Then, Prabhupada said, it is because the Bhagavad Gita declares that
Krishna is God. Therefore, we accept Krishna as God. So, what is going on here?
Actually, Prabhupada, you know, through different, you know, conversations is
driving home the point that both are important. You know. There is scriptural
evidence. And there is personal experience. And when both are combined together,
then the conviction becomes very deep. So, whatever, you know, we, you know, you
know, believe, we believe first based on scriptural evidence. And after that, it
is not just a matter of belief. Where the scripture also gives a process for
inner transformation. And when there is inner transformation, there is personal
experience that comes out. So, you know, scriptural evidence. Plus personal
experience leads to conclusive, you know, conclusive understanding. So, that
way, you know, it, that is how a devotee's conviction becomes very deep. So, we
start from, so, we, we be..., we have to have scriptural authority. And along
with that, experience. If we only argue based on scripture, then there can be an
endless debate going on. Because anybody who wants to claim any belief, that
person will, you know, draw some, some scriptural quotation from somewhere. And
try to demand. This is the reality. This is, phew, this is reality. This is
reality.

        tarko ’pratiṣṭhaḥ śrutayo vibhinnā

You know. You know. You know. There is a professor Staal with whom Prabhupada
had a debate. The devoteeas wanted to ha..., you know, arrange with a
university so that they could have a course on Krishna Consciousness. As the
part of a, you know, the curriculum of the university. So, when that was going
on, you know, so, there was this professor Staal who was a respected professor
of Hinduism. And he said that, you know, these devotees spend too much time
uttering a mantra. You know, that, devo..., the devotees had wanted that, those
who are enjoying the course, they also have to chant Hare Krishna. Regularly. He
says, the, this, they are spending their hour..., spending too much time. You
know. Instead of studying Hinduism, they are just chanting mantras. That is not
required. And he says, anyway, in the Hindu scriptures, the mantra, mantra
chanting is not told. And then, when the devotees reported this Prabhupada,
Prabhupada gave a long list of verses. Tell..., telling how these all talk about
the chanting of the Hare Krishna mantra. And then, that profess..., that
professor, he replied back. He says, no, you say this mantra. You say this. But
it, actually, you quoted this verse. But it actually means. You quoted this
verse. But it actually means this. And you quoted this verse. But it actually
means this. This actually means this. And then, when he wrote back, then
Prabhupada, you know, wrote back. And he said that, you know, actually, these
are verses. And the meanings are clear enough. And he says, where, whenever
there is a law, whenever there is a court case, you know, that different lawyers
will sp..., present the arguments from different perspective. But, but, present
the respective arguments. But then, the decision is made by authority. That is a
judge. So, he says that for us, the judge is Lord Chaitanya. And he has told
that, actually, the, you know, there is no process as potent as, you know,
chanting of the holy names.

        harer nāma harer nāma
        harer nāmaiva kevalam
        kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva
        nāsty eva gatir anyathā

So, you know, you know, you know, chant the holy name. There is no other way.
You know. Both of them are said three times over here. So, he said that, this is
our authority. And then, the process of debate does not lead to any conclusion.
So, Prabhupada had a few exchange of letters. And after that did, dropped off.
But Prabhupada said, the scriptural basis for Krishna Consciousness. Prabhupada
had this conversation published as a, as a booklet, also, at those times. And it
comes in "Science of Self-Realization", also. Now, if you, if we read it, it
may appear as if, you know, Prabhupada has not really refuted that Staal's
explanations. Prabhupada has given adequate evidences. And reasoning. You know.
You know. But Prabhupada, you know, just makes the point over there that if
somebody just wants to go around, you know, arguing, based on quotes, it can be
endless.

	bahu-śāstre bahu-vākye citte bhrama haya
	sādhya-sādhana śreṣṭha nā haya niścaya

So, you know, shastras. There are many scriptures. And "bahu-vākye". Within
that, also, there are many meanings. "bahu-śāstre bahu-vākye". You know. What
happ..., you know, what happ..., and each of them, each verse can be mean..., in
a, in a, interpreted in different ways. And because of that, "nā ha...",
"bahu-śāstre bahu-vākye citte bhrama haya". "bhrama haya". One may not know what
is the conclusion. "sādhya-sādhana śreṣṭha". What is the ultima..., what is the
best means? What is the ultimate goal? "nā haya niścaya". One will not be able
to understand. So, therefore, what one has to do is, one has to focus. You know.
You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. So, actually, when
one focuses on the essence. What is that essence? You know. You know. They, if
we look at the scripture, there is adequate evidence for the chanting of the
holy names. And one focuses on chanting of the holy name, one gets purified. And
one gets the inner experience. So, there is scripture, there is scriptural
evidence. And there is personal experience. And that leads to the conviction.
So, you know, if we just go for scriptural evidence without trying out any
process, then, one will stay at the, simply at the mental, intellectual
platform. And one will not get any conclusive understanding. And if one decides,
I will only focus on exp..., personal experience. That personal experience can
delude us. Because we may get some experience for a few days, for a few weeks.
But after that, experience may go away. Somebody might go to the, go to some
retreat. Where some baba is made into God. And people are chanting kirtans for
that baba. And there is nice scenic natural place with sweet music going on in
the background. And people may say, oh, tears came in my eyes. Ha..., I have
felt so good over there. I have never felt so good. Now, that was a, that was a
transformational experience. I accepted that person as good. Now, actually
speaking, you know, we cannot rely only on our experiences. Experiences are no
doubt important. But experiences have to be based on scripture. Because
otherwise, the experiences may just be mental experiences. Which will come once.
And they will go away. They will not be repeated. So, the, what differentiates
the experiences on the path of bhakti, you know, in the path of bhakti-yoga, you
know, specifically, bhakti-yoga is the process of devotional, that devotional
service by which we connect with God, is that, the experiences are repeatable.
They are verifiable. And they are also, in a general sense, predictable. The
pro..., the, you know, you know, process that we are following, it is
well-delineated. So, that rarely happens when people have these sentimental
kinds of experiences. So, when both are there, then it is a very potent process.
Then, it is a very potent mess..., you know, way of deepening our conviction.
So, now, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, this is the con...,
essential conclusion of the Gita. That Krishna is the Absolute Truth. And Arjuna
will make it clear again in the next verse further.

        sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye
        yan māṁ vadasi keśava
        na hi te bhagavan vyaktiṁ
        vidur devā na dānavāḥ

So, "sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye". "sarvam etad". All that You have said. "ṛtaṁ".
"ṛtaṁ" means, actually, I accept it. It is true. It is all true. "ṛtaṁ manye".
"yan māṁ vadasi keśava". You know. "māṁ vadasi". What you have spoken to me, oh,
"keśava", I accept it all. "na hi te bhagavan vyaktiṁ". Oh, You, Absolute Truth.
Oh, You, oh, Supreme Person. You know. Your Persona..., whatever you have
revealed to me. "vidur devā na dānavāḥ". Actually, this is not easy for even
the, you know, Gods to understand. What to speak of the demons? "vidur devā na
dānavāḥ". You know. You know. You know. You know. So, the point is, Krishna is
telling, I accept everything that you say. I accept everything that you say. You
know. "na hi te bagavan vyaktiṁ". That, actually, "bhagavan vyaktiṁ". You know.
You know. Your, your personality, your nature, the way you have manifested
yourself. What you have revealed to me about your Absolute Truth. "bhagavan
vyaktiṁ". It is not easy to understand. So, there are two different points in
this verse. First is that my dear Lord, I accept what you say. And then, I also
acknowledge that it is not easy to understand you. So, what is the connection?
He is saying that when we accept Krishna, it is not necessary that we have to
understand everything about the, Krishna has said. Will be, there will be some
things which we will not be able to understand. So, then, rather than saying
that they are false. Which is suspend, judgement about them. We understand that,
you know, certain things may require some purification for us to be able to
understand them. So, we suspend judgement about them. You know. You know.
Acc..., I accept what You say. But how it is true, the, the things about You,
that even the devatas cannot understand. You know. What to speak of me? You
know. You know. You know. You know. Now, Krishna goes, you know, now, Prabhupada
says this, this is the way the Bhagavad Gita is to be understood. Not half hen
logic. Half hen logic, we know, is that, just take one part of the Gita.
Whatever is convenient. Whatever agrees with our philosophy. And whatever does
not agree, we reject it. So, if one has that kind of attitude, then, you know,
that person cannot, you know, make much spiritual advancement. So, if somebody
says that, you know, you know, people say, think that, you know, they have their
opinion about God. And, you know, you know, once there was a Ch..., you know,
Christian talk show. A reg..., TV reg..., reg..., regulative show, something.
Where people come and ask questions. You know. Some person said that, you know,
I am, you know, I, I believe in Jesus. But I am not a part of any church. So,
you know, you know, you know, the pastor goes there. He asked him cautiously.
So, if you believe in Jesus, then why are you not any part of any church? He
says, you know, I have not found any church that agrees with my understanding of
Jesus. So, this is a very interesting standard. That means, you know, I have a
certain understanding of Sesu..., Jesus. And, you know, somebody else has to
agree with that. And I have to find a church which agrees with that. So, it is
like saying that I am a patient. And I am not, I am not taking the treatment.
Why? Because I have not found any doctor who agrees with my diagnosis. You know.
The doctor is, is the, is the doctor supposed to agree with the patient's
diagnosis? Or patient with the doctor's diagnosis? Now, it may happen that today
there may be many religious organisations which may be interpreting things, you
know, improperly. And people have to be, you know, people have to be cautious
about it. And such, such type of scepticism may be warranted in many occasions.
But the point is ultimately, the patient has to agree with the doctor. Not the
doctor with the patient. You know. The, if the, if we think that I have to find
a doctor who agrees with my diagnosis. Then, we have got the whole thing around,
around, you know, whole thing upside down. You know. We have got the idea that
the horse has to, the carriage has to, come before the horse. So, the horse is
going to pull the carriage. Not the carriage with the horse. So:

        sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye

He says, I accept everything that you say. Now, here, let us look at one
important point. You know. How do we understand that there is some asp...,
some section of the Gita is its conclusion? You know. You know. You know. You
know. So, we will see here. How can we know the Gita's meaning? There are three
different ways in which. Check the Gita's message itself. Check the
understanding of the original student. And check the actions of the original
student. You know. So, we will see that. What is the Gita's message? The Gita's
message, if you see, there is a flow in it. And Krishna teaches various things.
But then, if there is any clear categorical, you know, you know, unequivocal
declaration that is made. That is made at the end of the Gita. In 18.66. When
Krishna tells. Give up everything else.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

Give up all varieties of religion. And just surrender to Me. Me. Me, alone. "mām
ekaṁ". So, it is a very categorical. Yes. There are many paths talked about. But
this is the conclusion. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, generally,
there can be many things which are talked. For example, when a teacher is
trying to d..., attend, instruct the student. Teacher may give, instruct at
various levels. But what the teacher teaches at the end, that is the conclusion.
And especially, the teacher also says that. You know. Ok. Whatever I have
taught for us. Forget it. This is what I want you to do. So, 18.66 is like that.
And apart from that, also, we can see what is the unde..., you know, if you want
to know, there is a conversation between two people. The teacher. And the
student. What posed the essential message that was taught? We can look at what
came at the end, conclusion, in the teacher's statements. Then, we can see, what
was that the student understood? If the student's understanding, if student gave
some understanding. If the student's understanding was wrong, then teacher would
have corrected the understanding. So, now, here, Kri..., you know, Krishna has
spoken. And Arjuna is giving his understanding.

        paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma

So, do we see Krishna correcting? Oh, no. No. No. Do not think that I am "paraṁ
brahma"? There is some Brahma which is beyond Me. And that is what you have to
meditate on. Krishna does not correct Arjuna like that. So, what is understa...,
whatever understanding Arjuna has given. Krishna accepts that. You know. This is
the correct understanding. So, the understanding of Arjuna that is, is spoken by
him, that is told over here. And then, we can also look at the action of, you
know, the original student. You know, we, if somebody speaks, this is my
understanding. That may be twisted and misinterpreted. But then, we can look at
the action. So, what is the action? We do not see, you know, at the end of the
Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna trying to do some impersonal, jnana meditation. Arjuna
acts in devotional service to Krishna. So, we, we have to look at the, check at
the actions of the original student. Then, the actions are very clear. He acts
in devotional service. That the, he works. And his work is also in the mood of
devotion. So, before that, we can look at the Mahabharat, also, what happened
afterwards. So, essentially, if we let the Bhagavad Gita speak for itself, it is
very clear that, you know, Krishna is the Absolute Truth. And devotional service
to Him is the, you know, best means to that Absolute Truth. You know. You know.
You know. You know. You know. So, now, if we look at the importance of 18.66, as
I was mentioning. Sometimes, some people may say there are some verses which
seem to be contradictory. Which seem to contradict each other. So, imp..., if
contradictory statements are present in a conversation of book, you know, how to
resolve? The normal logic is, the later statement is given higher precedence
than the earlier statement. Why? Because the conversation is developing. And
another point is, here, it, respect to Bha..., 18.66, the irrefutable logic is
that, later statement rejects the earlier statements. You know. And that is what
18.66 does. So, now, let us move forward to the next verse.

        svayam evātmanātmānaṁ
        vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama
        bhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa
        deva-deva jagat-pate

So, "svayam evātmanātmānaṁ". So, actually, you know, you, alone, know your
glories. So, Krishna is telling Arjuna that, you know, actually, what to speak
of the dev..., you know, I not know, nor I understand You fully. That I know I
do not understand You fully. The devatas not understand You fully. Actually, no
one, except You alone, understand You. So, Krishna has told it from His side
that.

        vedāhaṁ samatītāni

I know everything. So, Krishna is acknowleding this. Arjuna is acknowledging
this over here. He says:

        svayam evātmanātmānaṁ
        vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama

You are "puruṣottama". And You alone know Your glories. And then, he gives
various describers.

        bhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa
        deva-deva jagat-pate

So, you know, four, actually, five epithets are used here by Arjuna to glorify
Krishna. First is "puruṣottama". There are many "puruṣa"s. I am also "puruṣa".
But You are "puruṣottama". You are the supreme "puruṣa". So, "puruṣottama". And
then, after that, "bhūta-bhāvana". "bhūta-bhāvana" means You are the source of
all living being. That Krishna has talked about several times in the Gita. You
know. That all living beings come from Him. And not only are You the source of
all living beings. You know. A father may have begotten some children. But
then, children go out of control. Father cannot control them. But Krishna is not
like that. "bhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa". "bhūteśa". You are the controller of all
living beings. "deva-deva jagat-pate". "deva-deva". You are the God of all Gods.
So, what Krishna has earlier told, you know, about how He Himself gives, you
know, you know, you know, devatas giving blessings. It is He who gives the
blessing, power that devatas to give blessings. That He is the ultimate object
of worship. So, Arjuna is acknowleding that. "deva-deva jagat-pate".
"jagat-pate". You are the master of the universe. So, you know, you know, You
are the best among all persons. Not, not just that the best of all persons.
Actually, You are the source of all persons. Not just the source of all persons.
Actually, You are the controller of all persons. And there may be many
controllers who have some power to control the various Gods. You know. But You
are the God of all Gods. Even the Gods worship You. We know, whenever the
"rākṣasa"s become extremely m..., m..., powerful. And malevolent. At that time,
the devatas go to Vishnu for help. So, You are "deva-deva". And then, You are
"jagat-pate". You are the master of the whole universe. So, actually, each of
these is used by Arjuna to demonstrate and emphasise how Krishna is the Absolute
Truth. So, now, after this, here, in this verse, more or less, Krishna conc...,
concludes His understanding. And Prabhupada explains how each of these words
mean different things. Now, from here, onwards, to the next few verses, Arjuna
will make a request. He has now f..., Arjuna has given his understanding from
12, 13, 14, 15. Four verses. But now, he starts making a request.

        vaktum arhasy aśeṣeṇa
        divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ
        yābhir vibhūtibhir lokān
        imāṁs tvaṁ vyāpya tiṣṭhasi

"vaktum arhasy". "vaktum arhasy". He says, you know. You speak. Speak my dear
Lord. "aśeṣeṇa". In detail. "divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ". You know. Divine indeed
are Your own glories. So, the word "ātma" can refer to soul. Or "ātma" can refer
to one's own. Own, we, we, see, the word soul. It can, this is my life and soul.
You know. So, a mother may say to the child, you know, you are my life and soul.
What does it mean? It is not that the soul of the mother has come out of the
body and is staying in the, now in the, you know, you know, you know, child.
Actually, that is a way of saying that, the word soul is sometimes used in
metaphorical sense. You are the life of my life. You are my essence. So, like
that, "ātma-vibhūtayaḥ". Your own "vibhūti"s.

        divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ
        yābhir vibhūtibhir lokān
        imāṁs tvaṁ vyāpya tiṣṭhasi

So, your opulences, by your opulence, you have pervaded the whole of existence.
And "vaktum". Please speak about them. Please speak about your opulences. And
how should you speak about them? You know. You know. You know. "a...",
"aśeṣeṇa". You know. You deserve to speak in detail. "śeṣa" means to remain.
"aśeṣeṇa" means without, you know, keeping anything in, in, we, holding anything
back. Just speak. Speak unreservedly.

        vaktum arhasy aśeṣeṇa

Your "divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ". Your divine opulences. And what kind of
opulences? By which, you have pervaded this world's. "imāṁs tvaṁ vyāpya
tiṣṭhasi". You know. You know. You know. So, from here, onwards, Arjuna is
actually accepted Krishna's conclusion. And Arjuna has become enlightened. But
Arjuna is thinking about, you know, common people. And he is thinking how will
they understand Krishna's glory. How will they be able to meditate on Him? So,
then, with that in mind, Arjuna is making this request. My dear Lord, You
pervade all of creation. So, people can look around. And think about the world.
And they can think about how extraordinary the world is. So, therefore, what are
they doing over here? They are, you know, he is saying that, they can look
around the world. And if they can connect what they see in the world with
Krishna. Then, that will enable them to begin and continue their God
consciousness. Their Krishna Consciousness. So, you know, now, Krishna will
make, Arjuna will make that request more clearly in the next verse.

        kathaṁ vidyām ahaṁ yogiṁs
        tvāṁ sadā paricintayan
        keṣu keṣu ca bhāveṣu
        cintyo ’si bhagavan mayā

"mayā". So, "kathaṁ vidyām ahaṁ yogiṁs". You know. "kathaṁ vidyām". How can I
know? "yogiṁs". It is interesting that, normally, the word "yogi" is used to
refer, you know, to a seeker. You know. If the person who is seeking yoga. One
who is practicing "yogi". That person is called as "yogi" Now, why is Krishna
being called "yogi" over here? Actually, you know, Krishna is also desiring
"yoga". Not for any self realisation of oneself. But to help us get realisation.
Krishna has used the word "yoga" to refer to His revelation, also.

        paśya me yogam aiśvaram

See my mystical opulence. So, you know, you are, you are, you know, mysteriously
connected with all the universe. You know. Actually, Arjuna will re..., you
know, "Sañjaya" will refer to, you know, Arjuna, sorry, "Sañjaya" will refer to
Krishna, also, as "yoga-īśvaraḥ". And:

        mahā-yogeśvaro hariḥ
        darśayām āsa pārthāya
        paramaṁ rūpam aiśvaram

In the Eleventh Chapter, we will see, you know, when Krishna displaces His
universal form. At that time, "Sañjaya" will use the word "yoga",
"mahā-yoga-īśvaraḥ" to refer to Arjuna. To refer to Krishna. And then, in the
conclusion of the Bhagavad Gita, in 18.78, also, you know, "Sañjaya" will refer
to Krishna as:

        yatra yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇo
        yatra pārtho dhanur-dharaḥ

So, there, also, Har..., Lord Hari, Lord Krishna is referred to "yogeśvaraḥ". So
that Krishna is not like any ordinary "yogi". That is understood. He is
"yogeśvaraḥ". He is the Lord of all the "yogi"s. You know. But here, the word
"yogi" is used in the sense that Krishna is also a person who is, you know, you
know, help, who is connected with everything. The yoga means connection. So, we
are seeking connection with the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth is also
connected with us. And the Absolute Truth is connected with, you know, all of
existence. Matter and spirit both. So, that connection of the Absolute Truth is
a mystery. And that mystery is unravelled by our purification. And by Krishna's
revelation. So, that process of Krishna's revelation by which, you know, of,
Kri..., firstly of, Kri..., b..., Krishna, how Krishna is connected. And how we
understand their connection. That involves, you know, yoga, also. Yoga from
Krishna's part. So, in that sense, "yogiṁs".

        kathaṁ vidyām ahaṁ yogiṁs
        tvāṁ sadā paricintayan

How can You, I meditate on You constantly? When we have love for Krishna, then
we will been able to naturally meditate on Him at all times. Directly. But
otherwise, when we are in the material world, our consciousness will inevitably
connected wth material things. So, then:

        keṣu keṣu ca bhāveṣu

So, here, the word "bhāv...", The "bhāva". "bhāva" can mean emotions. "bhāva"
can mean nature, also. So, here, it refers to material nature.

        keṣu keṣu ca bhāveṣu
        cintyo ’si bhagavan mayā

Oh, "bhagavan", how can I, while in material manifestations, you know, while is
observing the material manifestation, think of You? So, you know, you know,
Arjuna's question is specific over here. So, generally, our journey to spirit
does not happen just, you know, spontaneously. It, we, generally, move from
matter towards spirit. In our own observations. You know. Through this world.
So, Krishna is, you know, Ar..., being requested by Arjuna, please give us a
process by which we can understand in that way. So, Prabhupada also points to
this explanation of the word "yogi", here. He addresses Krishna specifically as
"yogi". Because He, Krishna is, He is covered over by, you know, His cov..., He
is the master of "yoga-māyā". So, because He is the master of "yoga-māyā". So,
He can reveal Himself if He so desires. And that is the desire of the Lord over
here. Desire of Arjuna over here. So, He:

"is the master of the yoga-māyā energy, by which He is covered and uncovered to
the common man."

You know. You know. So, now, because materialists cannot understand Krishna
spiritual. They have to rest concentrate the mind on His physical things. And
try to understand. Try to see how Krishna is manifest by physical
representations. So, the question will continue.

        vistareṇātmano yogaṁ
        vibhūtiṁ ca janārdana
        bhūyaḥ kathaya tṛptir hi
        śṛṇvato nāsti me ’mṛtam

So, "vistareṇātmano yogaṁ". "vistareṇa". "vistareṇa" means in detail. "ātmano
yogaṁ" means Your own glory. Your own mystic power. "vibhūtiṁ ca janārdana". Oh,
"janārdana". Oh, You are the maintainer of all living beings. Speak about Your
"vibhūti". "bhūyaḥ kathaya tṛptir hi". "bhūyaḥ". Now, the word "bhūyaḥ" had been
spoken right in the beginning of this chapter. You know. Where:

        bhūya eva mahā-bāho
        śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ

That, you know, "bhūya", Arjuna is saying that I am speaking, you know, Krishna
was speaking saying that, that again, here, oh, Arjuna, I am going to speak my
supreme words to you. So, "bhūya". Again. Again. Again. So, please, you know,
please speak it again.

        ... kathaya tṛptir hi
        śṛṇvato nāsti me ’mṛtam

When I speak Your, when You speak, Your katha is there. When I am hearing it.
Actually, I am not satisfied. "śṛṇvato nāsti me ’mṛtam". Actually, there is no,
satis..., there is, I am not satisfied. I want to hear more. And more. And more
about it. So, you know, the Krishna, nature of Krishna Katha is that, it gives
us more and more relish constantly. You know. You know. Good books, you know,
you know, people want to read them carefully. You know. Not wanting to miss any
sentence. Because every sentence is meaningful. Great books, they want to read
it again. Read them again and again. Why? Because, you know, when we read them,
there are multiple layers of meanings. And when we do a fresh reading. We know.
This meaning did not strike me. This meaning did not strike me. Yes. When there
are classics in literature. Which people want to read again and again. But when
we come to the greatest book. It is Bhagavad Gita. You know. The process of
discovery is not just one way. It is two ways. What does that mean? It is not
just that we who are searching. It is not that we by our careful reading. Oh, I
did not think, did not think about. I did not think about this. I did not think
about this. So, every time, we read the Bhagavad Gita, we can get new, new
meanings. Not just because we are discovering new, new meanings over there. But
because Bhagavad Gita is a manifestation of Krishna. It is a self-revelation of
Krishna. And Krishna reveals new, new meanings. You know. If Shakespeare has
written Hamlet. Then, people say, I will read hundred times that book. Because
there is so much depth in the poetry. And the imagery. And the meaning. Now,
Shakespeare is not present in Hamlet. It is not that Shake..., Shakespeare will
do the "dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ". He will give some intelligence to people to
understand that. No. And of course, Shakespeare is not God. And he, the,
whatever the, you know, whatever the artistry, the poetry, the imagery that is
there, you know, at a material level, where, where it is there. We give credit
for that. And if people can read many times, then they will relish it. But when
it comes to Krishna's words, Krishna's words are extraordinary. And that is why
people can relish it more and more. Day in and day out. More and more day in and
day out. Why? Not just because we are trying to discover real meaning. Then, we
are discovering because there is so much meaning, you know, within those words.
But along with that, there is multiple, there are many, many levels of meaning.
Ok. This point, I will connect with this point. This word, we, and we will get
so much nectar over there. But actually, it is Krishna, also, who reveals. And
that is why there is no end to the relishing. Once we de..., start developing a
taste for Krishna katha. For, then, that kath..., katha, that taste goes on. And
on. And on. And whatever is the consciousness of Arjuna over here, that same
consciousness is expressed by "Sūta Gosvāmī", you know, in the, as the sage,
among the sages of "Naimiṣāraṇya". "vayaṁ tu na vitṛ". Here, he quotes over
here.  Prabhupada quotes from 1.1.19 in the "Bhāgavatam". 

        vayaṁ tu na vitṛpyāma
        uttama-śloka-vikrame
        yac chṛṇvatāṁ rasa-jñānāṁ
        svādu svādu pade pade

"vayaṁ tu na vitṛpyāma". "na vitṛpyāma". I am not satisfied. We are not
satisfied. "uttama-śloka-vikrame". The glories of "uttama-śloka". We are not
satisfied with them. Why? "yac chṛṇvatāṁ rasa-jñānāṁ". This knowledge is not
ordinary. This is "rasa-jñānāṁ". There is so much "rasa". There is so much
nectar in this. And what will happen by that? "svādu svādu pade pade". That, it,
every step, there is so much nectar in it. "svādu svādu pade pade". So, we just
have to get a taste for Krishna katha. By gradual purification, the taste will
come. And once the taste comes, it will just go stronger and stronger. And we
will relish it more. And more. And more. You know. So, you know, Prabhupada
writes how the "Purāṇa". You know. 

"Purāṇas are histories of bygone ages that relate the pastimes of the various
incarnations of the Lord. In this way the reading matter remains forever fresh,
despite repeated readings."

Why? Because it is the pastime of Krishna. It is Krishna Himself who is
manifesting through those wonderful pastimes. And giving us an opportunity to
relish those pastimes. To relish His own glories. So, we see how Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu, he would like to, you know, you know, have, hear, you know, pastime
of Dhruva Maharaja. The pastime of Prahlada Maharaja. Hundreds of times. And why
was he so eager? Because, you know, it was relishing. It was not just, you know,
not just some theoretical, you know, intellectual understanding that he was
getting. It is actually a, you know, a, a revelation of the sweetness of one's
object of love. That was, that one was getting. So, actually, people generally
have a concept of newness in terms of externals. You know. He says, people want
to have something new. Oh, I want to have a new dress. You know. A new watch. A
new cellphone. A new computer. A new house. Or a new spouse. I want something
new. New. New. So, people want s..., people think of newness only in terms of
externals. But actually, even if they get all these new things, internally, what
is happening? All these new things boil down to the same old experiences. Isn't
it? All these new things, they will, what experiences they can offer us, they
can offer us only the experiences of eating, the pleasures of eating, mating,
sleeping and defending. What is the person going to do with all these duties?
Ultimately, it boils down to these pleasures, only. So, therefore, you know, you
know, the externals may be new. But the internals are not new. For a devotee,
you know, externally, we might seem to be doing the same activity. We are going
to the same temple. We are worshipping the same deities. We are chanting the
same maha mantra. You know. You know. We, we are hearing the same stories. But
externals may be old. But the internals become new. Why? Because as our love for
Krishna becomes awakened. By hearing the Krishna katha more and more, the
puri..., impurities go away. The love for, our original love for Krishna becomes
revived. Awakened. And by that, we connect more and more with Krishna. And
because Krishna is unlimited. Therefore, the joy that we get from the connection
with Krishna is also unlimited. People think that, you know, you know, you know,
people do not, unless one, you know, here, is experiencing it internally, one
will not be able to understand or relish it. We have to see it not from
outsider's perspective. But from insider's perspective. Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura would give the example of a, you know, trying to lick a honey
bottle from outside. You know. Without opening the lid. So, when we actually are
emotionally and devotionally connected with Krishna, then the same activities can
give us richer and richer experiences. You know. And of course, in devotional
service, also, there is variety. It is not that the same thing all the time.
There are so many books which are giving pastimes of the Lord. There are so many
holy places that we can go to. There are so many incarnations of the Lord. There
are so many holy names of Krishna, also. So, there is variety, also. But the,
but the, we, if our goal is not to ext..., newness in the external sense. It is
newness in the internal sense. And that newness in the internal sense, you know,
you know, it is relished when we go deep in our relationships with Kri..., you
know, Krishna. So, generally, for example, people in science. You know. When
they want to discover some new concept. They discover new s..., concept. They
may think, oh, this is so wonderful. I have discovered this concept. So, the,
with, actually, the exciting thing is the discovery. Once some equation has been
discovered. Then, after that, ok, it becomes a mathematical, mechanical function.
You use it to calculate things. Then, the thrill goes out. And then, we want to
make some new discovery. New discovery. So, in spiritual life, in material life,
the excitement is in discovery. So, we may feel, is there some n..., n..., is
there something new to discover in spiritual life, also? Actually, in spiritual
life, it is not so much of discovery of a new concept. As it is a recovery of a
lost map. Reco..., it is not a discovery of a new concept. But the recovery of
an old map. This map is the map which shows us the pathway to Krishna. So, we
get the map. And then, we move along the map. When we move along the map
steadily, steadily, steadily onwards, then what happens, ultimately, we reach
Krishna. And Krishna is our long-lost, you know, you know, beloved. If we had a
childhood friend. And after that, we meet that person after man..., long, long,
long time. Then, that person still knows us. And remembers us. And lov..., loves
us. Then, then, when we meet that person, actually, there is a joy in that
reunion. So, similarly, when we reconnect with Krishna, the greater our
reconnection, the greater is the joy. And Krishna is not like any ordinary
person. His glories are not limited. His glories are unlimited. And that is why
the joy that comes in relishing His glories is also unlimited. And, you know,
you know, you know, it is that joy that Arjuna is relishing. And Krishna, you
know, Arjuna is requesting Krishna. Please describe to me these glories so, so
that I, I will relish them. And world will also come to know how they can think
of You. And they can also join us, join me and all the devotees in relishing
Your glories. So, in response to this, Krishna will start speaking from the next
verse describing His glory, His "vibhūti"s in the next several, twen..., almost
twenty verses, twenty, twenty-one verses of the next, of this chapter. That we
will discuss in our next class. 

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
