Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TWpiKImevOk
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=HUB0RyXe_L4-9KXVywPIoJnrnEN8MTU0ODQ4OTM3MkAxNTQ4NDAyOTcy&event=video_description&v=TWpiKImevOk&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_114_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_11_Text_51_to_55_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are at the last part of the Eleventh Chapter. The Eleventh Chapter is called as
the "virāt-rūpa". "viśva-rūpa", rather. So, the "viśva-rūpa" is the description
of the universal form. The revelation of Krishna. And in that, we have
discussed, till now, several sections. You know. Currently, we are at verse
11.51. Which has come pa..., part of the last section. So, let us have an
overview of the various sections before we continue from verse 51. So, verses 1
to 4 are Arjuna's request to see Krishna's universal form. Verses 5 to 8 are
Krish..., Kri..., you know, are Krishna's descriptions of a, of the universal
form.  Krishna is giving a preview of what is going to come. Then, verses 9 to
14 are "Sañjaya"'s description of the universal form. Therein, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know, "Sañjaya" is, you know, from a distant
perspective, the camera goes backwards. And he describes what is happ..., you
know, what is happening over there. What Arjuna is seeing. 15 to 31 is Arjuna's
description of the, his, the vision. Then, it has several divisions. Four
divisions, precisely.  You know. We discussed Arjuna's, you know, you know,
vision of the universal form. What he saw. Then, he saw, Arjuna's vision of,
what is the effect of the universal form of the universe. Then, Arjuna is
beholding of the kala-rupa. You know. The, on the, the visio..., you know, the
vis..., the form, the vision as manifested on the battlefield. And then, the
effect of that on Arjuna. And concluding with his prayer. Who are you?

        ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo

Then, after that, 32 to 34 is Krishna, you know, as the "virāt...",
"viśva-rūpa", telling Arjuna that, you know, you know, become My instrument. And
then, after that, there are Arjuna's prayers. 35 to 46. So, those prayers, also,
we discussed, had four parts. Discussed, first, he offers, you know, he
glorifies. Then, he offers obeisances. Then, he seeks forgiveness. And then, he
requests for the beholding of the, you know, four-handed, "catur-bhujena". And
then, this, return to the "saumya rupa". Now, in the 50th verse, you know,
Krishna has obliged to, Arjuna's request by beholding the "viśva-rūpa". Sorry,
beholding the "catur", from the "viśva-rūpa", he came to the "catur-bhujena"
rupa. And from the "catur-bhujena" rupa, he came to the "dvi-bhuja" rupa. So,
like that, the vision is gone now. And now, you know, Arjuna is now going to
reply to what Krishna has just done for him. So, let us look at the verses.

        arjuna uvāca

        dṛṣṭvedaṁ mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ
        tava saumyaṁ janārdana
        idānīm asmi saṁvṛttaḥ
        sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ

So, "dṛṣṭvedaṁ". "dṛṣṭvā". "idam". I am seeing. "mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ". The human form.
"tava saumyaṁ janārdana". "tava". Of Yours. "saumyaṁ". "saumyaṁ" is gentle.
Arjuna is, he is beautiful. "saumyaṁ" can mean soft. Gentle. Soothing.
"janārdana". Oh, as we have, we have discussed earlier, the word "janārdana" can
mean, oh, chastiser of the enemies. Or it can also mean, oh, you know, you know,
protector of people in general. "idānīm asmi saṁvṛttaḥ". "idānīm" means now. I
am "saṁvṛttaḥ". Settled. Calmly settled. "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". I have
returned to my own nature. My consciousness. "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ".
"prakṛtiṁ" means nature. So, you know, we see that Kri..., Arjuna has a steady
relationship with Krishna. That is a relationship of friendship. At the external
level, it may appear that Arjuna is a ksatriya. Krishna is a ksatriya. And these
are two ksatriya friends. But that is only an external vision. At a deeper,
internal vision, you know, both of them are transcendental. Krishna is the
Supreme Lord. And Arjuna is the devotee. And so, "prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". So, from
external point of view, "prakṛtiṁ gataḥ" means, ok, two ksatriyas are now
returning to their original friendship. But from an internal perspective, it is
that, the Lord and His devotee are returning to their intimate relationship. So,
that "prakṛtiṁ" is not material "prakṛtiṁ". You know. The word "prakṛtiṁ",
generally, we use in terms of material "prakṛtiṁ". But that is not its only use.
The word "prakṛtiṁ" basically means nature. Or energy. You know. You know. You
know. As nature or energy, you know, the important point is that, there is, you
know, you know, you know, material nature. Or material nature. And spiritual
nature. Or spiritual energy. So, both exist. And both are, you know, you know,
playing, a, a role as per the Lord's will. So, the word "prakṛtiṁ" used in a,
you know, spiritual context. We see in "daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ".

        mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha
        daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ
        bhajanty ananya-manaso
        jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

So, in four point, you know, sorry, nine point fou..., you know, thirteen,
Krishna uses this word. So, that is "prakṛtim", He uses. "daivīṁ". As divine.
So, "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". To the, Arjuna has returned back to the normal
situation. So, actually, you know, you know, in this world, also, when we face
very troublesome situations. Suddenly, in this world, something extremely
bewildering happens. You know. We may lose a loved one. Or there may be a
terrible accident in which we get, you know, we get immobilised temporarily. Or
we may have a huge financial loss. Or there might be a big earthquake. Or a
tsunami. Or a, some other hurricane. Or natural disaster. And them, that is in
one sense, we are seeing the "kala-rupa" of Krishna. And even a devotee can get
bewildered when the devotee sees the "kala-rupa" of Krishna. In the sense that,
you know, it, it is not that a devotee is heartless. And when we say, we should
be spiritual, that does not mean that we can naturally, we can, we are normally,
we are dead to all material emotions. You know. We do not want to get carried
away by material emotions. But we should not just distinuish all emotions
between material and spiritual. Yes, that is one level of differentiation. But
there is also something called as human response. So, we should not dismiss
everything at the human level as material. Because we are currently existing at
three levels. Material. Men..., physical. Mental. And spiritual. And in just
physical and mental are material. And they do affect us. So, we see Arjuna,
also, you know, grieved bitterly. You know. When, you know, "Abhimanyu" was
killed. Was it that Arjuna forgot the philosophy? You know. No. It is not that
Arjuna forgot the philosophy. But there are natural emotions of affection
between a father and the son. And their father will naturally grieve. So, the
point here is that a devotee may get overwhelmed. He says, Arjuna, you know, you
know, his:


        mā te vyathā mā ca vimūḍha-bhāvo

You know. Krishna, when Krishna is argue..., you know, is reassuring Arjuna that
"mā te vyathā". Do not be in a, do not be troubled. "vimūḍha-bhāvo". Do not be
bewildered. So, Arjuna was feeling like that. You know.

        pravyathitāntar-ātmā

He has said in his prayers that "āntar-ātmā". My inner being is completely
"vyathit". So, like that, it can happen to devotees, also, that when, you know,
mat..., material nature shows its ugly feature. You know. It shows the
"kala-rupa". So, at that time, the devotee can also be devastated. And then,
devotee can also lose, you know, perspective. And devotee can become
overwhelmed. So, at that time, just as Arjuna:

        ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo

My dear Lord, what is this? What kind of form is this? Now, we hear about
"kala-rupa", conceptually. And it is good to know about the concepts. But along
with that, we also need to know that this is not just a conceptual description.
Along with that, it also, you know, is meant to instruct us. So, the, you know,
unfortunate things that happen in this world, actually, they are the "kala-rupa"
of Krishna. Now, in one sense, "kala":

        kālo ’smi loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddho

Time I am, the destroyer of all the worlds. So, whatever destruction happens.
And whatever destabilisation that brings, it is not just that only the, you
know, destruction at the "Kurukṣetra" war was due to, you know, due to the
"kala-rupa". No. All destruction is by the "kala-rupa". So, we understand this
is also a "kala-rupa". This is not a pleasant form. This is an agitating form.
And as Arjuna first im..., bewilderment, he, what is this my dear Lord? Then,
the Lord responded. And then, he offered obeisances. And then, he said, my dear
Lord, please show me the "saumya rupa". So, like that, when a devotee gets
bewildered. You know. One definition of intelligence, as we have discussed is
to, intelligence means to know what to do when we do not know what to do. That
means that to know what to do when we do not know what to do, that means, there
is a specific what to do. Ok. This problem has come. How do I solve this? I do
not know. We do not know what to do. But there is a generic what to do. What is
that? Pray to Krishna for guidance. B..., beg to Krishna. Krishna, please keep
me engaged in Your service. And please guide me how I can serve You now. So,
when we do that, then what happens by that is we keep moving forward. So,
Krishna will:

        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

You know:

        yena mām upayānti te

Krishna will give us intelligence of how to, we can move ahead. It may not, it
may not be that the intelligence will come immediately. But it will surely come.
And it will help us to move on in our spiritual life. So:

        sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ

And then, when Krishna gives the intelligence, then we will see that, ok, there
is, this "kala-rupa" is there. But along with the "kala-rupa", there is
something wonderful, also, which is happening. What is that something wonderful?
Actually, it is not that a devotee is, you know, hav..., having the head in the
sky. And devotee thinks that the tragedies of this world are wonderful. No. As
devotees, you know, we would like, you know, we, devotees do not want anyone to
suffer. And tragedies bring tremendous suffering. But still, devotees also
understand that, ultimately, it is Krishna who is the caretaker of all living
beings. And Krishna has some plan. And a devotee turns the eyes from the
distractive form of material nature. Which is "kala-rupa", Krishna mani..., of,
Krishna manifesting to the "saumya rupa". So, we look at the "kala-rupa". Then,
we turn to "saumya rupa". You know. The, this is sometimes called as tough love.
This is, the "kala-rupa" of this world is Krishna's tough love. Tough love means
that sometimes, you know, love has to be tough. If a child is not studying. Or a
child is doing mischief. Or a child is playing with fire. At that time, the
mother may have to be tough in her love. There is love. But there is toughness,
also. So, the "kala-rupa" is the tough part. But the Gita wisdom helps us to
know from that, connect the tough part with the love part. And understand,
actually, that, yes, yes, ultimately, we discussed, what is the "kala-rupa"?
"kala-rupa" destroys the temporary to make way for the eternal. Destroys the
temporary to make way for the eternal. That means, you know, when we see the
distractiveness and the desctruction of material nature. Desctruction means,
first, we see that something is just destroyed. And then, by that, we understand
that everything, it, it, we, it give, sinks deeper into us that everything here
is destructible. So, when we see the destruction. It reminds us the
destructibility of everything. It reminds in a very forceful way. And then,
that, in a more, inspires us. Motivates us. Impells us. To redirect our
affection. Our attraction from the temporary to the eternal. From the world to
Krishna. And in that way, our vision shifts from the "kala-rupa" to the "saumya
rupa". And then, in this way, when a devotee takes shelter of Krishna, at that
time, "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". Devotee will become
restored to the normal situation of, yes, Krishna is my master. I am His
servant. And let me keep serving Him forever. That is what we would like to do.
"sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". So, generally, in this world, when, when things, you
know, things get, you know, disturb us. How can things disturb us? You know.
When there is change in the external world, that change naturally disturbs us.
Now, when the change disturbs us, our normal expectation is that Krishna should
shred, set the external thing right. And that is what we pray to Krishna for.
But ultimately, you know, the external is not the shelter for us. The shelter is
the internal. It is our connection with Krishna, that is the shelter. To the
extent that the externals disturb us, to that extent, it indicates that our
internal is not sheltered in Krishna. It means, if my internal shelter is in my
bank account. And suddenly, you know, the Indian rupee devalues. Or there is an
economic slow-down. And then, I realise, oh, my money, it is of not much value.
Or the stock market crash. And I will lose money. I will feel tremendously
agitated. So, that agitation, when I, that I may pray to, may I pray to Krishna.
Krishna, please set this right. Please let this economy come back on track. Or
even if they cannot present, cannot come back on track, at least, let my shares
big, have the money. So, I will have the money. I want to serve You. But I need
money for that, also.

So, now, you know, here, what is happening? The externals have changed. And
through the external change, Krishna is teaching us. It is in..., you are
getting so disturbed. That indicates that your internal shelter is not in Me.
Your internal shelter in something other than Me. And that is an important
learning lesson for a de..., learning opportunity for a devotee. Oh, that means,
I should, what Krishna want..., is demonstrating through me. And what Kri..., is
getting confirmed by my agitation about this issue is that I am not sheltered in
Krishna. So, let me take shelter of Krishna. Let me move my inner shelter from
money to Krishna. You know. If I have some respectable position even in devotee
circles. And suddenly, my position is challenged. Then, what happens when my
position is challenged? At that time, I start feeling that, oh, you know, I have
this position. I may be a counsellor. And when I start feeling, oh, what is
this? You know. People are not respecting my, the counsellor. My counsellor.
Yes. You know. He is saying that I am not, I am not, you know, caring enough. I
am not competent enough. I am not advanced enough. This. That. And becuase of
that, I feel, I may feel my position challenged. Now, I may get disturbed. Now,
the disturbance indicates that my shelter is not in service to Krishna. But my
shelter is in the, you know, in the prestige that I am getting as a counsellor.
So, what should we do in such a situation? Now, we may see, no, but we need the
externals, also, to be right to serve Krishna. We need some financial stability
by which we can serve Krishna. If I have to serve as a counsellor. If somebody
is just going around, you know, you know, doing character assassination on me,
of me, me, then how can I serve Krishna? You know. That may be true. But we have
to see, things, see things first and foremost at the internal level. So, let me
get my shelter within. And when we do that, you know, Kri..., there are external
changes which are meant primarily to help us make internal changes. And when
the, Krishna sees us making internal changes, then Krishna can make the external
changes far more Kri..., easily, and effectively than what we can do by all our
plans and endeavors. You know. So, that means, a devotee should be able to move
inwards. And make, make internal changes. You know. Not, not that it means we
are passive externally. Not that we accept everything that happens externally
passively. But that we do not just act only at the external level. Ok. What
inner change, what improvement can I try to make? Now, we may say changing our
shelter from some material attachment to Krishna is not easy. Yes, that is true.
And it is not going to happen overnight. Definitely. That is true. But I, it is
never going to happen. Leave alone happening overnight. If we do not try for
it. So, these sort of situations when we are shaken up.

        pravyathitāntar-ātmā       

Our inner being is completely troubled. That time, this is the opportunity for
us to align our inner, you know, you know, you know, our inner compass towards
Krishna. You know. It has often gone a little off-track. Yes, I want Krishna,
also. But along with that, I want many other things, also. So, we get the co...,
inner compass back us straight focused on Krishna. And then, when we do that,
you know, then:

        sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ

Then, we return back to that inner position of calmness. Of, you know, poise. Of
happiness. So, as we get, normally have in our relationship with Krishna. So,
now Krishna will speak after this. Now, before we move forward, here, let us
look at one more point. Krishna is saying over, Arjuna is telling over here.
"mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ". What does this word "mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ" indicate? You know. That,
Prabhupada's whole commentary is focused on this. That, you know, the Lord's
original form is "mānuṣaṁ". "mānuṣaṁ" is, is it, is it, does it mean mortal? No.
It means human. Human means, the Lord originally has a two-handed form. A form,
just like, that, that is just like yours and mine. Or rather, you know,
sometimes, people say that is our form. You know. How, why should God have a
form like ours? So, it is not that God has a form like ours. It is that we have
a form like God's. You know. There are two different conceptions. There is
anthropomorphism. And there is theomorphism. Anthropomorphism means morphised
form. Like we morphology. The study of structures. Study of shapes in biology.
Morphology. And then, there is, anthropomorphism means that the idea that we
have ascribed God a human form. Because we are human beings. So, we have
envisioned God in a human form. You know. This is actually, it is just very
self-centered analysis. Because we are taking ourselves to be the reference
point. The starting point. You know. But the fact is that the scriptures
describe that God has a form. And God's original form is reflected, you know, in
our form. So, man is made in the image of God. Even the Bible says that. And
Krishna says also in 15.7, as we will see, He says that:

        mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke
        jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

"aṁśaḥ". "aṁśaḥ" means sparks. So, we are all sparks of Krishna. So, "mānuṣaṁ
rūpaṁ". So, this form of Krishna is originally the two-handed form. And that is
not a mortal, material form. That is a transcendental eternal form. And that
form is what Arjuna is seeing now.

        dṛṣṭvedaṁ mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ
        tava saumyaṁ ...

"saumyaṁ". This is very affectionate. It is very easy. It is much more easier to
develop an affectionate relationship with the form of Krishna as, as a
two-handed person than as a "kala-rupa". You know. What do you do? As Arjuna,
when you have to offer obei..., what to speak of, say, embracing. Or expressing
love. Or talking. Even obei..., even obei..., even obering..., offering
obeisances is difficult. Because Arjuna says, where should I offer obeisances?
You know.

        ... atha pṛṣṭhatas te

You know.

        namo namas te ’stu sahasra-kṛtvaḥ

        namaḥ purastād atha pṛṣṭhatas te
        namo ’stu te sarvata eva sarva

He says, I offer "sahasra-kṛtvaḥ". I offer obeisances again an again. "namaḥ
purastād atha pṛṣṭhatas te". I offer obeisances ahead and behind. And again,
again, I offer obeisances. So, you know, even we are offering, offering,
offering, and offering, offering obeisances is difficult, what to speak of doing
other things. So, therefore, what is important here is, "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ
gataḥ". That, you know, this "mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ" is the original form. And relating
with the original form is the original nature of the living entity. And when we
understand this, then we will return to the original nature. If we think of
going to some other relationship. Or going to a relationship with some other
form. That may be, sorry, other manifestation. That is the impersonal
manifestation. Then, we will not get practice of "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". You
know. That will lead to:

        kleśo ’dhika-taras teṣām

That will lead to misery and frustration as is discussed in the Twelfth Chapter.
So, now, Krishna will start speaking. Let us look at it.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        su-durdarśam idaṁ rūpaṁ
        dṛṣṭavān asi yan mama
        devā apy asya rūpasya
        nityaṁ darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ

So, "su-durdarśam idaṁ rūpaṁ". "idaṁ rūpaṁ". This form. What is the nature of
that form? "su-durdarśam". It is extremely difficult to see. "su-durdarśam idaṁ
rūpaṁ". And what kind of? "dṛṣṭavān asi yan mama". As you are see..., as you
have seen Me. As you are seeing Me. It is extremely rare to see. "devā apy asya
rūpasya". Even the Gods are "nityaṁ darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ". They are constantly
aspiing to see this form. "nityaṁ darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ". So, what happens?
"su-durdarśam idaṁ rūpaṁ". You know. What is He telling over here? That, you
know, you know, you know, this is very, very difficult to see. You know. We see
in the Tenth Canto that before Krishna was to appear, at that time, when He was
in the womb, the devatas came and started offering prayers. And all the devatas
are offering prayers because they are all recognising that Krshna is the eternal
transcendental Lord. You know. They know that Vishnu, you know, is the person to
whom they pray. And now, Vishnu has said that I will appear. And then, here,
accordingly, according to that proph..., you know, prophecy, here, the Lord has
appeared. But when Krishna appears, even they are surprised. That is how Brahma
gets bewildered. That is how Indra gets bewildered. How does that happen?
Because even they have not seen such, this form. You know. Generally, you know,
the devatas, so, this is the, the, below is the lower planetary systems. And the
middle is earthly. And then, above is heavenly. And then, above that is, you
know, the "Kshir Sagar". Where there is Vishnu residing. And then, beyond that
is the spiritual world. So, normally, the devatas go to the "Kshir Sagar". And
there, they do not even see Vishnu. They just pray to Vishnu. And then, Vishnu
responds. Generally, you know, by giving a message in the heart of Brahma. You
know. So, you know, the devatas do not get to see Vishnu, also, regularly.
Although, Vishnu of course comes sometimes. Sometimes means, whenever the
Vishn..., whenever Vishnu is to perform some, you know, assist the devatas. So,
Vishnu may come and attack, fight on behalf, behalf of the devatas. But
generally, also, Vishnu does not, is not seen. Seeing Vishnu is recent. Rarely,
it happens. But seeing Krishna is very rare. And that is why He is saying,
"devā apy asya rūpasya". "asya rūpasya". This form. "devā" is also "nityaṁ
darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ". They are constantly desiring to see it. You know. So, now,
Prabhupada basically explains in the purport that it is only by opening up
spiritual eyes that we can see the Lord. It is not by any ordinary means. Now,
Krishna will go on by describing this. So, now, 52nd verse, He said has that
this is very difficult to see. Even devatas are hankering to see it. Now, then,
53rd verse, He will describe what are all the ways by which one cannot see Him.
When we say it is something very difficult to achieve. Then, you know, we will
say, you know, ok, suppose, you want to say that, if you want to go to
Badrinath. It is very difficult to go there. Then, we may say, oh, actually, you
cannot go there by plane. Then, you can say, you cannot go there by train. Then,
you can say, you cannot go there by car. You cannot go there by boat, also.
Then, how do you go? Because you will have to walk all the way to the top. Oh,
really? That you understand then. So, normally, when you want to say, something is
difficult, we will give a, cannot go, do this. You cannot go this way. You
cannot go this way. You cannot go this way. You cannot go this way. So, like
that, when Krishna says, it is very difficult to know Him. First, in 53rd verse,
He tells, what are all the ways by which we cannot go there. Now, of course,
some parts of Badrinath may be accessible now. But there are some parts of Guru
Badrinath, that are very remote. And then, we just have to walk up there, only.
So, the point is an exam..., this is an example which is meant to illustrate a
particular point. So, now, Krishna will describe what are the ways in which one
cannot know Him. So, 11.53:

        nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā
        na dānena na cejyayā
        śakya evaṁ-vidho draṣṭuṁ
        dṛṣṭavān asi māṁ yathā

So, "nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā". "nāhaṁ vedair". Not by study of the Vedas. Not by
"tapasā". "na dānena". Not by giving charity. "na cejyayā". Not by worship. By
none of these can I be known. So, then, how can I be known? So, f..., by, not by
study of the Vedas. These four ways, he is saying, not by known, you know, what,
what happens by, exactly? What cannot be done, that is not being even told over
here. How He can be known, He will, told in the next verse. "śakya evaṁ-vidho
draṣṭuṁ". Is it possible? "evaṁ-vidho draṣṭuṁ". "evaṁ-vidho" means like now,
like you are seeing Me now. "dṛṣṭavān asi māṁ yathā". As you are seeing Me now.
So, now, it is very significant that the impersonalists want to say that,
actually, there is some higher reality beyond Krishna. And that is what we have
to go to. But Krishna is very clearly saying, "māṁ yathā". Seeing Me is very
rare. The impersonalists say, oh, actually, when you are less intelligent, you
can think of a form. And then, when you become more intelligent, then you go
beyond the form. But then, Krishna is telling that, actually, seeing this form
itself is rare. It is not that He is saying that, ok, this seeing the form is
for common people. And going beyond the form is rare. He does not say that. It
is, it is saying that it is so rare by that, by this normal Vedic process of
elevation. One cannot get to see it. So, Vedic process of elevation generally
give punya. And take one to Svarga. But they cannot take one beyond. So, Kri...,
these are the, you know, four things. "nāhaṁ vedair". "vedair" means the study
of the Vedas. So, the recitation of the Vedas. The memorisation of the Vedas.
"nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā". Somebody may do a lot of austerities. You know. By
willpower. We know the pastime of the milk-drinking brahmacari. In
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta". You know. It is just taking only milk. But what happened
was that, "Chaitanya Mahaprabhu" said you cannot just, you know, obtain the
Supreme Lord by austerity. You know. You know. Or just by drinking milk. By
doing austerity like that. He says, you require pure devotion for that. So, "na
tapasā". "nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā". "nāhaṁ vedair", we see the example that, you
know, there are many examples of people who are Vedic pandits. We have the
example of "Keshav Kashmiri" in "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". Very learnt in the Vedas.
But still, he did not understand what the ultimate goal of life is.

        nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā
        na dānena na cejyayā

"na dānena". So, you know, "na dānena" refers to those who give charity. Now,
you know, you know, the point, giving charity is good. But that does not
necessarily prove anything. That that does not necessarily prove that this, you
know, this charity is necessarily transcendental. You know. Charity is in
goodness. But we cannot know the Supreme Lord by goodness. You know.
Harishchandra is a famous king in the Vedic culture. Who is glorified for his
truthfulness. But that does not ma..., make him automatically transcendental. Or
spiritual. So, people may give a lot of charity. But cha..., by charity alone,
one cannot know the Lord. So, you know, you know, you know, then, "ca",
"ijyayā". "ijyayā" means worship. So, now, the word "ijyayā" can refer to deity
worship. But norm..., in this context, in the Vedic context, "ijyayā" refers to
fire sacrifices. By worship. So, actually, when the sacred fire comes. When the
brahmana is chanting mantras. And they are offering "āhuti". Then, that is
"ijyayā". They are doing worship of Vishnu. Who is manifesting his mouth, you
know, through Agni. So, Agni Deva is manifesting. And Agni Deva is accepting the
sacrifices. And those sacrifices are going to all the, you know, devatas through
him. "na cejyayā". So, even the, by that, we cannot know. And that we see in the
pastime of the yajnic brahmanas. Their wives, they were able to see. You know.
Their wives were able to see wat? That, you know, you know, you know, their
wives were able to see that, they, you know, you know, this is the Supreme Lord.
And we should go to Him. And in fact, they did not even think so much that He is
the Supreme Lord. Oh, it is Krishna. He is the Lord of our heart. Let us go to
Him. But when they saw this, you know, their husbands. They thought, you know,
we are performing big, the sacr..., big sacrifice. What are these children doing
over here? Get out of the way. They did not, actually, that they did not even
say get out of the way. They just neglected them completely. It is quite
impersonal. And quite dehumanising to neglect a person like that. So, "dṛṣṭavān
asi māṁ yathā". So, how can you know? You cannot know Me by any of these means.
So, actually, when Krishna says, you know, "dṛṣṭavān asi māṁ yathā". You cannot
see Me. So, seeing is not just literally seeing. You know. In the, you know,
pastime of Mukunda, you know, you know, when, you know, Chaitanya Maha...,
there is a long pastime. Most of you will probably be knowing it. That he was
having some association with mayavada. And then, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu got very
angry because of that. And Chaitanya Mahaprabhu said you will not be able to
see Me for ten million lifetimes. And he started danc..., first, Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu said, just take him out of my association. Never bring him back. And
then, he is, they said, you will not be able to see me for, after ten, for ten
million lifetimes. And he started dancing. And just ten million lifetimes, I
will be able to see him. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was so please with his positive
attitude. By his faithfulness. By his humility. By his devotion. You know. That
he called him back. And then, he offers prayers. And then, he says, my dear
Lord. Actually, you have allowed me to see You. That is my great, great fortune.
But then, even the demons saw you. And seeing You is actually not really seeing
You. You know. Because real seeing you happens with great devotion. Demons like
Shishupala. Dantavakra. Kamsa. Jarasandha. They all saw You. But what did they
want to do? They saw Your all-attractive supreme form. Which is the shelter of
all living beings. Which even Brahma, and Shiva, and Lakshmi adore. And what did
they want to do? They wanted to shoot arrows. And kill that form. So, what kind
of, what is the use of seeing in this way? This is my dear Lord. See..., real
seeing of You is seeing with devotion. And that seeing with devotion can happen
s..., only when there is devotion. So, please grant me devotion. You have given
me dar..., Your darshan. I am grateful for that. But please grant me Your
devotion, also. Then, I will be able to truly see You. So, you know, here, he is
praying that, please, you know, so, when he is saying:

        dṛṣṭavān asi māṁ yathā

So, when do..., one does, does all these activities, they are good. "ijyayā".
And then, "vedaiḥ". "tapa...". "vedaiḥ". You know. "vedair". "tapasā". "dānena".
These are good. Piou..., they are virtuous activities in Vedic culture. But they
alone do not lead to the vision of the Lord. So, what is required for that
vision? That will be described. They do not lead to vision means, one may even
get to see the Lord. But one will not be able to understand the significance of
darshan of the Lord. And that is why, it is almost as if one has not seen the
Lord only. So, one, to see the Lord means, to actually see with understanding.
And how that happens, that will be described in the next verse.

        bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya
        aham evaṁ-vidho ’rjuna
        jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ ca tattvena
        praveṣṭuṁ ca paran-tapa

So, "bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya". "bhaktyā". By devotional service. "ananyayā
śakya". "ananyayā" means, you know, "anya" is different. Or other. "ananya"
means there is no, nobody else. That means undistracted. You know. It is unmixed
by any other thing. Not mixed by fruitive activity. Not mixed by speculative
knowledge. The "ananya". It is not directed towards anything else. Or anyone
else. And it does not contain anything else.

        bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya
        aham evaṁ-vidho ’rjuna

"aham evaṁ-vidho ’rjuna". You will know Me as I am. And, "evaṁ-vidho" means
right now, as you are knowing Me, that way, I can be known. And "jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ
ca tattvena". "jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ". By "jñātuṁ" means, by knowing in this way,
"draṣṭuṁ". Seeing Me. "tattvena". "tattvena" mean, you know, in truth.
"tattvena". And then, "praveṣṭuṁ ca paran-tapa". "praveṣṭuṁ". You will enter.
Now, where will He enter? Now, sometimes, as soon as we hear the word entering.
We may think, what is happening? Entering, is this referring to brahmajyoti?
That we are try..., entered into the brahmajyoti. No. Krishna does not use any
impersonal aspect over here. Impersonal reference over here. All that He is
saying is, you will enter. So, what will you enter into tough? You will enter
into the "tattvena".

        jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ ca tattvena
        praveṣṭuṁ ...

So, you will enter into the truth of my understanding. Prabhupada writes. As he
translates this as you will:

"enter into the mysteries of My understanding."

So, Krishna is not saying that, there is some other truth that is higher than
Me. And I am here, and "tattvena". That truth is there. And you will go beyond
Me to that. There is no such, you know, reference to anything beyond him. All
that is being said is that by bhakti, one will understand, you know, you will be
able to see Me.

        bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya
        aham evaṁ-vidho ’rjuna

"aham". As I am now.

        aham evaṁ-vidho ’rjuna
        jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ ...

One will be able to know. And one will be able to see. And then, "praveṣṭuṁ ca
paran-tapa". "praveṣṭuṁ". Will enter in. And in this way, we will be able to
move forward. So, in our spiritual life. So, what does this mean? You know, with
God, is known by a particular process. And we cannot use any other process to
know him. So, actually, you know, the important point to recognise here is that
the Lord is compassionate. And He wants to reveal Himself. At the same time, the
Lord has a relationship of love with all living beings. And it is the, at the
basis of that love, that, you know, the real real..., you know, the reality, the
spiritual world is sustained. And it is the, by the basis of that love that all
reciprocations, and revelations, and relationships happen. So, Krishna wants us
to come to that platform of love. So, if you see that, you know, you know, there
is a body, we have body. We have mind. We have intelligence. We have ego. And we
have, we are ouselves the soul. So, the soul is the seat of emotions. The soul
is the, actually, what we use as the, when we use the word heart, that is
actually referring to the soul. So, that soul has a natural relationship with
Krishna. So, none of the other paths actually activate the soul. You know. They
activate other parts of the body. Other parts of our current being. For example,
karma is primarily on the physical level. Jnana, you know, is on the
intellectual level. You know. Yoga is on the mental level. So, here, you know,
you know, "vedair", "tapasā", "dānena", "cejyayā". Like these are mostly
physical activities. You know. "vedair". I am speaking with my mouth. "tapasā".
I am doing austerities for the body. You know. You know. "dānena". I am giving
charity. I am using money. Which is external to me. And "ijyayā". I am using
some material phar..., paraphernalia. A ghee. And grains for worship. So, where
is my heart getting invested over here? No. It is not. But in here, Krishna
says, "ananyayā". That means nothing else, just purely the heart. That does not
mean that the body, and the mind, and the intelligence are not used. But one is
not distracted by them to other things. So, when purely our heart is offered,
then, you know, then Krishna accepts that. And then, you know, Krishna
reciprocates and reveals Himself. So, essentially, "bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya".
By that, Krishna is just telling us the natural reality of how we can relate
with Him. Let us say, if I am going by a train. Now, I have, and the conductor
asks, please show me your ticket. He says, you know, do you know that I have got
a degree from IIT as a gold medalist? Ok. That is good. But show me your ticket
right now. He says, do you know that I went to America. And I have got a degree
from MIT? He says, that is good. But show me your ticket. He says, don't you
know that I have been recognised for the, I was a prof..., teacher. And I have
got the best teacher's award. That is good. But show me your ticket. You know.
When we are taking a particular path, then a particular qualification is
required for that. So, all the other things, they may contribute in some way.
But there is a particular of center proce..., center qualification that is
required. So, like that, you know, the, all the other, if, if we have done
"vedaiḥ", "dānena". If we have done "ijyayā". If we have done, you know,
"vedair". "tapasā". All those are good. But all of them should ultimately
contribute to bhakti. And by bhakti, we will know Him. And then, by that
knowledge, we will be able to move forward in our spiritual life. So, Prabhupada
explains in this purport that, you know, Caitanya, that, actually, this bhakti
was given by Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu very freely.

"was appreciated by Rūpa Gosvāmī as the most muniﬁcent man of charity"

This is "maha-vadanyaya". "maha-vadanyaya". And then, Prabhupada talks about,
you know, one should worship as the deity. And then, so, why is Prabhupada
talking about? He is talking about this to establish the point that that, you
know, the other things can be utilised. So, "dānena" can be utilised on the path
of bhakti if the "dānena" is given for Krishna. But it is not just "dānena". It
is bhakti that will give us and recruit Krishna. And then, that "dānena" becomes
not "dānena". But it becomes bhakti. And then, Prabhupada talks about how, now,
it is interesting:

" For the beginners in devotional service to the Lord, temple worship is
essential,"

And by now, for this, Prabhupada quotes this verse. Famous verse from
"Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad":

        yasya deve parā bhaktir
        yathā deve tathā gurau
        tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ
        prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

So, one who has "parā bhaktir" in "devata". And one who has "bhaktir" in
"gurau". Then, "tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ". Then, the meaning of this gets
illuminated. "prakāśante mahātmanaḥ". Amid the, those great score, the souls
are, is illumination that happens. You know. You know. And Prabhupada writes,
the two indicates "bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya". There are, other processes will
not work. And then, Prabhupada again emphasises towards the purport end that:

"The personal forms of Kṛṣṇa, the two-handed form and the four-handed, are ..."

"... completely different from the temporary universal form"

So, the universal form is temporary. It is not eternal. And then, Prabhupada
makes the point that Krishna changes from the universal form to the four-handed
form of "Nārāyaṇa". And then, to His own natural form of two hands. That
means, there, there was Kri..., Krishna originally. You know. There was Krishna
originally. From Krishna, the universal form came. From there, the four-handed
form came. And now, the two-handed form has come. So, actually, people who
mistake bigness to be the sign of true greatness. You know. They may, they
cannot understand how Krishna's two-handed form is the greatest. You know.
Somebody who has got a hundred-channel TV. So, he says, now, give me a
two-channel TV. No. Somebody is, you know, "sahasra-rupa".

        sahasra-bāho bhava viśva-mūrte

"sahasra-bāho". He has got hun..., hundreds and thousands of forms. If somebody
thinks that the standard is, the greater the number of arms, the greater is the
form of God. You think, two arms. There is nothing great about it. But no. The
greatness of the form of God is not, you know, manifested necessarily by the
number of arms that their form has got. It is manifested by the intimacy of love
that that form reciprocates. And then, all those forms are coming from Krishna.
So, Prabhupada quotes from the, you know, you know, you know, you know,
Prabhupada quotes several verses here. Let us look at some of those verses.
Then, see the context in which he is saying this. Now, Prabhupada's point is
here that all forms come from the form of Krishna.

        yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya
        jīvanti loma-vila-jā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ
        viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo
        govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

So, "yasyaika-niśvasita". So, even in His one breathing, you know, you know,
"kālam". In the duration of one "kālam". Breath. Put. Period. "athāvalambya".
Taking shelter of that much time. Depending on that much. Then, "jīvanti
loma-vila-jā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ". "loma" is head..., hair. So, "loma-vila-jā" is
the pores on the body. So, we have hair on the body. And then, there are pores,
you know, through which the sweat comes out. So, "loma-vila-jā".
"jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ". You know. You know. You know, that which, and then, that
is, is the, all this happens from the form of Vishnu. "viṣṇur mahān". This is
Mahavishnu. But that Mahavishnu, what is it that, what, what, what is, "sa iha
yasya kalā-viśeṣo". He is just one part of this. One expansion of the Supreme
Lord.  And "govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi". I offer my obeisances to
that Lord. And Prabhupada quotes from the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad", also.

        sac-cid-ānanda-rūpāya
        kṛṣṇāyākliṣṭa-kāriṇe
        namo vedānta-vedyāya
        gurave buddhi-sākṣiṇe

So, he quotes, "sac-cid-ānanda-rūpāya". Very clear. You know. That there is, you
have form. And it is "sac-cid-ānanda. "kṛṣṇā". "kṛṣṇāyākliṣṭa-kāriṇe". So, you
know, you know, you know, you know, "namo vedānta-vedyāya". Understanding Him
means understanding the Vedas. "gurave buddhi-sākṣiṇe". So, "gurave". You are
the Supreme Lord. "buddhi-sākṣiṇe". Actually, you know, you know, you know, you
know, the important point in this verse is, all the sanskrit is straightforward.
Straightforward over here. You know. Prabhupada's emphasis is that you have a
transcendental form. You know. You know. You have an eternal form.

        kṛṣṇo vai paramaṁ daivatam

"Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad", Prabhupada is quoting several verses.

        Eko vaśī sarva-gaḥ kṛṣṇa īḍyaḥ

        Eko ’pi san bahudhā yo ’vabhāti

So, all those form..., all these verses, Prabhupada is quoting to point out that
Krishna's form is transcendental. It is not that some, there is some tattva
beyond Krishna that we have to go to. No. Krishna is the highest tattva. And
then, Prabhupada also quotes here elsewhere. You know. There is some place,
there is some places where Prabhupada has not given any references because, you
know, any quote from the previous acharyas, they also not given any references.

        yatrāvatīrṇaṁ kṛṣṇākhyaṁ paraṁ brahma narākṛti

So, "yatrāvatīrṇaṁ". "yatrā". "āvatīrṇaṁ". "āvatīrṇaṁ" means avatar. You know.
You know. Here, this, it is descended. And what is this name of this form? This
descent? It is "kṛṣṇākhyaṁ". It is "kṛṣṇā". "paraṁ brahma narākṛti". That
sub..., has come, it was "paraṁ brahma", who has come as "narākṛti". As a, in
a "narā", "ākṛti". In the form of a human being. And then, of course, Prabhupada
quotes several verses from the Bhagavad Gita which we have already discussed.
You know. And then, he concludes that the devotee is not attracted by the
universal form. The devotee is attracted by the two-handed form of Krishna. So,
in this way, here, Krishna has concluded that, actually, the two-handed form is
the highest. And that can be known only by bhakti. So, Prabhupada's purport
emphasises that there is no reality higher than the two-handed form. So,
"tattvena". You know. "tattvena". "praveṣṭuṁ". "ca tattvena".

        jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ ca tattvena
        praveṣṭuṁ ... paran

paran...:

        jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ ca tattvena
        praveṣṭuṁ ca paran-tapa

So, this is referring to the entering into the mystery of understanding. Now,
after this, Krishna will summ..., summarise this chapter in one sense. Now,
Prabhupada says that this verse is the, you know, sum and substance of the Gita. 

        mat-karma-kṛn mat-paramo
        mad-bhaktaḥ saṅga-varjitaḥ
        nirvairaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu
        yaḥ sa mām eti pāṇḍava

So, "mat-karma-kṛn". Do My work. "mat-paramo". You know. Make, understand that I
am the Supreme. Make Me the supreme goal of life. "mad-bhaktaḥ". Become My
devotee. "saṅga-varjitaḥ". Give up bad association. "nirvairaḥ". To not be
envious of "sarva-bhūteṣu". Of all living beings. Do not be, not be envious.
"yaḥ sa mām eti pāṇḍava". One who does this, such a person will come to Me. So,
now, again, and again, and again, we see the significance over here. You know.
If somebody is considering that, ok, there is some tattva beyond Krishna that we
have to attain. Then, immediately, the next verse, Krishna is saying, "mām eti".
You will come to Me. Now, so, in this verse, we will see how many times is the
word "mām" coming? You know. At least four times. "mat-karma-kṛn", "mat-paramo",
"mad-bhaktaḥ". So, three times. And then, it is not that, that, all these three
are referring to some sadhya. Sadhana and the sadhaya is something different.
No, it is referring to sadhana as well as to sadhya. You know. So:

        mat-karma-kṛn mat-paramo
        mad-bhaktaḥ saṅga-varjitaḥ

You know. So, all this is referring to Krishna, only, ultimately. But after
that, it, after it refers to Krishna, then, you know, "mat-karma". Then, after
that, you will come to Me. "mat-karma-kṛn". Work for me. Engage in My work. So,
"mat-karma-kṛn". Now, this is, we will see different levels of this working for
Krishna. You know. Earlier, Krishna has said in 9.27:

        yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi
        yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat
        yat tapasyasi kaunteya
        tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam

"kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam" is, whatever work you are doing, you are, offer the
fruits of that work to Me. That is one level of "kṛn". And that is good. That is
desire..., that is also, Krishna says that, by this, "vi...", "mokṣyase".
"mok...":

        śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ
        mokṣyase karma-bandhanaiḥ
        sannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā
        vimukto mām upaiṣyasi

Krishna says, by this, also, you will come back to Me. But that is not the
primary, you know, that is not the highest level. We discussed that. How
Chakravarti Pada gives analysis of various levels. And he considers, you know,
that that is not a very elevated platform of practicing devotional service. But
here, Krishna is not saying, you know, "kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam". He is not saying
that. Whatever work you are doing, you offer it to Me. He says, He is saying, do
My work. "mat-karma-kṛn" means we do service for Krishna. So, for example, we
help, you know. we do deity worship. We help in book distribution. We help in
the missionary activities of Krishna Consciousness. And we, in this way, do
Krishna's work. "mat-karma-kṛn mat-paramo". What is "mat-paramo"? "mat-paramo"
means that we, you know, you know, makes Me the supreme goal of life.
"mat-paramo". You know. Now, it is important. "paramo". You know. All of us,
when we live in the material world, we may have some intermediate goals.  Which
are also important. You know. When Parikshit Maharaja was ruling the world. At
that time, you know, ruling the world is not easy. And he would, he, he, you
know, he has to make plans. He has to make policies. He has to fight conflicts.
He has to deal with politics. All these things do occur when a person is in
administrative position. And it is demanding. And he was doing it all. And then,
he also had to, you know, take up the responsibility if he wanted to be the
king. He has to take up the responsibility. And he was taking up the
responsibility. You know. All these ways, he was "mat-karma". He was doing the
work. But then, when the s..., conflict came, you know, ok, now, he moved to the
nine, seven days. Then, immediately, he left. He left. And what did he do? He
left. And he turned towards the, so, you know, turned towards exclusive focus on
the Supreme Lord. By renouncing the world. And hearing Bhagavatam for seven
days. So, by this, what is he demonstrating? 50:06
