Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nrZV8UN-NqM
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=nrZV8UN-NqM&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_007_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_05_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=Btrm5V46TErPLRRazHcqQyScoKZ8MTU0MDAyMTg4M0AxNTM5OTM1NDgz

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Isopanisad study.

Today, we will discuss the fifth verse of the Isopanisad. The fourth mantra was
what we discussed yesterday, which is talking about how the Absolute Truth is
inconceivable. So we will continue the discussion. This is a part of the second
subsection of the Isopanisad. Section, four to eight which is understand Ishvara
by spiritual vision. So in that, four to five talking about Ishvara is
inconceivable to our normal intelligence.

Let us look at the mantra:

        tad ejati tan naijati
        tad dūre tad v antike
        tad antar asya sarvasya
        tad u sarvasyāsya bāhyataḥ

So, "tad ejati", that Absolute Truth, "ejati" means works, "tan naijati" means
it does not work, so "tad dūre tad v antike", that Absolute Truth is far way,
and he is close also, "tad antar asya sarvasya", He is inside of everything, and
the same time, "tad u sarvasyāsya bāhyataḥ", He is outside of everything.

So here, three contradictory attributes of the Absolute Truth are talked about.
He works, He does not work, He is far away, He is close, He is inside
everything, He is outside everything. Now, at first glance, this appears absurd
and contradictory.

And Srila Prabhupada's translation makes that contradiction even more appearant.
The Supreme Lord works and does not work. He is far away, but he is very near as
well. He is within everything, and yet he is outside of everything. So let us
try to understand how this works out.

So, let us go over the purport of Srila Prabhupada that we can divide this
purport into five main parts. The first point that Srila Prabhupada makes is the
Supreme must be inconceivable.

Then, the second point is inconceivable does not mean that we cannot understand
at all, we can gain some understanding, so that understand is how the Absolute
Truth isfar yet near. "tad dūre tad v antike". That is what Srila Prabhupada
explains.

Then, in connection with how that Lord is close by, "antike", Prabhupada
introduces the concept of deity, and he talks about the Lord manifesting as
deity. The science of deity worship is paragraph three to six.

And then Srila Prabhupada addresses the normal standard mayavadi notion that the
Absolute Truth has no qualities and he looks at what the word Nirvana actually
means.The Absolute Truth, how is Nirvana yet saguna?

And then, the last line, Srila Prabhupada raises, the point raised in, the
mantra has third and fourth lines. So normally, when we refer to a mantra, so in
scholar circles, so this "tad ejati tan naijati", this will be five a, "tad dūre
tad v antike", this will be five b, "tad antar asya sarvasya", this is five, c,
and "tad u sarvasyāsya bāhyataḥ", this is five d. So, in the last section of the
purport how the Lord pervades everything, yet He is separate, that section,
Srila Prabhupada addresses what is given in five c and d, how He pervades
everything, yet transcends everything.

Now let us look at each of these points.

The Supreme must be conceivable. So Jiva Goswami in his Sandarbas addresses this
point that logic cannot understand the Absolute Truth, but when logic cannot
understand the Absolute Truth, the Absolute Truth is not illogical, but
translogical.

So what is the difference illogical and translogical? If we consider this to be
the logical level, illogical means that which is below the logical level. All
that which is below logic is illogical. Whereas all that is above logic that is
translogical. What does it mean below logical logic and above logic?

Below logic means that something does not make. Something is so insensible,
something is so silly that it cannot stand the scrutiny of logic and it falls
apart. Some person comes along and claims, I am God. Somebody told Srila
Prabhupada I am God, Prabhupada said and I am the queen of England.  So, it is
such a stupid claim, anybody, ordinary person claims that I am God, so it is
illogical.

Illogical means that which cannot stand the scrutiny of logic, whereas
translogic means that in whose presence logic cannot stand. So, God, the
Absolute Truth is so great, Absolute Truth is Supreme. And supreme means
superior to our logical faculty. If we say logic, we should be able to
understand and comprehend God completely, then God is no longer supreme, logic
becomes supreme.

So, as written here, do not make logic into a secular God. Secular God means
that people say do not believe in God, or they do not care for God, do not value
God and they say, logic is greater than God. Do not make logic into secular God.
Let logic be our minister, not master.

That means that there we understand that logic is valuable. Logic is very useful
in many cases, but logic is the Absolute Authority. Logic is subordinate to God
ultimately. So let logic be our minister, not master. That means wherever, it
is, wherever is the jurisdiction of logic, there we use logic to examine and
understand, what is what. But beyond that, we understand that there are many
places where logic does not apply.

So how it does not apply? For example, when we talk about torch light. A torch
light can help us to see the way when it is dark, and the torch light is very
valuable. But if I decide to point the torch light at the sky at night, and say,
I want to see where the Sun is, I cannot find the Sun with the torch light.  The
torch light has its utilitiy, but then there are areas where also the torch
light will lead us to futility.

The torch light will not be useful for us to find the Sun in the sky. The Sun is
far greater. So to find the Sun, we cannot use the torch light. When the sun
rises on its own, at that time, we will see the Sun, its self-effulgent glory,
without the torch light at all.

So, the first point here is that when we come to God, God is like the Sun, logic
is like the torch light. So, we do not deny the role of logic. When there is
darkness, at that time, logic is valueable, no doubt. When there is complete
confusion, anybody is claiming anything, then to consider what is right and
wrong, we have to use logic, and the Vedic scriptures also do use logic.

So in fact the whole Bhagavad Gita, the Vedanta Sutra is all based on logic in
many cases, but at the same time, when it comes to the direct study of the
Absolute Truth, we understand the Absolute Truth is the greatest being. He is
great than logic also.

So the Lord is not illogical, but translogical. So logic, that does not
substitute for experience. I will explain this point. Suppose I have to go to a
doctor to find out what is my disease and what is the treatment I should take.
That naturally, I have to use my logical intelligence to evaluate what the
doctor is saying.

If I have a stomach upset and the doctor says, we have to amputate your leg,
says, what is this? Does not make sense. So we will use our logic naturally.

Now, if after using my logic, what the doctor says makes sense, then the doctor
describes the healthy condition to me and tells, this is the medicine that you
take, then you will become healthy. Now, is it possible that just by using my
logical intelligence to understand how the medicine works, I will get cured?

No, logic cannot substitute for experience. Logic helps us to understand which
experience I should undergo, and whether that experience is producing its
desired result. That means when I should go to a doctor to take treatment or
not. What the doctor says makes sense or not, and after that, when the doctor is
saying, it will cure me, is it curin me actually? So I can use my intelligence
to evaluate that.

But beyond that, logic cannot substitute for experience. Similarly, logic can
help us to differentiate between real spirituality, authentic spirituality, and
shadow or pseudo spirituality. So logic does have its utility, but beyond that,
logic cannot cure us. For that, we have to practice spiritual life, we have to
practice devotional life. And we practice devotional life, that gives us the
Supreme result of divine perception, of perception of the higher reality of
life.

So to continue with the doctor example, instead of just talking about good
health, if I talk of a person who is blind, and there is a medical process by
which the person can be cured. Now, the doctor may describe, you know, this is
how, this is the disease in your eye, because of you are not able to see. This
is the medicine you will take. And by that, you will get cured and you will be
able to see.

Now, the process of medication will lead to the recovery of the eyes of the
person. And when the eyes recover, at that time, the person will be able to see.
But this does not mean that just logically understanding how the process works,
we will be able to grant the perception, the vision to the person. No, the
person has to undergo the treatment, then vision will be possible.

So similarly in this case, we have to actually develop a higher understanding, a
higher vision by which we will be able to see the supreme reality. The superior
reality of life is spiritual reality, and we currently do not have spiritual
vision. So rather than rejecting the spiritual as illogical, we have to accept
the spiritual as translogical, and raise ourselves upwards.

So now, there is a kind of logic, even in transcendence and let us try to
understand that.

So now, for example, "tad dūre tad v antike", this is what the Isopanisad says,
that the Absolute Truth is far away, and He is close also. So now, is this a
contraction? Actually, it is not a contradiction, it is a paradox. What is the
difference between the two?

Contradiction is opposite statements that do not make sense. For example, you
say excess fat, and then you say excess thin. Now, both do not make sense at the
same time. They are contradictions. Excess is either fat or thin.

So paradox, on the other hand, is opposite seeming statements that make sense at
a deeper level. Opposite seeming statements, they are not contradictions. They
are opposite statements and they are meant to grant us understanding at a deeper
level.

For example, when we say, the least corrected people are the most correct. So,
we discussed this example earlier of the least corrested people, something that
is the least corrected. So the teacher is checking the people, and the people
are the least corrected, with minimum red marks.

Now what happens is the least corrected people are most correct. What does it
mean? It means that actually the least corrected, most correct, does not make
sense, but there is a higher meaning. The teacher had to correct those people
the least, because what the student have written is the most correct. So the
least corrected people are the most correct, there jucst (?, 13:29) opposition,
jucst opposition means bringing close to each other, of contradictory seeming
words, opposite seeming words together, least corrected, most corrected. Jucst
opposition forces us to think. And then oh, this is what it means.

So, similarly, in the scriptures give us contradictory seeming statements. There
is a deeper meaning that is there. And that deeper meaning has to be understood
by proper contemplation. Without that contemplation, we just stay at the
superficial level, and we will reject us, oh, this does not make any sense. It
makes sense, but we have to go deeper.

So, "tad dūre tad v antike", so is this possible? We understand this at many
levels. We know that the Absolute Truth has three manifestations, as Brahman,
there is Paramatma, and there is Bhagavan. So, the Paramatma aspect is right
next to us in our own heart. So being present in the heart, the Paramatma is
closer and the closest. Even if some person embraces us tightly, still that
person cannot come as close to us as the Paramatma does, as the Paramatma is
always.

        sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
        ...

In 15.15 in the Bhagavad Gita, Lord Krishna says, "sarvasya caham hrdi", the
hearts of everyone ready, "sannivisto", I sit very close, closer and the
closest. So in that sense, "tad v antike", but at the same time, Krishna is
Bhagavan, He is in the spiritual, performing pastimes, and "tadure", so far
away. Brahma Samhita says:

        panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyo
        vāyor athāpi manaso muni-puńgavānām
        so 'py asti yat-prapada-sīmny avicintya-tattve
        govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

So, the Isopanisad says that, sorry, sorry, the Brahma samhita says that, that
even the great sages, that by the path, "panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara", hundreds
of crawls of years, if they, "sampragamyo", they keep traveling, and how fast?
"vāyor athāpi manaso", they go even at the speed of the wind, or even at the
speed of mind, still, "prapada-sīmny avicintya-tattve", "prapada", even in the
feet, "pada" is feet, "prapada" is front part of the feet, that means the toes.
They will not be able to touch even the toes of the Supreme Lord.
"avicintya-tattve", he is "avicintya", he cannot be understood. To that Govinda,
I offer my obeisances. Brahmaji is praying in Brahma samhita.

So He is so far away that we cannot reach Him. So as Bhagavan, He is far away,
as Paramatma, He is close to us. So similarly, "tad ejati tan naijati", what was
the first line of this verse? That person walks, and that person does not walk.
What does it refer to? Actually, the Supreme Lord as Brahman is all pervading.
The Supreme Lord as Brahman, He, because He is everywhere, He does not have to
walk anywhere.

As Brahman, as the all pervading light:

        apani-pado javano grahita
        pasyaty acakshuh sa srinoty akarnah
        ...

So the Svetasvatara Upanishad describes that that Lord "apani-pado", he has no
hands, and no legs. At the same time, "javano grahita", although he has no hands
and no legs, when somebody offers Him food, immediately, from wherever He is, He
comes there and He accepts. So if He does not have legs, how does He come? If He
does not have hands, how does He accept?

So the "pasyaty acakshuh sa srinoty akarnah", so that person, "acakshuh", He has
no eyes, but He sees, "pasyaty". "akarnah", He has no ears, "sa srinoty", He
hears. How does it all that happen? Because, although He does not have material
eyes, He has transcendental eyes. Although He does not have material ears, He
has transcendental ears.

So here that is being made is deep, that what is a contradiction, what seems to
be a contradiction at a material level, at the immediate level of perception
conveys a deeper reality.

So Srila Prabhupada brings out this point in his purport by the talking about
"tad dūre tad v antike", he brings to the point of deity worship. So now, what
exactly is the concept of deity worship? To say that God cannot appear as matter
is to limit him. This is a very important point to understand. You know, many
impersonalists, and many iconoclasts, iconoclast means, icon means symbol,
iconoclast means those who destroy symbols. So iconoclast refers to those
religionists who do not accept deity worship, and they often delight in
destroying deities because they say all symbols are false, and the symbols need
to be destroyed so that we can go to the real God, we can focus on the real God.

So, they say that God is infinite, God is unlimited. How can you limit Him that
God to us, stone form like this? So, for such people, what is described is, that
when they say that God cannot come as a form, are we not limiting God by that?

So, you, one can argue that, as, if we say that God has, you know, a particular
form, like we here, we have Lord Caitanya, so they say God cannot appear in a
form, say, God cannot appear in a form. God cannot appear in limited form as a
deity. But isn't that limiting God? So what we can say that, God is, we are not
limiting God. So by saying that, God cannot appear in a form, we are limiting
Him. 

So actually speaking, the Vedic scriptures, especially the Pancaratva scriptures
describe that God can appear in form, he is so unlimited appear that he can
appear in a limited seeming form and still stay unlimited. God is so unlimited
that he can appear in a limited seeming form and still stay unlimited. How is
this possible?

There is a great Sri Vaishnava acharya, Pilayloka acharya. He was another
prominent successor of Ramanuja acharya. Here I am talking about one successor,
that is one line of successor. Vedanta Desika was a prominent acharya.  The
other is Pilayloka acharya.

So Pilayloka acharya gives this example of the elephant. See, there is a small
child, and the child sees a majestic elephant walking on the street. And then
the child thinks, oh I want to touch the head of the elephant. The child is so
small, no matter how much the child stretches up, for the child cannot reach the
elephant. Stop.

How will the child reach? Even if the child grows up still, the child will never
reach the top of the elephant. For the child, it is not possible.

But if the elephant sits down. Elephant sits down and lays down, and then brings
the head close to the child, the child can touch the head very happily.

So similarly, all of us souls, "mamevam so jivaloke", we are small "amisas" of
the Lord. We are like that child. And we cannot access the Supreme Lord. The
Lord is at the spiritual level of reality. So how can we acess Him? We have
material eyes, material senses, we cannot. But when the Lord descends, then the
Lord becomes accessible to us. So that is the great mercy of the Lord that He
descends from the spiritual realm to the material realm, and manifests as the
deity. This is the elephant sits down.

Now, when the elephant sits down, the elephant still has its height, it still
has its power, but it has chosen to sit down. Similarly, as I said, the
unlimited is so unlimited that it can manifest, that He can manifest in a
limited form, and still stay unlimted. The elephant can sit down, and still have
the power which it has when he is at full height.

So when Krishna manifests as the deity, He is not limited. He is manifesting His
unlimitedness in a different way. He, when He manifests as a deity, His focus is
not on manifesting his unlimitedness. In terms of his largeness, He is focusing
on manifesting His unlimitedness in terms of His mercy, in terms of His
accessibility.

God is not delight in exhibiting His greatness so much that He remains
inaccesible to us. God's primary concern is to make himself accessible to us.
And He makes Himself accessible to us as the deity. So Srila Prabhupada explains
that because matter and spirit are both God's energies, so He can convert matter
into spirit, and spirit into matter.

So when the Lord, when Krishna manifests as the deity, the deity may be made of
material elements, but by the presence of Krishna, the deity becomes
spiritualised. The deity is no longer material. The deity is made of material
elements, but deity is no longer material. The Lord has manifested as the deity
over there.

So here, the important point is to understand is that Krishna is not concerned
primarily with His majesty. He is primarily concerned with His mercy and His
accessibility. So because He is concerned with his showing His mercy, and making
Himself accessible, so He comes down as the deity. So that Lord who is "tad
dūre", we are in the material vision, the Lord is in the spiritual level of
consciousness. He is far away from us. "tad v antike", He manifests to us and
becomes accessible to us.

So now, the deity may appear material to eyes? Why? Because the deity seems to
just be material. Some people say that, what is this deity? The deity cannot
move. The deity cannot talk. The deity cannot even move a fly from its head. How
can this deity be God? The point is the deity has not manifested to show
omnipotence, to show majesty. The deity has manifested to show accessibility. So
because the deity has manifested for a particular purpose, we have to keep that
purpose in mind.

If Krishna wants, Krishna can, is present as a supersoul, even in the heart of
the fly. And Krishna can do whatever it wants to the fly. But His point, when He
comes as the deity is, the devotees want to see Krishna, devotees want to serve
Krishna, and Krishna manifests as the deity to give the devotees the opportunity
to serve Him.

So, therefore, when Krishna manifests as the deity, at that time, if a fly is
there on the head of the deity, what do the devotees think? Oh, Krishna, I am
here to serve the deity, I am not serving the deity properly. I am being
negligent. I have to become more attentive, more careful, and I should make
things so clean that no fly is coming. I will try to keep (?, 25:12) away the
flies.

So actually, the deity has manifested not to show omnipotence. The deity has
manifested to give an opportunity to do service. Whenever, the Lord manifests
through any material manifestation and at that time, that manifestation
generally follows the laws of material nature.

So some people from some religions, they say that, you know, what is this deity?
Some people, they will come and desecrate the deity, and say where is God? But
those same people also consider their holy book to be sacred. They consider
their particular scripture sacred. Now, somebody can take their scripture and
burn it. Now, when the scripture gets burnt, they say this is just ordinary book
gets burnt, is book gets burnt. What is so special about the book?

You know, the sacredness of a scripture is not demonstrated by its fire
proofness. The sacredness of a scripture is understood through the wisdom that
is there within it. When one studies it, understands it, applies it, experiences
the transformation, then one understands that this book is secret.

So just as the scripture is sacred, or still, the scripture, when it is
manifesting through a book, it will be acceptable as material book. If it is
burnt, it will burn. Similarly, Krishna, when He manifests as the deity, He is
not manifesting to prove His omnipotence. Just as Krishna, when manifests as a
scripture, He is manifesting as a scripture to prove His omnipotence. There, He
is giving us accessibility through the wisdom. Now, he is giving us
accessibility through the form. But the point, He is demonstrating so that we
can serve Him. He is demonstrating Himself as the deity so that we have the
opportunity the serve Him.

So, every manifestation of the Lord has a particular purpose. The Lord manifests
His omnipotence in the world through death. So when He descends, when He comes
as time, no matter how defined, how arrogant, how atheistic a person may be, how
powerful, how world-conquering, how aristocreing, how autocratically
unchallenged the person may be, when Krishna comes as time, as death, nobody can
do anything, that person simply has to perish.

So that is helpless. Nobody can avoid that. Nobody can stop that. The Famous
dictator when he was dying; the last thing that he did was, just before he was
about to die, lifted his fist and look at the sky, trying to move the fist up.
But nothing happened. He had to die still. Defiance will not save us at the time
of death. So, Krishna manifests His omnipotence as time, as death in this world.
And his other manifestation as deity and scripture, they are meant to give us
opportunity to serve Him.

So now, when we want to understand the deity, there are many differences, first
and foremost, between a deity and a statue, the first difference is, the deity
is made according to scriptural description. So Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakur talks
about three levels of vision of the deity. Jada-maya, mano-maya and cina-maya.

So jada-maya, one thing is just a statue, why are these people representing,
worshipping a statue? Just like some politician, or some film star, people make
a statue of that person, so that person has got nothing to do with their statue.
That person is a soul, who may be alive or dead, and if that person is dead,
the soul has gone to some other body, depending on their karma, and that soul has
nothing to do with the body, and when a statue is fashion according to the kind
of body that person had, that statue is just a stoneship, or a mudship, it does
not have anything to do with that person.

So some people, when people have materialistic consciousness, when they are
jada, jada means dead matter, when they are at the jada matter level, they think
of the deity as just a statue.

Then beyond that, the next level is mano-maya. At the level of mano-maya, a
person perceives the deity as a symbolic representation of the Absolute Truth.
So one thing is at this level, that God is ultimately formless, but one has to
ascribe some form to their Lord. So, why does one have to ascribe form to the
Lord? Because one does not feel emotions when we are disconnected with one
formless something.

So the idea is, if I want to feel patriotic, so now, I just look around, my
country is everywhere, oh I feel patriotic. So then I have the flag of, say
if I am Indian, I have the tricolor flag, and I look at the tricolor flag, my
saluted, I hear the national anthem, and I feel patriotic feelings, filling up
in my heart.  So now, the flag is a symbol of nationalism, of patriotism, of the
nation, and so the flag is a means by which patriotic feelings are awakened in
my heart.

So, at this level, at the mano-maya level, one understands, imagines things that
the deity is like a flag, the deity is a symbol, and that symbol is meant to
evoke feelings, of devotion in our heart, sublime feelings. But the idea
underlying this is wrong. Because the idea of a flag is, a flag is a concrete
symbol for something that is abstract. That is nationhood, patriotism. So now,
the idea here is in the case of mano-maya, that the Absolute Truth is
represented by the deity, and ultimately the Absolute Truth, we do not know what
it is, but probably it is formless. So people who have this idea, especially if
they are with the impersonalistic bend of mind, then they say that actually
ultimately, because the Absolute Truth is formless, and the purpose of the form
is just to evoke devotion. So different people can have different forms. They
can make their own forms, they can choose their own ishtadevat, and then they
can worship that. Now, the concept of isthadevata is a valid concept in the
Vedic scriptures.

So there are many forms of Supreme Lord, there is Lord Vishnu, there is Krishna,
there is Rama, there is Nrsimha, and when Krishna also, there is Dama Krishna,
there is Dwarka Krishna, so there are so many different forms of Krishna, and
one has one's own ishvadevat means, the form of the Lord that is most dear to
us, with whom we have an eternal relationship. So we focus on worshipping that
form of the Lord. That is the concept of ishtadevata. But this concept of
ishtadevata, one's cherished deity, is distorted when the idea is that actually
the ishtadevata is just a tool. That means I have to worship the ishtadevata,
pray, thank about the Ishvadevata till I understand that this is just a form,
and I have to go beyond the form to the light. So this is a distorted idea. It
is not based on scripture.

So because of this, people say, that ok, I can worship, you worship this devata,
I worship this devata, that person worships that devata, and some people say
that ok I will worship my guru, and some, I will worship myself only, because
ultimate I have to evoke feelings. So this becomes a reduction of religion to
absurdity eventually. Now, many of you may have seen this quote that people
write sometimes on their t-shirt, this is "I was an atheist until I discovered I
was God.", so what is the idea of this? They think God ultimately is just a
light, and that light is present within my only, so if I have to consider
something, let me think of myself as God.

So, this is, this is very distorted idea of impersonalism. We will discuss
impersonalism in detail in our future classes, But this is actually a caricature
of impersonalism. This is a mockery of imperonalism, and there are people who
are parading ideas like this all the time in today's society. Such people say
whatever form you want, because ultimately, you have to go beyond the form to
the light. In fact, there are some spiritualists who say that you worship the
form, choose whatever form you want, and that you meditate on the form. For
example, you take your istadev, then take some deity, meditate on it, that
deity, and then the success of your meditation is when you are meditating on the
deity, you concentrate, concentrate, concentrate, and by the power of your
concentration, the deity crumbles into powder. So when the deity crumbles into
powder, what does that mean? You have gone beyond the form, you have gone beyond
the form to the light.

Phew, this is a monstrous idea, and it is unfortunate that such ideas are going
on, and there is some, some seekers, who just want to in order say that,
actually the deity has crumbled to the powder. What they do is actually, they
make the deity, beat the deity into powder, and they say, see, I have attained
enlightenment now. So this becomes again as I said, the caricature of
spirituality, very fortunate.

So mano-maya is the idea that the Absolute Truth is formless, and that this is
just a representation of the Absolute Truth.

So, another way that mano-maya can be applied is that ok that the Absolute Truth
may have a form, but this is just a medium to that. This is not that. This is
just a medium. So, we will look at the second, later, but let us understand this
first concept in a different way. So the idea of this, the Absolute Truth being
manifested through a symbol of deity, is that there is no intrinsic connection
between the way the Absolute Truth is and the form that is there for the deity.

So for example, you know India currently has a tricolor flag. So if today, the
Indian government feels that actually, agriculture is no longer very important
for us, that is not giving us much revenue and that is just so dependent on
the vagaries of nature. We do not want to make our economy depend on
agriculture. And therefore we do not want it represent in the national flag
also. So we decide that we remove the green color from the flag. Now, can the
Indian government do that? Yes, it can. If the government passes a resolution
to the parliament, then instead of tricolor, we can have bicolor. So, what does
it mean? In the case of, the concept of Indian nationhood, and the flag, there
is no intrinsic connection. The connection was just in our conceptualisation, in
our mind, that this flag was associated with this concept of nationhood. And if
I just change my conceptualisation, then ok, now this color, this particular
flag is ont associated, this flag is associated.

So this is the idea of what is often called as ascending symbolism. That means
that there is symbol, but from my imagination, I move upwards from the concrete
symbol to the Absolute Truth, to the higher reality, and there is no intrinsic
connection. And there is no this kind of symbol, attributed to the Absolute
Truth. The, so, for example, the Vedas say, "natasya pratimasti", that there is
no representation for the Absolute Truth. That means that we cannot ascribe this
kind of forms to the Absolute Truth based on our imagination. So that is how our
imagination is changing, and if I ascribe one form today and another form
tomorrow, that is invalid. So therefore, there is an alter..., there is, this is
incorrect.

Now, to understand what it is, similar, correct actually, suppose a man, a man
goes to office, and when he goes to office, he has a wallet, in the wallet, he
keeps a photo of his wife. Now, one day he comes back home, and his wife fixes
the wallet (?, 37:45) and finds that there is a picture of some other woman. She
gets shocked. What is this? So the husband says, you know, actually, I am
thinking of you only, but I just said to change the picture. She is infuriated.
I will change husband then. So, the way, the photo of the person is, and the way
the person is, the direct between them, the two cannot be separated because that
person has originally a particular form, and the photo depicts that form.

So, the descending symbolism is, based on the concept that the person has
an original reality and the representation is based on that reality. So Krishna
has an original form in the spiritual world, and when that form is depicted
through the deity, then that form is not just a mental concoction. That is based
on the original nature of God. So the way the God is actually, that is depicted
through the deity. So this is also one way, people think that, ok, so the deity,
then the deity is like the photo of God. That means this is what God looks like
and we get a replica of God as the deity. No. That is certainly a better
understanding, the idea that God is formless and we ascribe any form to Him, but
still it is not the complete understanding that when we have photo of a person,
as I said earlier, the photo and the person are not related, the person
somewhere else, the photo somewhere else.

But because Krishna is all pervading, because Krishna is present everywhere, and
Krishna is not just any other person. Krishna is the Supreme Lord. Because He is
the Supreme Lord, and because He is all pervading. He can manifest wherever he
wants. So that is a major difference between a photo of an ordinary person, and
the deity of the Supreme Lord. The deity of the Supreme Lord is a manifestation
of the Supreme Lord, that is non-different from him. So when the devotees pray
to the Lord, my dear Lord, please, we want to serve you, please manifest as the
deity, so when the deity is made according to the original scriptural
description, and then the devotees pray to Lord, my dear Lord, please manifest
as the deity, and they perform the "prana pratishta". So, "prana pratishta" is
they invite the Lord to manifest as the deity. So at that time, the Lord
personally appears, and He resides in the deity. So, ahead the time of "prana
pratishta", the deity actually manifests non-difference from the Lord.

So, from that time onward, the deity is manifest, is the Lord. There is no
difference. So what does this mean actually? It means that Krishna is
manifesting Himself as the deity.

And when we come to the cina-maya level of consciousness, cina-maya level of
consciousness, at that time, we understand this point that the deity is
non-different from Krishna, non-different from the Absolute Truth. How is the
deity non-different from the Absolute Truth? Because the Absolute Truth has
chosen to manifest as the deity. The Absolute Truth is all-pervading, but
although that all-pervading Truth is normally inaccessible to us, now the Truth
has chosen to become accessible to us.

So the Bhakti-Rasamrta-Sindhu depicts this based on a puranic verse:

        ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi
        na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ
        sevonmukhe hi jihvādau
        svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

So, it is described, "ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi" that the name of Krishna and other
such similars things, "na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ", that one cannot understand
these things with one's gross senses. Gross senses, one cannot understand. But
"sevonmukhe hi jihvādau", when we are performing seva, beginning with the
tongue, "jihvādau", that means chant the holy name, take Krishna prasadam,
engage in service to Krishna, then "svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ", "svayam eva
sphuraty adaḥ" means that the Lord chooses to manifest Himself, "svayam eva" by
His own will, He manifests, and "sphuraty adaḥ", "sphuraty" means he uses
"sphuraty". He manifests Himself, and then we understand.

So presently, when we approach the deity, we serve the deity with a reverential
attitude, with faith that actually Krishna is non-different from the deity, and
his faith is based on philosophical understanding. The philosophical
understanding, that Krishna is all-pervading. Krishna is omnipotent, and most
importantly, Krishna is merciful and wants to be accessible to us. That is why
he manifests as the deity. And with this faith, when we serve the Lord, with our
eyes take darshan of the Lord, with our hands, do worship of the Lord, with our
tongue, we glorify the Lord, by all this, the Lord will become pleased and then,
he will reveal Himself to us. He will elevate us to the spiritual level of
consciousness, and therein, he will reveal Himself to us so that we can see Him.

So at that time, Srila Prabhupada would say, when you become pure, this very, he
is giving the point that (?, 43:09), it is, this very Krishna will talk to you.
So let me become qualified. That will happen. Till that time, we have to strive
to acquire the necessary purification qualification, by practicing devotional
service. So at the cina-maya level of consciousness, one has this reality,
realisation of this reality.

So now, "tad dūre tad v antike", that was we were discussing until now, that the
Supreme Lord is close and far. How is he close and far? As Bhagavan, He is far
away, but as a deity, He is so close to us. So, let us move forward and discuss
this further. So first Srila Prabhupada says how the Absolute Truth is
impersonal, is inconceivable. Then he talks about how the Lord manifests in the
world as incarnations, and he manifests also as the deity. This is Srila
Prabhupada talking about the deity. And now, Prabhupada writes again in 4.11,
he uses the verse:

        ye yatha mam prapadyante
        tams tathaiva bhajamy aham
        ...

And Prabhupada says, on the basis that he gives another explanation: For the
surrendered soul, He is always within reach, whereas for the unsurrendered soul,
He is far, far away, and cannot be approached.

So Krishna is revealed based on our attitude, "naham prakasya sarvasya, yoga
maya asama avataha", Krishna does not reveal Himself to anyone and everyone.

Now, Srila Prabhupada comes to the point of, gusaguna and nirguna. Let us
discuss this now. So, the word saguna refers to that which has no qualities, and
nirguna refers to that which has qualities. So how are these two verses to be
practically understood? That something is saguna and something is nirguna.
Actually, the saguna refers to that which has absolutely no material qualities.
That is nirguna. And saguna refers to that which has qualities.

So, Srila Prabhupada explains that the word guna can mean qualities. It can also
mean moods. So, normally, the impersonalists take it to refer to qualities. As I
said, nirguna means that Lord who has no qualities, and saguna refers to that
Lord, who has qualities.

However, the word guna also refers to modes. And there are three modes of
material nature, ignorance, passion and goodness, and the Lord is
transcendental. So nirguna can also mean that the Lord does not have anything to
do with the three modes. He is beyond the modes. So nirguna can mean either mean
no qualities, or it can mean no modes, no effect of modes. So the impersonalists
try to say that the Lord has no qualities. But the devotees explain that the
Lord is actually unaffected by the modes. Now, who is right? There can be
contradiction about this. But Jiva Goswami talks about this in the Sandharbas,
Baladevasan talks about in the Govindabhas, and they emphasize that whenever we
discribe the Absolute Truth, we are talking about the Absolute Truth, and there
is some description which involves qualities, even when the impersonalists say
that the Absolute Truth is pure consciousness. So at that time that the Absolute
Truth is pure is a quality. "Ananta mananda brahma", so they say, there is a
Brahma is unlimited, that is also quality. If the Brahma is filled with
happiness, that is also quality.

So if the Absolute Truth had absolutely no qualities, then there would be
nothing left to the Absolute Truth. So to say that there are no qualities in the
Absolute Truth, that is to reduce the Absolute Truth to absolute nothing, to
zero. So even the impersonal brahman, the mayavadis talk about, even that has
some qualities. In the sense that there is some descripton of it, that is
unlimited, that is all pervading, that it is blissful, these are all qualities,
ultimately. So, the word nirguna is meaningless, when it is used to say that no
qualities. Whereas nirguna means, when we say, it refers to that which is beyond
the mode. Then it is more logical. And not just logical, it is also more
scriptural. More scriptural, because the scriptures often talk in remarkably
interesting terms.

So let us look at this verse from the prayers of Gajendra. This is SB 8.3.8 and
8.3.9. So here, Gajendra, this background story is that, Gajendra is in danger
caught by the crocodile, and he is praying to the Supreme Lord. And when he
prays to the Supreme Lord, he is offering this prayer, so:

        na vidyate yasya ca janma karma va
        na nama-rupe guna-dosha eva va
        tathapi lokapyaya-sambhavaya yah
        sva-mayaya tany anukalam ricchati

So he is telling over here, my dear that, that Absolute, "na vidyate yasya ca
janma karma va", that we cannot know, the "janma karma va" of that one, "na
nama-rupe guna-dosha eva va", not the name, not the form, not the qualities, we
do not know anything about that Lord. So there are several descriptions here
which may seem impersonalistic that actually the Lord does not have any form,
or qualities, or attributes or activities, and then when the Lord comes and
responds to Gajendra's prayers. There is a person who comes with form, with
qualities, with activities and that person comes and rescues Gajendra.

So here, what is happening? There is obvious contradiction here if you think
about it, Gajendra is praying to the Absolute Truth, who is apparently, if you
look at the verses, and they may seem to describe impersonal Absolute. And yet,
a personal Absolute comes and rescues Gajendra. And then Gajendra goes back to
the spiritual world with that Absolute. So what is happening? Is it that
Gajendra is praying to one person, some other person is coming? No, the person
to whom Gajendra prays, that is the person who comes. So when Gajendra is
praying, and he is asking for the Lord who is to appear, who does not have any
qualitiies, or forms, that refers to the qualities and forms, which other people
in the world have, which devatas have, which Himself has, the Lord does not have
any of those qualities, but the Lord does have transcendental qualities.

And that is indicated again in this verse itself:

        tasmai namaḥ pareśāya
        brahmaṇe ’nanta-śaktaye
        arūpāyoru-rūpāya
        nama āścarya-karmaṇe

So here it is described, "tasmai namaḥ pareśāya", therefore, I offer obeisances
to that Supreme Lord, who is "pareśāya", who is transcendental, and he is
ishvara, this is Isavasya Upanishad, so Isa is there in it, in this verse also.
Now, "brahmaṇe ’nanta-śaktaye", that Lord is the Absolute Truth, is unlimited
energy, the most significant point for us is, "arūpāyoru-rūpāya", that Lord is
"arūpāyo", he has no form, at the same time, the Lord is, "u-rūpāya", he has
many, many forms. Now how is it possible? That the Lord has no form, and many
forms, "nama āścarya-karmaṇe", that this is actually amazing, "nama
āścarya-karmaṇe", something which we cannot understand easily. But the point is,
"arūpāyoru-rūpāya", that has no form, he has many forms. This means that the way
to understand it is, "arūpāyo", he has no material form, he has nothing to do
with anything material, at the same time, "u-rūpāya", he has many spiritual
forms. So, when the scriptures say that the Absolute Truth is nirguna. That
nirguna does not refer to qualities. It refers to modes. And the Absolute Truth
has nothing to do with the three modes. But still, at the transcendental level,
the Absolute Truth does have qualities, Absolute Truth does have form, in that
sense, the Absolute Truth is a living loving all attractive person filled with
many qualities, and the most attractive form.

So here, when Gajendra is describing the Lord's description, he is talking about
nirguna in terms of, the Lord having no qualities. They are produced by the
modes, but he has transcendental qualities. Now, Prabhupada uses the example of
Prahlad Maharaja over here, and he says that Prahlada said that the Lord is
everywhere and the Lord manifested through a pillar. So here, this, Prabhupada
is giving this example to say that:

        tadantarasya sarvasya tadu sarvasyasya bahyatah

So how "tadantarasya sarvasya"? The Lord was inside of everything and that is
how he manifested through a pillar. So, when he manifested through the pillar,
what happened? Now, this is very dramatic to understand. So this is the pillar,
Hiranyakasipu is here, Prahlad is here, Hiranyakasipu is asking, where is your
Vishnu? Is he everywhere? He says, yes. He is everywhere. Is he there in this
pillar? Yes. Bang. He comes and bangs it, and Nrsimhadev emerges from it. Such a
scary sound that Hiranyakasipu closes his eyes. And now, what happens after
that? Hiranyakasipu gets killed, then Nrsimhadeva is victorious. Now what does
Prahlad do? Prahlad then said the Lord is everywhere and the Lord is in the
pillar also. And thus Prahlad go and offer obeisances to the pillar and embrace
the pillar, and offer prayers to the pillar. No. He respects the pillar because
the Lord was present over there, but he understands that the Lord is different
from the pillar.

And when he has to offer prayers, he does not offer prayers to the pillar, he
offers prayers to the Lord who is seated on the throne now. That means the Lord
pervades everything, and at the same time, the Lord transcends everything. The
Lord pervades everything means that he is present everywhere in this world. At
the same time, his existence is not limited to this world. He pervades this
world, he is everywhere, but at the same, he also transcends this world. So
pervasion means to be inside this world. Transcendence means to be beyond this
world. So, "tadantarasya sarvasya", this is referring to the pervasion of the
Lord. The Lord pervades everything. That is demonstrated through Prahlad
Maharaja saying that my Lord is everywhere, and Nrsimhadeva coming out of the
pillar.

But "tadu sarvasyasya bahyatah", He is outside of everything also. He is outside
of everything. How? We see that when Krishna opened his mouth, Yashoda mayi has,
mouth, checked whether there is any dirt in it. Then, he aaa, and then she saw
the whole universe. So now, she saw the whole universe inside Krishna, and
Krishna was outside. Now of course, what she saw was wonderful because in that
universe, she saw Vrindavan, and in Vrindavan, she saw herself, and she saw
Krishna also. So that was quite mystical, but essentially she was there with
Krishna, and the whole universe was inside him. That means Krishna was separate
from the Universe, "tadu sarvasyasya bahyatah" that he was outside of
everything.

So in this way, the Isopanisad describes the Lord's terms that are not
contradictory, but paradoxical. "tadantarasya sarvasya", He pervades everything,
at the same time, His existence is not reduced to everything. He transcends
everything. So:

        bahunam janmanam ante
        jnanavan mam prapadyate
        vasudevah sarvam iti
        sa mahatma su-durlabhah

So it is said that, "bahunam janmanam ante", after many life times, "jnanavan
mam prapadyate", they surrender onto me, knowing "vasudevah sarvam iti", they
understand Vasudeva to be everything. So it is interesting that this verse says
that when they understand Vasudeva is everything, they do not surrender to
everything, they surrender to Vasudeva. What is the difference? If they are
surrendering to everything, that would mean everything is God. But they do not
surrender to everything. They surrender to Vasudeva because Vasudeva is the
source of everything and he is beyond everything.

So there are two schools of thought here, there is pantheism and panentheism.
Pantheism means, pan means all, pantheism is everything is God. So people say,
ok, there, this wall is God, this table is God, the universe is God. Everything
is God. Pantheism is the idea.

Whereas panentheism means, yes, everything is sacred, but God pervades
everything, but God's existence, extends beyond everything. God pervades
everything, and God transcends everything also. That is what the Isopanisad is
telling in this verse that "tadantarasya sarvasya", He is inside everything, but
He is beyond everything, "tadu sarvasyasya bahyatah".

Prabhupada concludes over here: The fact is that there is nothing but God within
and without. Everything is a manifestation of His different energies, like the
heat and light emanating from a fire, and in this way there is a oneness among
His diverse energies.

But then Prabhupada emphasizes: Although there is a oneness, however, the Lord
in His personal form still enjoys unlimitedly all the pleasures enjoyed minutely
by the tiny part-and-parcel living entities.

So the enjoyment of the Lord, we will discuss later, but the point is, that
Krishna pervades everything, but still, Krishna His own life beyond this world
in the spiritual world. There he enjoys.

So to summarise, we started by discussing this verse, how the point of Supreme
Lord having inconceivable attributes is continuing, and therein, it is described
that first of all, he is inconceivable because He is the Supreme. So logic
should be our minister, not our master. The Lord is not, the Absolute Truth is
not illogical, but translogical.

Then we discussed the difference between paradox and contradiction. And the
scripture contains paradoxes, which force us to go deeper to reconcile the
opposite seeming statements, and come to a greater understanding.

And then we discussed about the deity worship of the Lord. Krishna manifests as
the deity, not as to prove His omnipotence, but to give us an opportunity to
serve him. Like the elephant sitting down, so the child can reach. The Lord is
so unlimited that he can manifest in a limited seeming form and still stay
unlimited.

So Krishna's concern is not His majesty, but His accessibility.

And the last, anyway we discussed the concept of saguna, nirguna, about how
Gajendra, when he prayed for a nirguna Lord, a saguna Lord appeared, that means
the two are the same. So nirguna is not for the perspective of qualities, the
Lord has no qualities, but from the perspective of, nirguna means, the Lord has
not been influenced by modes.

And this understanding, we see that, the Lord is close, yet far, depending
on whether our vision is jado-maya, mano-maya, or cina-maya. When we see the
deity of the Lord.

And lastly, the Lord pervades everything, yet He transcends everything. So the
Isopanisad teaches pantheism, it goes beyond that to a very special kind of
understanding of God, where God extends, God lives in everything, and still He
exists far beyond everything in His own life in the spiritual world.

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande.
