Hare Krishna.

So, we continue with our discussion on the Isopanisad. We have discussed three classes until now, first the introduction, then the invocation, which discussed how the material world is also perfect for its purpose, and then we discussed about the isavasya principle in the earlier class, that was in mantra one. Now we discuss mantra two.

So before we go to mantra two, let us have a quick overview of this first section of the Isopanisad. The first section is basically talking about the isavasya principle and learn to live in harmony with the Ishvara. So what is the isavasya principle? Everything is perfect, that is talked in the invocation, and everything belongs to the Ishvara is talked in the first verse.

Now, in the second mantra, it is said that how living in harmony with it, with that isavasya principle, with the Ishvara will benefit us.

And in the next verse, it will be talked how living in disharmony with Ishvara will lead to suffering.

So let us discuss this sutra about, how living in harmony with the Ishavara will benefit us. So:

        kurvann eveha karmāṇi
        jijīviṣec chataṁ samāḥ
        evaṁ tvayi nānyatheto ‘sti
        na karma lipyate nare

Kurvan means to do, eveha certainly in this way, karmani, doing working in this way. Now what is this way? So this is the continuation of the previous verse. The previous verse is that do not enroach on others' property. Accept what is your quota. So "kurvann eveha karmāṇi" means that accepting your quota, not enroaching on others' quota. When one lives like that. One can live or one can desire to live... transformation of sata, sata means century, hundred. One can desire to live for hundreds of years, samah, period.

Apart from this, there is no alternative. That because when one works like this one will not become bound. So what is the essential meaning of this verse? Working in this way, one can desire to live for hundreds of years, and there is no alternative to man, human beings, because otherwise one will become bound by karma, and working in this way, one will not become bound by karma.

So, now, we would say everybody wants to live for hundreds of years, so if everybody wants to live for hundreds of years, then what is the point in saying that, if you live in this way, then you should desire to live for hundreds of years. Actually, if people are living ignorantly, if people are living sinfully, then the longer they live sinfully, the more karmic bondage they are creating.

And the more they will have to suffer as a consequence of their bad karma. So if a person is acting sinfully, for that person to live longer will mean prolonging the miseries of material existence for much longer time in future lives. On the other hand, if the person lives harmoniously, then the person is not creating any bad future for oneself, and along with that, that person is also contributing to the good of society. And because the person is in this way doing good for oneself as well as others, for such a person to live for a long time is a blessing, is something which is desirable for that person, and other people also desire. Let this person live for a long time.

So when the verses, that there is no other way to live. Now, we know that people are living in other ways, there are people who live Godlessly, so what does it mean? There is no other way to live. What it means is there are no other intelligent way to live. If somebody is at the twentieth store of the building, and the only way to come down is by staircase. Now somebody does that there is no other way to come down from the building. Now, there is another way also. You can just jump down from the terrace of the twentith storey, it will come down and will never come again, will die.

So, that means if one chooses some other way to come down from the twentieth storey of the building, that is fraught with designer and even bound to disaster. So similarly, what is being said over here, if we do not live harmoniously, there is no other way to live. Because the other way is the way to disaster. And this is the way by which there is no karmic bondage.

Srila Prabhupada's translate is: one may aspire to live for hundreds of years if he continuously goes on working in that way, for that sort of work will not bind him to the law of karma. There is no alternative to this way for man.

Now, so, let us look at what Srila Prabhupada is saying in the purport. So the purport can be divided into five sections again.

So the first paragraph in the purport talks about how karma-bandhana causes the death. So the connection is people want to live for hundreds of years. Nobody wants to die. So but why there is death? That is what is the connection between this point in the purport and the verse, mantra.

Now human life offers liberation through akarma. So, the second paragraph talks about, ok, nobody wants to die, nobody wants to be bound by birth and death. So how does one come out of it? By akarma.

So now the question may come up how will we learn about akarma? Then, the Vedas teach that. The Vedas lead ultimately to akarma. The Vedas teach many things, but their conclusive teaching is akarma. Now people cannot, what akarma is we will discuss in details, but essentially it is pure devotional service. So people cannot start practicing akarma immediately.

So therefore, it says, first begin by bringing God into sense-gratificatory life. That means ok when we want sense gratification, fine, but when we want sense gratification, do not do it in a irreligious way, do it in a God conscious way. So that is the first stage of spiritual life.

Now if one does not practice this first stage of spiritual life also, then everything that one does is in vain. So if one does not have God, then whatever one does becomes in vain.

And therefore Prabhupada finally concludes by saying: make all atruisms into karma-yoga. Atruisms means different kinds of benefactory activities which we want to do for others, make them, bring God into them, and then they will become spiritualised. Then, they will give lasting benefit. Otherwise, the benefit from that will be sceaflety (?, 07:48).

So the whole theme of the purport is to acknowledge Ishvara, live according the isavasya principle. So let us look at each of these points one by one now.

So Srila Prabhupada starts the purport by saying no one wants to die. So now, how karma bandhana causes death. The soul is eternal, so the soul is say here, and the body is in front. So the Bhagavad Gita gives the example that just as the sunlight illuminates the whole universe, the soul illuminates the body.

        yathā prakāśayaty ekaḥ
        kṛtsnaḿ lokam imaḿ raviḥ
        kṣetraḿ kṣetrī tathā kṛtsnaḿ
        prakāśayati bhārata

So in the 13 chapter 34th verse, Krishna uses this and the other example of ether, pervading nature. For these two examples, it uses how the soul interacts with the matters. So it says, the Sun illuminates and activates the whole Universe, the soul illuminates and activates the body with consciousness. The soul is eternal, the body is temporary. Now, the soul does not have to die because the soul is "sat", however the soul experiences death, the misery of death, because of attachment to the body.

Just like when a person is watching a movie, and in that movie, there is a hero, and hero is so heroic that the audience gets attracted to the hero, and then suddenly in the middle of the hero, in the middle of the movie, the fight going on, and suddenly the willan (?, 09:38) hits a big blondy head of the hero, and the head just both (?) apart, and the hero dies.

Then everybody in the audience will get shocked. How the hero die. So what happened over there? Because the audience was emotionally attached to the hero, so what happened on the screen, which actually had nothing to do with them, nothing has happened to them when they are sitting on the chairs in the theater, but because they are emotionally attached to the hero, when something happens to the hero, they feel affected by that. Similarly, the soul is like the audience, and the body is like the character in the movie theater. So because the soul is attached to the body, so when the body undergoes an injury, the body undergoes distraction, the soul gets traumatised.

So who is it that suffers, say, when we are, say when we die? Is it the body or is it the soul? Actually, the body is dead, the body cannot suffer. The soul is ananda, sat-cit-ananda, the soul cannot offer, and then who suffers? Actually, the soul who identifies with the body, and mistakes the events happening to the body to be happening to itself is who suffers. So we suffer because of misidentification. So first point that Srila Prabhupada makes is that to the extent, we desire to enjoy material things, we become bound by karma to that extent. It is because a person desires to watch the movie, and hope that through watching the movie, I will get happiness. So the person starts watching the movie and if the movie turns out to be a horror movie, where the hero suffers terribly and eventually is killed, then the person gets traumatised.

The spectator feels suffering, although that person does not suffer (?). So like that the soul comes into material existence. The soul desires to watch the movie. Watch the movie means the soul desires to do materialiastic activities, desires to do karma, to get material enjoyment, and when the soul does not get material enjoyment, the soul suffers. And the material life is like a horror movie. We undergo so much suffering here and to the extent we identify with the body, to the extent our suffering increases, ultimate suffering is death.

And the body is destroyed, the soul feels traumatised. So the immortal soul suffers the pain of mortality because of the desire for enjoying matter. And the desire for enjoying matter is the cause of karma and karma-bandhana. So that is what binds the soul to material existence. So now, when the soul is bound to material existence, no living being wants to die, and yet all living beings have to die. Although all living beings die, still what do we do?

Human life offers liberation through akarma. We, when we come to the human form of life, then we can perceive a higher reality, we can perceive the eternal beyond the temporary. We can perceive the spiritual beyond the material. And we can realise that by doing akarma. So, now, let us look at this word. There are three types of activities, three types of karma. So now, the word karma can have four different meanings, and this itself, you will see, the karma is used in two different senses, so for example karma can mean action of any kind, where any action can be called karma.

Sometimes, when we are suffering, oh, I am suffering because of my karma. There what we are referring to is not karma, but the reaction of karma. So the word karma can refer to our actions, the word karma can refer to our reactions, or we say that the law of karma is inescapeable. Here we are referring to the system of action and reaction. That can also be called as karma, and beyond that the fourth meaning of the word karma is what is given over here.

So within the generic word karma, there are three kinds of activities, one of them is also called as karma, so this can also be called sukarma, good karma. Prabhupada explains in the purport as actions which are performed in terms of one's prescribed duties as mentioned in the revealed scriptures. So, we get good, we do good karma when we act according to scripture. We act morally, responsibly, good activities. That is karma. That is sukarma or good action.

Then the opposite of that is vikarma. Vikarma is bad action. Actions which are performed by the misuse of one's freedom, which direct one to the lower life forms. So when people say eat abominable food stuffs, eat meat, then nature may give them the body of a lion or a tiger because that is more suited for eating meat. So that is vikarma.

Now, akarma does not mean inaction. It means action which brings no reaction. So the 'a' prefix is not directly modifying karma in the first sense of action, it is modifying karma in the sense of reaction. So akarma means action that produces no reaction. So actions, as Prabhupada says, which free one from the cycle of birth and death. So how does that happen? That we will discuss later, but essentially, akarma means when we act for the pleasure of Krishna, then we do not have to suffer any reactions, because Krishna is working for our purification and elevation. He is staying in our heart and he wants to liberate us.

So when we start working for him, it is like the patient cooperating with the doctor. When the patient starts cooperating with the doctor, naturally the patient's recovery is smoother, quicker and better. So like that, when we start cooperating with Krishna, by doing akarma, then we can be liberated from the material existence. So going back earlier to the movie example, akarma means the person decides, no I do not want to watch the movie anymore. So, I just want to come out of the theater. Then, whatever suffering is going in the movie, that will not affect the person. Because that person understood now that I do not want to watch the movie, I am not interested in whether it is good or bad on it. It is illusion, let me get out. So akarma is that kind of activity.

So let us move back now and we will see that, human life offers liberation through akarma. So how exactly do we perform akarma? Srila Prabhupada explains that akarma essentially means doing activities on behalf of God. So for example, if I am working in the army, and while working in the army, I shoot an enemy soldier. At that time, because I am working on the behalf of the army, I am not held responsible. In fact, if I shoot many enemy soldiers, I may even get a mild honor from the government because I have served the government in a very important way in a particular battle. So on the other hand, if I come back and I shoot a neighbour over an argument, then I will be punished because I am doing that on my account. So when we act on our own account, we become bound, when we act on behalf of Krishna, we become unbound, we become liberated.

So the whole purpose of the Vedic literature is ultimately to teach akarma. So akarma refers to those activities which bring liberation. Now Srila Prabhupada writes that such a liberating work is described here in the pages of Sri Isopanisad. And Prabhupada immediately correlates with Bhagavad Gita. Srila Prabhupada will do this repeatedly in his Isopanisad purports that he will again and again refer to the Bhagavad Gita to elaborate the concepts which are talked about over here.

So now Srila Prabhupada makes a significant statement: Factually, no one has to do anything more than render devotional service to the Lord. However, in the lower stages of life one cannot immediately adopt the activities of devotional service, nor can one completely stop fruitive work.

So what does this mean? Often, people ask, you know, is spiritual life supplement for material life or a complement for material life? Supplement means something which is addition, like dietary supplement, normal dietary is there, take something extra. So is spiritual life a supplement or is it a complement? Complement means that which completes. So for example, if I am eating and there are some essential dietary elements that are missing in my diet, then whatever I add, it makes the diet complete. So that is a complement. So is spiritual life a supplement something which is additional or is spiritual life a complement? That means something which is essential which completes our material life.

So what is the answer? Is it a supplement or a complement? Actually, it is neither. Spiritual life is a replacement for material life. Ultimately, we as souls are spiritual and material life is artificial for us. It is unnatural for us. And in our pure eternal stage, we are meant to be liberated from material existence and return back to the spiritual world to live entirely spiritually. So the ultimate goal of spiritual life is that spiritual life should act as a replacement for material life.We become liberated from material existence and we return back to the spiritual realm. But before we come to that, initially we may think of spiritual life as a supplement, ok, you like to practice spirituality, fine, I do not like to practice spirituality, I will not practice. So we think it is an optional additional activity that some people may do, some people may not do.

So that is an initial and ignorant vision. But actually, it is even in the material level of existence, spiritual life is a complement to material life. It is essential that we bring God into our lives. Otherwise our lives remain incomplete.

And Srila Prabhupada makes the next point: the Vedas lead ultimately to akarma. The Vedas talk about religion at multiple levels. So Srila Prabhupada says that these isms, this is a very interesting statement by Srila Prabhupada, these isms refer to altruism, socialism, communism, nationalism, humanitarianism. So these isms are certainly very attractive forms of karma-bandhana. This is like a "I am feast in a well-dwelled glow", I am feast in a well-dwelled glow means that something which seems very soft, but there is, it is very hard hitting.

So, now, normally people think of altruism, humanitarianism as very good things, nationalism is also good, but Srila Prabhupada says they are very attractive forms of karma-bandhana. They are also forms of bondage. Why? Because if I am attracted to my nation, then all that will happen is I will not get liberated. I will become reborn in the country again as some other specy depending on the kind of karma I have done, or if I have not done too much bad karma, I may be born as a human being, but still, I continue on material existence. Even nationalism is a form of karma-bandhana. It does not lead to liberation. And that is why we have to add God to whatever we do. So without adding God, without acting according to the isavasya principle, one will not be able to stay on without karmic bondage.

So, let us look at how this is done in the Bhagavad Gita. So Srila Prabhupada explains now that spiritualise all isms. So sense gratification plus God will be karma kanda. That means, ok, I want a good spouse, I want a lot of wealth, I want power, that is what materialistic people want. But then, scriptures, ok, that is what you want, we will provide you that. You do these rituals. You worship this devata. You do this yagna and you will get these things. So here what is happening, we can visualise one circle, this is circle of sense gratification, and then there is another circle of dharma. So dharma is religion, sense gratification another circle. Now the area where these two circles will intersect, that is karma kanda.

That means dharma is one circle, sense gratification another circle, the area where the two intersect, that is which, the intersection area will be dharmic sense gratification, religious materialism. That is the beginning of most people's spiritual life. Most people come to God, not because they love God. Most people come to God because they love the things of this world and they are not able to get it themselves, so think, maybe God will give this to me. So that is the beginning. So when religion and sense gratification intersect, and the intersection set is called as karma kanda. So Prabhupada says even if one wants sense gratification, one must bring in God into it, otherwise the sense gratification will be the cause of bondage.

If one does it dharmically, at least there will be some elevation that will happen gradually, and similarly, if one wants any kind of altruism, any kind of good work for society, for nation, then one has to keep God in the center. Now Srila Prabhupada would encourage Indians as well as Americans, he would tell them that all of you are Indians, and India has say, no, this Bhagavad Gita is your own cultural legacy. People from all over the world are practicing it, not only practicing it, they are renouncing everything materially enjoyable and they are becoming missionaries and centering all this, sharing this message all over the world, you Indians, why don't you do?

Share Krishna Consciousness with the world, become teachers of the Bhagavad Gita. Understand it and teach it. So Srila Prabhupada would encourage Indians based on their pride of Indian identity. Now, when 1970, Srila Prabhupada was preaching at that time, there was the war for the separation of Bangladesh and eventually, Bangladesh has become separate from Pakistan, as a separate country. At that time, Srila Prabhupada was giving a class and he said that you people are concerned that we lost one part of our country as Pakistan, but you see now if you just share this Consciousness, I am an old man, lone man, and I have done what I can to share Krishna Consciousness. So many people all over the world have become devotees.

If all of you share Krishna Consciousness with everyone else, then the whole world will become Hindustan. So this was Srila Prabhu (25:31)
