Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xHeAt1YHIWc
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=7ht2mN35cNL26rcYdBjtqc0y_Vh8MTU0MDEwMjU2MUAxNTQwMDE2MTYx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_016_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_13_part_1_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=xHeAt1YHIWc&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

So, we continue with our discussion on the Isopanisad. We are discussing about
sambhuti and vinasa. So, mantra twelwe said that when a person worships the
asambhuti, that person "andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti", goes into darkness. And person
who worships so called sam..., asam..., sambhuti, so called sambhuti, that means
a concocted conception of the Absolute Truth. That person goes into deeper
darkness. Now, this verse is going to contrast the two. It says one result is
obtained by worship of sambhuti, and another by the result of a..., by the
worship of asambhuti. So, let us lo..., look at this verse. So, it is said:

        anyad evāhuḥ sambhavād
        anyad āhur asambhavāt
        iti śuśruma dhīrāṇāṁ
        ye nas tad vicacakṣire

So, "anyad evāhuḥ sambhavād", "āhuḥ" means it is said. Certainly, "evā", by them
it is said. "anyad", one, one particular. "sambhavād", by the worship of
"sambhavād", by the worship of the eternal, one result is obtained. 

"anyad āhur asambhavāt", by the worship of that, which is not eternal, some
other result is obtained. "iti śuśruma dhīrāṇāṁ", this is what I have heared
from the "dhīrā", "śuśruma dhīrā". "ye nas tad vicacakṣire", those who have
perfectly explained it. So:

"It is said that one result is obtained by worshiping the supreme cause of all
causes and that another result is obtained by worshiping what is not supreme.
All this is heard from the undisturbed authorities, who clearly explained it."

Who clearly explained it. So, now, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport.
So, basically, this, now, Srila Prabhupada is giving little longer purports, in,
for these mantras. So, there are sixteen paragraphs in this purport.

So, first thing Srila Prabhupada says is this verse clearly says different paths
lead to different results. One p..., one path, one result, another path, another
result. So, therefore "dhīrā" exposes folly of "all paths lead to the same
goal". And analysing this will be the main theme of the purport and the class.

So, after exposing the folly of that, then "dhīrā" teaches shastra. What does
shastra say? Different paths lead to different goals. So, we have to choose the
right path and then we get to the right goal.

Then, accept Krishna as sambhavat. So, what are, what are the paths now? One is
that we accept Krishna as the Absolute Truth. Then, what will happen? Yes.
This is what Arjuna did. And then Arjuna, what did Prabhupada say? He killed his
so called relatives to satisfy Krishna. That means for the satisfaction of
Krishna, one is ready to do anything. No. If somebody does not accept Krishna as
sambhavat. Then, the person may choose an entirely different course of action.
What is the course of action? People are my God, somebody may say. As we
discussed, mana seva, madhava sevaya. We will discuss elaborately. Or I am God.
That is Mayavada. Which we discussed earlier also. We will discuss it little bit
today also.

Now, hearing from "dhīrā" helps one and all to attain perfection.

So, let us look over these points now. Firstly, do all paths lead to the same
goal? We will look at this from a logical point of view, from the scriptural
point of view, and then from the practical point of view, the cultural point of
view. So, now, Srila Prabhupada standard example for refuting st..., this was
that if one sits, say, in Mumbai, one train is going to Chennai. Another is
going to Delhi. Another is going to Calcutta. So, now, will it be that all the
trains will lead to the same destination? No. Because actually they are all,
trains going in different directions. So, similarly, Srila Prabhupada says, how
can all paths lead to the same goal? These paths are different. And these paths
take people in different directions. The impersonalists may refute that this is
a wrong example because, actually, do you say the, do, do you think that the
Absolute Truth is limited, like one small place, like Delhi, or Calcutta, or
Chennai. The Absolute Truth is everywhere. The Absolute Truth is in Delhi also,
Calcutta also, Chennai also. So, therefore, this is a false example. Now, the,
when the impersonalists say like this, they are actually not understanding the
thrust of the e..., example. The thrust of the example is not whether the
Absolute Truth is limited or unlimited. The thrust is whether the, the path to
the Absolute Truth is a particular path or by doing anything in life, one can go
to the Absolute Truth. Just one have to evolve one's consciousness in a
particular way, so that one can go the Absolute Truth.

You know, for example, Srila Prabhupada was asked this question once in America
after University programme. Swamiji, I do not know the verse, but I have heard
that the Bhagavad Gita says whatever we do, ultimately, we will go back to God.
So, Srila Prabhupada replied, if whatever we do, we, we have to go back to God,
then why would God have to speak the Bhagavad Gita? We would do whatever we
wanted to do and we would go back to Him. But Krishna speaks Bhagavad Gita, in
which He tells this. If you do this, this will happen. If you do this, this will
happen.

        mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi
        mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi
        atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān
        na śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi

Krishna says if you become conscious of me, in 18.58, you will cross over all
obstacles by my grace. If, however, you do not become conscious of me, you will
be lost. So, Krishna is clearly telling two paths, two consequences. So, Krishna
does not teach this. So, yes, it is true that the Absolute Truth is unlimited.
But that does not mean whatever we do, we will go to the Absolute Truth. Why?
Because the Absolute Truth is perceived at a particular level of Consciousness.
The Ab..., if our consciousness is not tuned to that level, then although the
Absolute Truth is all pervading, we cannot perceive the Absolute Truth. So,
f..., there are three modes of material nature. There is ignorance, passion and
goodness. And beyond that, there is transcendence. So, only for consciousness,
and moving towards transcendence can we perceive transcendental reality.
Otherwise, transcendental reality will remain inaccessible to us. So, the thrust
of the example is not the nature of the destination. The, the thrust of the
example is the reality that different paths are going to take us to different
kinds of consciousness. And not all kinds of consciousness are equal when it
comes to perceiving, realising, or relishing the Absolu..., the presence of the
Absolute Truth. And this is not just based on logic. This is also based on
scripture. Before we go to scripture, to understand that the Absolute Truth is
ultimately a person. And when we talk about a person. When we want to go close
to a person, then there are certain things which we have to do. Now, if I
want to go clo..., become closer to my spouse, then I know what his or her likes
and dislikes are, and accordingly change my behavior. Similarly, the Supreme
Lord is a person. And relationships require commitment. Krishna is the Supreme
Person, then actually, if we people work so hard to try to win the favor of some
ordinary person. How much more we need to strive to win the, to c..., form a
relationship with the Supreme Person? Supreme Lord is very merciful, very
accessible. But still, He is a person. And He needs to, He needs to be
approached as a person. And approaching Him as a person means that we understand
what are His likes and dislikes, and act accordingly. Now, Krishna's likes and
dislikes are not arbitrary. At, as far as the principles of devotional service
are concerned, at least with respesct to purification of a consciousness from
the lower modes to the higher modes. What Krishna likes, it is also for our
ultimate good. That the more we do the things that are pleasing to Krishna, the
more we become purified, elevated. And we become happier. And ultimately, we get
liberated.

So, now, let us look at the scriptural refere..., now, it, the scriptures use,
if, if the scriptures are going to say that all paths lead to the same goal,
then the scriptures would not use repeated instruction by contrast. Instruction
by contrast means that the scriptures tell, if you do this, this will happen.
And that, that, that will happen. Now, thus, this has been done in the
Isopanisad itself. This particular mantra that we are taking. You know, it was
preceded by similar mantra earlier with respect to vidya and avidya.

        anyad evāhuḥ sambhavād
        anyad āhur asambhavāt

        anyad evāhur vidyayā-
        nyad āhur avidyayā

So, just like it was, here it was, sambhavat and asambhavat. So, the Isopanisad
makes it clear. If you do this, this will, going to happen. If you do this, this is
going to be happen. So, similarly, in the Bhagavad Gita, so many occasions. We
just look at a few occasions over here. So, in the third chapter and fourth
chapter, Krishna is talking about faith. And in 31, 32, He says, that if you
have faith, what will happen. If you do not have faith, what will happen. In 31,
He says:

        ye me matam idaṁ nityam
        anutiṣṭhanti mānavāḥ
        śraddhāvanto ’nasūyanto
        mucyante te ’pi karmabhiḥ

He says if you have faith in me and follow my instructions, you will become free
from all sinful reactions. Now, the other hand, in 32, He says:

        ye tv etad abhyasūyanto
        nānutiṣṭhanti me matam
        sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān
        viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

If you, if one is envious of me, one does not have faith in me, then whatever
knowledge one acquires, that will all be lost. Why? Because the consciousness is
misdirected. So, Krishna is clear in it, two paths, two consequences. And
similarly, 4.39-40 also, Krishna says something similar. In 39, first He says
what will happen by faith.

        śraddhāvāḻ labhate jñānaṁ
        tat-paraḥ saṁyatendriyaḥ
        jñānaṁ labdhvā parāṁ śāntim
        acireṇādhigacchati

He says, if you have "śraddhā", "labhate jñānaṁ". You will get "jñāna". And
"jñāna" will lead to "parāṁ śāntim". "acireṇādhigacchati", you will get supreme
peace. And quickly you will get. Now, on the o..., on the other hand, He says,
if one does not have faith:

        ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca
        saṁśayātmā vinaśyati
        nāyaṁ loko ’sti na paro
        na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ

He says that if one does not have faith, one will get happiness neither in this
world, nor in the next world. And then, after that, in 16.23-24, He talks about
one who follows shastra and one who does not follow shastra. So, first, He says,
in, one who does not follow shastra. So, in 31, 3.31 and 4.39, He told the
positive first, and the negative later. But in 16.23 and 24, first, He tells the
positive. And then He tells the negative. So, f..., sorry, first, He tells the
negative, and then He tells the positive. In twenty..., in 23, He first says,
those who do not follow shastra.

        yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya
        vartate kāma-kārataḥ
        na sa siddhim avāpnoti
        na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim

So, one who gives up shastra and "vartate kāma-kārataḥ", act only out of their
own selfish desires. "na sa siddhim avāpnoti", they will get no "siddhi". They
will not attain perfection. "na sukhaṁ", they will not get happiness. "na parāṁ
gatim", nor will they ever get the supreme destination. Now, and therefore,
Krishna says this is not the path that you should follow. What is the path you
should follow?

        tasmāc chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te
        kāryākārya-vyavasthitau
        jñātvā śāstra-vidhānoktaṁ
        karma kartum ihārhasi

Therefore, oh, Arjuna, "tasmāc chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te", understand what is
"chāstraṁ". And "kāryākārya-vyavasthitau". Understand what is the "kāryā" to be
done. What is the "kāryā" not to be done. "jñātvā śāstra-vidhānoktaṁ",
understanding what is the "vidhāno śāstra". "karma kartum ihārhasi". Act
accordingly. And 18.58, we already discussed. Now, let us look at 9.25. This is
an important verse from the Bhagavad Gita which talks about, we discussed this
briefly earlier. But we will discuss it once again. 9.25 is:

        yānti deva-vratā devān
        pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ
        bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā
        yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām

That, one who worships the devatas goes to devatas. This is actually talking
about overall goodness worship. Good, you now, "yān...", "pitṝn", "bhūtāni yānti
bhūtejyā", He says, as far as "pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ", those who worship in
the mode of passion, they worship the ancestors, they go to the ancestors. The
worship, those who worship in the ignorance, that is "bhūtās", they go to the
"bhūtās". And those who worship me come to me. So, Krishna is in one verse
giving four different trajectories. What can be clearer? What can be more
unambiguous? It is very very clear what Krishna is telling over here. He is
telling that different paths will lead to different goals. All paths do not lead
to the same goal. So, where does this idea that all paths lead to the same goal
come from? It comes from a desire to try to simplify complex issues. Simplify,
or, z..., now s..., not simplify, actually, to try to water down complexity and
try to make things simple. Now, even when those things are not simple. When one
tries to artifically make them simple, it leads to misunderstanding. Certainly,
things should not be made more complicated than what they are. But at the same
time, we cannot make things artifically simplistic. So, student has to evolve.
But teachers should not make things more complex than what they are. But a KG
student cannot understand calculus. And if a, if say, doctorate level, or senior
college level calculus has to be studied, the student has to evolve. You cannot
simplify the subject beyond a particular level. The truths themselves are
complex. So, it could be a simplistic wish of people that actually, you know,
all paths, whatever you want to do. You follow that path. I follow my path. We
will all be happy. There will be no conflict. So, this desire is good.

So, now, but this desire may be good. But it just does not work. So, we will
look at the cultural nature of this desire. But let us look at one more verse,
which is often used by the impersonalists to support, to support the idea that
all paths lead to the same goal. This is Gita 4.11. Now, many impersonalists
interpret it to say all paths lead to the same goal. However, what the verse
actually says is all people are on my path. It does not say that paths lead to
the same goal. Let us look at this verse, this 4.11:

        ye yathā māṁ prapadyante
        tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham
        mama vartmānuvartante
        manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

So, it is interesting that Srila Prabhupada quotes more of 4.11 A and B. A and B
is:

        ye yathā māṁ prapadyante
        tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

He quotes more of "ye yathā māṁ prapadyante", as all people surrender unto me, I
reward them accordingly. So, he focuses on this principle of reciprocation. And
when we study the Bhagavad Gita, we will look at this verse in much more detail.
But suffice it to say the emphasize of this verse is what? That Krishna is
reciprocal. If somebody surrenders to Him with pure devotion, He rewards that
person eternal destination. If somebody reci..., d..., surr..., approaches Him
with the material motivation, Krishna reciprocates accordingly giving him
whatever that person desires. So, that, that is the thrust which Srila
Prabhupada uses. Now, Mayavadis thrust the next part. What is the next part?

        mama vartmānuvartante

That "mama vartmānuvartante", "mama" is mine, "vartmā" is path. "ānuvartante" is
to follow. "manuṣyāḥ", people. "pārtha sarvaśaḥ", so all people, oh, "Pārtha".
so "sarvaśaḥ", "manuṣyāḥ", "mama vartmānuvartante", all people, oh, "Pārtha",
follow my path. So, as Prabhupada translates it.

"Everyone follows My path in all respects."

So, now, actually speaking, this verse really cannot be interpreted to mean all
people are on my path. Sorry, that all paths lead to the same goal. Because if
we look at the verse, what does it say? The "sarvaśaḥ" is clearly applied to
"manuṣyāḥ". It is not applied to "vartmā". It is not talking about all paths. It
is talking about all people. All people are on my people. "mama vartmā". It is
not "sarvaśaḥ vartmā". My path, all people. So, Krishna is not saying all paths
followed by all people will come to me. He is saying all people are on my path.
Now, what does it mean when we say all people are on my path? That is a very
profound truth. Actually, different people are attracted to different things in
the world. So, materialistic people are attracted to materially good-looking
t..., good-looking or good-feeling things. Religious people are attracted to
different devatas. Atheistic people are attracted to their own intellectual
ideas about atheism. Drunkards are attracted to alcohol. Sports lovers are
attracted sports. Devotees are attracted to Krishna. Now, all these people have
different things that they are attracted to. But actually, whatever a person is
attracted to, that attractiveness is ultimately a spark of Krishna's
all-attractiveness. Krishna talks about this in 10.41 in the Bhagavad Gita that:

    yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ
    śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā
    tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ
    mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam

He says that all opulent, beautiful, glorious creation spring from, but a spark
of My splendor. So, Krishna says over here that actually all people are
attracted to me. But they do not know that they are attracted to me. And when
they are attracted to my sparks, then they do not come to me by attraction to my
sparks. If a man is attracted to the beauty of a woman, then that attraction,
that beauty of a woman is not just her beauty. It may be temporary under her
position. But that is ultimately the arrangement of Krishna. If a pe...,
sports fan is attracted to a brilliant batsman, that talent is of that player
temporarily. When that person grows old, when that person becomes sickly, that
person cannot play the same way. So, that attractiveness is given to that person
by Krishna. Of course, because of the past karma of that person, and certainly,
the present hard work may also be involved in the person's expertise. But the
point is, that spark of attractiveness ultimately comes from Krishna.

So, in that sense, whatever anyone is attracted to, that person is attracted to
Krishna. However, when a person is attracted to alcohol, that attraction to
alcohol does not take the person to Krishna. That takes the person away from
Krishna. On the other hand, if the person is attracted to Krishna, and that
performs bhakti, then that person goes to Krishna. So, all people are on my path
means all people attracted to me in my various manifestations. And, but based on
that, some are going towards me. Some are going away from me. So, therefore, it,
what is important to understand is that ultimately all of us have to become
attracted, not to the sparks, but to the whole. So, the sparks are also coming
from Krishna. The attractiveness comes from Krishna. But that does not take us
towards Krishna. Because we do not see the Krishna connection of the sparks with
the whole. Only when we see that connection, then we will not get so much
fascinated, infatuated, and distracted by the sparks. But we will concentrate
our attraction on the whole. And then we can go back to the whole. So, this was,
is talking about a far deeper philosophical truth. And not a simplistic idea
that all paths lead to the same goal. And as I said, the Bhagavad Gita and so
many other verses, as we just briefly discussed, is talking clearly that all
paths do not lead to the same goal.

So, now, if logically, scripturally, the idea is that all paths do not lead to
the same goal. Then, why is that people substantiate such an idea? So, let us
look at it from a sociocultural perspective now. So, in general, there can be
three broad paths. So, first is the path called exclusivism. Exclusivism is the
idea that my way is the only right way. Exclusive, exclusive means only. Like
some, say, television company says, we have got, having exclusive coverage of
the world cup. It means we are only doing it. Nobody else is doing it. So, some
people, some, or some religions, some paths, they claim that we have exclusive
rights to God. So, they say you can only go back to God by following our path
and by no other path. Now, this sort of reduction to a monopolised commodity in
the religious marketplace is something which alienates intelligent people. You
know, if God is great. God is the father of all living beings. Why would God be
restricted to one path? Most of the Abrahamic religions, Christianity, Judaism,
and Islam, they all are based on this idea, exclusivist idea. That ours is the
only way back to God. And that is one main reason why people get alienated from
religion. It is, it is, it just stinks with narrow-mindedness. This idea that
ours is the only way to God.

And then, as a reaction of an immediate reaction to that, or as an instinctive
fanciful reaction of that, people go to the other extreme. The other extreme is
what. It is called as pluralism. Pluralism is all ways are right. All ways are
right is just another way of saying, all paths lead to the same goal. So, all
ways are right. Now, this seems, especially in a time when we have
multicultiralism. There are diff..., in every, practically, every country, there
are people from different religions. In the past, in the west for example, there
was only Christianity. And people basically could either be Ch..., at least in
the re..., recent past, people could either be Christians, or they could be,
they were considered pagans, atheists But now, now, in practically every
country, there are many religions. And the idea that only one of these religions
is the right religion. All of the other religions are wrong. That seems to be
very culturally alieva..., alienating. And that can lead to lot of conflicts.
So, thus people say, in order to avoid conflicts, you know, we should believe,
your path is right. And my path is right. So, in fact, some people go to the
extreme and they say that actually, there are as many religions as human beings.
That means every human being has his or her own religion. So, now, this is quite
an appealing as far as its appeal and broad-mindedness goes. Because it seems,
oh, it is so tolerant. It is so broad-minded. You know, you follow your
religion. I will follow my religion. You know, you know, we certainly should be
broad-minded. We certainly should be open-minded. But we cannot be so
open-minded that our brains fall out. What does that mean? That essentially
means that actually, open, you know, in a name of tolerance, we should not quote
impotence. What does it meaning of tole..., tolerance lea..., tolerance actually
leading to impotence? See, all of us are in a sick condition right now. The
great religions of the world, whatever may that the differences, they do say,
agree that we have to develop love for God. And they tell us that when we are,
get attached to material things, to these worldly things, then that i..., will
distract us from God. And we should not get infatuated by these things. And
going back to God, loving God, is the ultimate goal of life. This is a broad
teaching of the great theistic religions of the world.

Now, if we say all paths are right. And the fundamental problem that comes is
that, ok, one of the paths will be atheism. So, if atheism is right, just
because all parts are right. So, atheism is also one of the paths. And atheism is
right. Now, if atheism is right, then what happens? All o..., all the religious
paths become wrong. Because all the religions are asking us to surrender to God.
And atheism says there is no God. And if atheism is right, then there is no God.
Then all the ideas, glimpse ideas about God become wrong. So, even from a simple
logic, actually, all paths cannot be right. So, then, is there some criteria?
How do we decide? Now, exclusivism smacks of narrow-mindedness. But pluralism
smacks of zero-mindedness. So, zero-minded means there is no intelligence only
in the idea that all paths lead to the same goal. It is basically, if we are in
a diseased condition, then there can be different treatments. Now, patient can
choose Ayurveda, or Alupati, or Homeopati, or Naturopati. They are different
kinds of treatment that the person may try out. But essentially, it is not that
everything a per..., patient does is a treatment. If the patient starts taking
the very fools that caused the disease. Then, he says, this is my variety of
treatment. That will not work. Why will that not work? Because the disease will
become worse. So, the essence of treatment should be, even if there are
differences in the various treatments, the essential point is that those
treatments should make the patient healthy. And the signs of health should be
true across different systems of medicine. So, for example, the person gets the
energy back. The person's faith regains its lights and energy. And then, in the
different kinds of medical reports, basically, the reports come out well. So,
there are, there are objective criteria by which one can understand that the
person has become healthy. So, the essential point here is that although there
can be multiple treatments. That that does not mean that everything the patient
does is a treatment. So, what is the criteria of a deciding what is a treatment
and what is not a treatment? That is essentially the objective criteria of
whether the person's, patience's help is improving. Similarly, Srila Prabhupada
would say that actually, there is the objective criteria for whether a person is
developing love for God. S..., and tha..., that is why Srila Prabhupada was so
broad in his approach that when some Christian priest came and asked him.
Wha..., what is your opinion about Jesus Christ? When Prabhupada said, he is our
guru. Now, they were very surprised to see a, what they considered to be a Hindu
Swami, saying that Jesus is our guru. So, how is that? You know, Jesus Christ
had so much love for God that he was ready to liaise, lay down his life for the
service of God. So, such a person who has so much love for God, that person is
definitely our guru. So, Srila Prabhupada had this broad vision. So, the
criteria for the Jesus to decide was, for Prabhupada to decide was that whether
a person has love for God.

So, then, between these two extremes of exclusivism and pluralism, there is an
intermediate balanced stage, which is called as inclusivism. Inclusivism means
there is one way with various levels on it. Various levels means that there,
people can be approaching God at different levels, different motivations,
different conceptions. So, depending on that, the levels will be there. But
ultimately, there is one way. So:

        mama vartmanuvartante
        manusyah partha sarvasah

"mama vartmanuvartante" means that all people are following my path. "mama
vartma", "mama vartma", my path. That means there is one path. But on that path,
people are going down or going up. So, with respect to medicine, there is
basically one path. The path where one person is either going towards health, or
the person is going away from health towards sickness. Now, the, within that one
broad trajectory to go up the trajectory, or to go down the trajectory, there
can be different specific routes. So, one can choose, say, we can call these as
different lanes. One can choose the Ayurveda lane. One can choose the Alupati
lane. One can choose the Naturopati lane. But the point is, one should be
becoming healthier. So, Srila Prabhupada said that we have not come here to
convert people from one religion to another religion. Now, our goal is not to
convert a Christian into a Hindu, or a Muslim into a Hindu. Our goal is to
actually make people into lovers of God. So, if there is any conversion. It is
not from materialism, from one religion to another religion. It is from
materialism to spirituality. Changing people from being lovers of material
things to lovers of God. That is the goal. And whichever path by which this
happens, we accept that path as bonafide. And if that is not happening, then
that path is not bonafide. So, there is objective criteria over here. And when
that objective criteria is understood, then people can move forward s...,
steadily on that criteria. But if people do not understand that criteria and
sentimentally think that all paths lead to the same goal, then actually they
will equate sickness with health. And they may be becoming sicker and sicker.
And imagining that we are on the same path as others. And we are becoming
healthier and healthier. That will not work. So, therefore, what is important
is, you have to understand the criteria, objective criteria. And see whether
person is moving upwards towards love of God in that criteria. And if that is
not happening, then that is not a path that takes us to God.

So, now, from the sociocultural point of view, today's predominate ethos favors
pluralism. When you have your path. I have my path. "eto matta topat". That
whichever path you want to follow, you follow. And as many opinions that many
paths. But actually, this is not based on scripture. Because there is objective
criteria. You know, for improving one's spiritual health. Now, we do appreciate
the points. So, are, are we as devotees exclusivists? No. When Srila Prabhupada
was asked in a Les Crane's show, he and Mukunda Goswa..., Maharaja at that time,
Michael Grant, Mukunda Prabhu. They had gone for the show. So, Prabhupada and
his disci..., student was there. And there was a Christian priest and his
student was there. And both of them, they had a sort of discussion. It was
basically meant to be like a, a popular conf..., con..., populist pondering
confrontation between two religious teachers. And that person asked, the host
asked the Christian fa..., priest. You know, so, this person is a Hindu. And
this pers..., his holy book is Bhagavad Gita. He did not even know the word
Bhagavad Gita. Bhagavad Gita, isn't it, Swamiji? Yeah. Prabhupada just nodded.
And he says, so, if he follows this book, will he go back to God? So, the priest
remained silent. He said. He did not say anything. So, he will go back to God?
He remained silent. And he came to Prabhupada. Prabhupada, so he follows the
Bible. By the following the Bible, will he go back to God? Prabhupada said yes,
follows the message of God, and develops love for God, then he will go back to
God. So, then, he came back, and in front all the witnesses, he says, so, this
Swami says that by following the Bible, you will go back to God. But do you say
that you following the Bhagavad Gita, you will go back to God? He says, the path
back to God is very narrow. You have to follow the Bible to go back to God. So,
according to you, you will not go back to God? So, no, those who follow the
Bible will go back to God. See, then, this is the narrow-mindedness of people.

So, now, this idea that Prabhupada, when he said that, people who follow
Christianity can go back to God, what does it mean? The criteria is that people
have to develop love for God. Then, they will go back to God. So, you know, it
is not just affiliation with a particular institution that takes us back to God.
It is the purification of the heart that takes us back to God. And of course,
certain paths, certain institutions can facilitate us in developing love for
God. So, Srila Prabhupada, you know, if somebody was falling Christianity in,
nominally. I was just born in a Christian family, not really following
Christianity very seriously. Then, Prabhupada would tell just chant Hare
Krishna, practice Krishna Consciousness. And there are, so because this is yuga,
This is Caitanya Mahaprabhu's mercy is there, the yuga dharma, or the chanting
of the holy names is there. So, we can develop love of God very fast. It is a
very swift and effective treatment process. But somebody, if somebody were
committed Christian, Srila Prabhupada would try to, not try to convert them, let
Christianity come. Prabhupada would inspire them to follow Christianity with
more serious commitment. He would encourage people to follow the notion of not
kill, to raise to the level of vegetarianism. So, the idea is, if, if somebody
is outside lying on the street. And he is sick. We will invite them to come to
our hospital and get treated. But our goal is not if somebody is treating,
taking medicine in some other hospital. Our goal is not to break into that
hospital, destroy that hospital, and pull people from that hospital and bring to
our hospital. No, that is not our goal. That is the idea of exclusivist
religions. Which consider our religion is only religion. And all the religions
are false. So, they will break other people's temples. They will break other
people's, you know, what they consider as false Gods. And they may even
persecute and kill people who are falling in other religions. And in that way,
they may try to attract people, or force people to accept their path. They will
try to monopolise their religious marketplace. For them, it is basically a
marketplace. And they consider all other competition to be ungodly. So, that is
not our understanding.

Now, within this understanding of the broad hierarchy that there are different
levels. And the more a person has developed love for God, the more that person is
advanced. And the path that helps a person develop love for God. That is a
bonafide path. Other paths are not. So, when we have this broad understanding,
then we can move forward to actually try for communal harmony. Communal harmony
will not come by simply whitewashing all paths as good. That is the current
idea in the name of plu..., pluralism, whatever you follow, that is good. So,
that, however, is not the truth. We have to understand that different paths will
have different consequences. So, now, sometimes, now, we come to the question of
impersonalism. Now, if impersonalism does not lead to criticism of bhakti. It
does not lead to offense towards Bhagavan, then impersonalism is also progress
in the spiritual path. Because many impersonalists follow certain principles.
They respect Vedic culture. They respect the Veda. The respect the cows. They
respect the deities. At least, many of them. And that way, they are also coming
to some level of goodness. So, now, the problem is if they start offending the
Supreme Lord, then they become, in many ways, more hostile to the devotional
culture, like I discussed in the previous class, how they start minimising and
criticising devotional service in order to talk about social service positively.
That is unfortunate. That is undesirable. So, we have to see based on
consequence.

Now, we discussed how in, in theory, in principle, Mayavada can be so
detrimental to spiritual life. And Mayavada is, have this idea that ultimately
all paths lead to the same goal. Because they have the idea that they want to
unite everyone. So, they say that, ok, you worship your devata. You worship that
devata. You worship that devata. And they say that, ok, o..., other religions
are also like that. They are worshipping the, some other God. Muslims are doing
something else. They are doing something else. And all these ultimately lead to
the same one supreme Brahman. Supreme, that is the Brahman. So, now, this idea,
of course, is not exactly scriptural. Because the idea is, one has to have
particular conception of God as a Supreme Being. And then one worships that
Supreme Being. Then, one will make spiritual advancement. And they return back to
that being. So, the impersonalists' idea we will have to look at the
consequences to evaluate it. Now, Srila Prabhupada makes very strong a statement
about impersonalism because it can have any harmful consequences. At the same
time, when Srila Prabhupada would deal with people. You know, he was warm. He
was cordial. He was gentlemanly. When Srila Prabhupada was staying with the
doctor Misra in the Misra studio, yoga studio in New York, at that time, they
were completely a philsophical loggerheads. You know, this, doctor Misra was
talking about impersonal, Mayavada based on Shankara's teachings. And Srila
Prabhupada would contradict that. But still, Srila Prabhupada was so cordial.
That Srila Prabhupada would not only sit and talk with him on friendly terms.
Srila Prabhupada cooked for him and feed him. And Srila, so, in, you know, our
philosophical differences should not make us, you know, arrogant or culturally
insensitive in ways that can be counterproductive for our outreach.

So, for example, you know, Srila Prabhupada would use the word fools and rascals
sometimes. Now, if you look at it generally, Srila Prabhupada would use these
words, these strong words, in his conversations with a small group of people.
The intimate disciples. And for them, he wanted to make it, things very clear.
This is right. This is wrong. And he wanted to make things clear. So, he did
that. But Srila Prabhupada himself was cautious. These kinds of words in the
purports come very very less. And purports are his primary authority. In fact,
there is a letter in 1976, where a disciple wrote to Srila Prabhupada saying
that I want to transcribe all your letters. Sorry, I want to transcribe all your
lectures so that I can understand your teachings better. And Srila Prabhupada's
reply is there. Prabhupada was saying as far as your desire is concerned, I
think, it is prayasa. It is unnecessary. Whatever teachings I want to give, I
have given them in my purports. You study my purport. That will be enough. So,
of course, that does not mean that lectures should not have been transcribed.
They got a valuable legacy of Srila Prabhupada's teachings through his lectures
also. But the point is, there is a hierarchy. So, what Srila Prabhupada wanted
to be perpetuated essentially was his books and the purports. So, even in the
vedabase, friend, the Jayadvaita Maharaja writes that in Pra..., all Prabhupada
words are eq..., are authoritative. But at the same time, there is a levels of
authority. So, at the topmost are his purports. They are more or less universal,
are broadest in their appeal. Then, there are lectures. Now, lectures are from
context specific. Srila Prabhupada is speaking in, say, Mumbai. He may be
addressing Mumbai specific issues at times. Then, below that, there are
conversations. He may be talking to some people. And again the context might be
there. And letters are the most contextual. So, the point is that Srila
Prabhupada's strong speech, you know, is something which he could do because he
was old. He had the authority of age. And he most importantly had the authority
of purity. He, there is one beautiful lecture of Prabhupada. Where Prabhupada,
he is saying that, you know, a devotee prays to Krishna. Krishna, all these
fools and rascals, they are suffering in material existence. Please give me the
ability to help all of them to come back to you. So, you see here, Prabhupada is
using the word fools and rascals in not in an angry or arrogant way. He is using
in a compassionate and caring way. You know, when we start using fools and
rascals. You know, we do not use it in that way. We use it, you know. He is a
fool. He is a rascal. We use it in a very judgemental and demitrary way. And it,
when we use that, it is very doubtful whether there will be compassion in our
hearts for, for those people whom we, whom we are condeming as fools and
rascals.

So, first of all, whether we have the purity of motivation and secondly, whether
we have the potency of transformations. Or Srila Prabhupada could use such
strong words and because he had so much purity, he could actually bring about
transformation. So, if we start using such words, then we may well not be able
to bring about transformation. In fact, we can alienate people by that. So, the,
ultimately, our purpose is to attract people to Krishna. And if by our s...,
method of speaking, we are driving people away from Krishna, then we are not
doing service. We are doing disservice. Krishna says in Bhagavad Gita, Third
Chapter, think 26 verse:

        na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed
        ajñānāṁ karma-saṅginām
        joṣayet sarva-karmāṇi
        vidvān yuktaḥ samācaran

So, He says, "na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed", do not disturb the minds of people who
are attached. A..., what should we do? "joṣayet sarva-karmāṇi", engage them
accordingly. And guide them to rise to a higher level of consciousness. So, now,
when we talk about Mayavada, we as devotees, now, use Mayavada as an open-ended
term to brand anyone who has the idea of the Absolute Truth being impersonal.
But there is a huge variety of people within that. You know, there are hardline
mayavadis who are intellectually convinced that the Absolute Truth is
impersonal. They are of, they are, they, they claim to understand scripture. And
they, they quote scripture, of course, misinterpreting it for their purposes,
but they are convinced mayavadis. And there are, they are, they are few. That
they are, no doubt. But they are few. But beyond that, there is a large number
of people who are simply under Mayavada influence. That means those people have
not really given any serious thought to Mayavada. Whatever they have read from
various auxiliary sources. Maybe, they saw some movies. Or they saw some
programmes on TV, read some Amar Chitra Katha. Or something like that. And if
like that, they got some idea. Oh, we have to merge in the Absolute Truth. And
in general, before Srila Prabhupada preached, most of the prominent Indian
spiritual teachers, or those who were considered to be prominent spiritual
teachers, they were impersonalists. And if you see, in the Indian history text
books also, post Independence Indian history is not talked about much. It is
only pre Indian Independence Indian history. And then more should the pre
Independence, spiritual leaders. Actually, national, national leaders are also
spiritual leaders. So, they are talking about favorable light. And most of them
were impersonalists. So, people do not know so much about Srila Prabhupada. On
the other hand, they know about many spiritual teachers who are impersonalists.
So, these people have not philosophically committed themselves to Mayavada. But
emotionally, they have some affection, some attraction for certain leaders. Not
because they know their teachings. But because just they have heard some good
about them from various sources. Now, if when people with come such notions
towards devotees, to Krishna Consciousness. And then they may ask. You know, ok,
you know, I have read so and so Swami's bo..., so and so Swami's book. He says.
And some devotee says, that Swami is a fool and a rascal. Now, people get the
shock of their lives. He says. Aaa. Oh. You, so, you are a spiritual person. He
is a spiritual person. How can you call, how can one sadhu call another sadhu a,
a, a fool and rascal like that? He says. But he is not a sadhu. He is asadhu.
S..., so, that shocks people even further. And then people get shocked in this
way. They basically, what happens to them is:

        yad gatvan nani vartante 

Just go away and then never come back to Krishna. So, you know, strong preaching
does not mean that we drive people away from Krishna. Our goal is to get people
to Krishna. And I have seen so many devotees speak strongly in the name of
following Srila Prabhupada. And the end result is they have driven so many
people away from Krishna. So, now, certainly, we do not want to waffle with the
truth.  That means, now there are different degrees. It is, if somebody just
mentions some spiritual teacher's name, you know, it is not that immediately we
have to pounce and say, that person is this, this, this, this, this. No. We can
just gently encourage them. Yes, it is good that you have spiritual
inclinations. You know, the, in this, in this time and age, not many people have
spiritual inclinations. You have spiritual inclination. That is very good. And
if you c..., if you read Srila Prabhupada's books. If you come to our
programmes, you will get a very systematic spiritual understanding. So,
appreciate the person for the spiritual inclination. And then bring that person
closer to Krishna. And then, if that person asks, what do you think about this
person? Then, r..., as Srila Prabhupada himself taught his disciples how to deal
with it. He said that you just ask that person what is his philosophy? And most
often, the people who say, you know, I do not know the philosophy. He says, yes,
then, fine. You know, the Bhagavad Gita is even as philosophy. And ultimately
Bhagavad Gita is accepted by all the great spiritual teachers, you know, in the
Vedic culture.  So, study the Bhagavad Gita. And then you will understand what
is the essential message. So, we can actually use people's spiritual inclination
towards whichever spiritual teacher it might have been. You know, that
inclination, we can use it to bring them towards Krishna if we handle it
sensitively. If we are insensitive, then we will drive those people away from
Krishna. So, it is like people are on a particular hill. We are on a taller
hill, on a mountain. So, that person has a particular faith present, with the
present understanding that person has a particular conception. And that person
may have a little faith in a particular spiritual teacher, little emotional
attraction. May, we cannot even really call it faith.

Now, we want that person to come to Krishna. So, what we are trying to do is we
have to build a bridge. So, by our conduct, by our words, that person should be
able to develop faith in us, and through us, faith in Krishna. And when that
person develops faith in Krishna through us and through other devotees of
course. You know, through Srila Prabhupada's teachings. Then that person will
slowly c..., come across the bridge. And when he comes on, comes on the boat of
Krishna's message, or the mountain which is given, Krishna's teachings. That
person will steadily advance upwards in approach to Kr..., Krishna. But when
that person is on the bridge, another person is about to climb the bridge, and
then at that time, we speak something insensitively. And then what happens?
The, as the per..., very brave, that person wants to cross. Tuck. We break the
bridge. And that person will forever stay over there only. And what will
happen? That person will get lost.

You know, I was, when I was in college. At that time, I was among the
intellectual leaders in our hostel. There was another young dynamic boy. He was
also spiritually minded. And he was like among the social leaders. So, you know,
the programme in our College was going on in my hostel. And when the programme
was going on, I invited him, come for the programme. He liked the programme. He
liked the devotees. And He liked the classes and the prasad.  And then I invited
him to a temple, temple. So, that day, there was a lot of crowd in the temple.
So, when he came for the festival.  Somehow, I could not meet him. Those were
the times when we did not have cellphones.  So, he came and he met some other
devotees. And he was, he had some attraction to some other spiritual teacher.
And this de..., this boy, he asked that temple devotee, what do you think about
this spiritual teacher? And this devotee probably had some, some s..., per...,
strange idea of strong puchis. That person, he will not get place even in hell.
My god. This boy was so shocked. He went back to the hostel. And he spoke. This
is what these people, this is what Hare Krishnas say. That such a big spiritual
teacher, will not, not even go to hell, even suffer more in it. What nonsense
was it? Practically, the next few weeks, you know, our view, College programme,
it just did not go on because boy stopped coming. We had to do so much
firefighting and ma..., management, and try to calm the damage. And then at the
end, what happened? That boy has now become sannyasi in a mayavadi mission. So,
he had spiritual inclination. He could have become a devotee. If he had just been
sensitively handled. To as driven away from devotees. And what did we..., what,
what was done? That person has now become a leader in a mayavadi mission. So, of
course, in that mayavadi mission, they do not have brahmacari and sannyasi. They
just have a very short brahmacari and then they take sannyasi. But he is, he was
a person with vigor, with some principles. And instead of getting him towards
Krishna, what happened was, the strong preaching has draw him deeper into
Mayavada.

So, so, now, when a person hears something like this. See, whenever names come
up, whenever persons come up, people's emotion comes up immediately. Philosophy
does not bring people's emotions. But persons bring people emotions. And as soon
as emotions are hurt, when people are criticised by name, or by value
judgemental statements, then, people's emotional filters get closed. And as soon
as the emotional filters are closed, then they are just not open to rational
discussion. So, our goal is not to close their filters. Our goal is to open
their filters. Now, when they discuss rationally, then they will understand how
Mayavada is not the teaching of the Vedic scriptures. And how in many ways, it
goes against the teachings of the Vedic scriptures. But if we do not let people
have the opportunity to open the emotional filters by strong speaking, which is
tuck, we close the emotional filters. Then we will drive them away. So, we have
to be cautious in our preaching. We have the siddhanta. And first of all, we
ourselves should be convinced that Mayavada is harmful. You know, at the same
time, we also have to understand that philosophically, there is a lot wrong with
Mayavada. But still, culturally, it is good. That people even because of, under
mayavadi influences, often, they have some sympathy. They have some sympathy for
spiritual, you know, for o..., for Vedas, for deities, for cows. So, that is, at
some levels also, it is good. It may not definitely be the best. It is not the
best, by far not the best. But still, as devotees, we should also be able to see
good in others. And because of, just, you know, insensitive, insensitivity in
the name of strongs preach..., preaching, we can alienate lot of people.

So, we have to carefully get people to Krishna's lotus feet. That means we speak
things in such a way that they, their faith in us becomes stronger than their
faith in whoever they were earlier connected to. So, only when that happens,
then they will be able to understand what we are saying. So, initially, a
gentle, gentle, Prabhupada said, my disciple, my devotees are defined by they
are perfect gentlemen and ladies. So, we have to behave sensitively, and
gradually help them build a bridge by which they can come to Krishna. So, one
is, we break the bridge before they can come to us. Second is that after they
are coming on the bridge, that time, we break the bridge. Then, they will just
fall down to nowhere. That means what? They have some faith in some spiritual
faith. They are coming to Krishna. And at that time, right in the middle, we
create a big confrontation, and then people start feeling. Oh, these are
spiritualists. They are all fighting among themselves. Better not have any
business with them only. I will be happy in my material life. Then, what have
you done? You know, we have not done any service to them. So, our goal is not
just to do strong preaching. The test of strongs preaching is not the strength
of the words that we speak. The test of strong preaching is the strong
transformation in the heart of people that we are able to bring about. And that
strong transformation c..., often comes not by strong speech, but by sensitive
respectful speech. A company by careful explanation, cultured behavior, and love
and care.

So, our goal is to get people closer and closer to Krishna. And how we do it? We
will have to do it very sensitively. Srila Prabhupada often said that, you know,
if you drive away from Krishna, that is not a service to Krishna. So, Srila
Prabhupada's example of using fools and rascals should not be misrepresented.
There are many other places where Srila Prabhupada has spoken very sensitively
also. You know, Srila Prabhupada, when he was talking with George Harrison.
Now, George Harrison was such a famous in, during his time that many spiritual
leaders were connected with him. And when he met Srila Prabhupada, while in
their conversation, only a part of their conversation is Ch..., is there in
Chant and Be Happy. If you go to vedabase, the full conversation is there. And
there, you will find that, he, George Harrison mentions many spiritual teachers.
You know. He says this. And he says that. And Prabhupada makes no comments about
them at all. Prabhupada says ok. And Prabhupada just continues speaking Krishna
Consciousness noncommittally, and come to Krishna Consciousness, Prabhupada
speaks vigorously, encourageously. And he became a devotee. So, we should not,
Prabhupada has used different strategies at different times. Sometimes, in a
come out, and bomb, fools and rascals, he may have said. There are other times
when he has been, he has spoken quite differently. So, now, Srila Prabhupada is
like a warrior. And a warrior sees the situation and decides which weapons to
use. When we want to follow in Prabhupada's statements, it is not the specific
strategy that matters. It is the same result that matters. Prabhupada was able
to get people to Krishna. And we should also be able to get people to Krishna.

So, most people today are under Mayavada influence. They are not mayavadis. And
people who are under maya..., mayavadi influence. You know, they can be brought
in the Vaishnava influence. They can be brought into devotee influence and made
into devotees if they are dealt with sensitively and respectfully, and shown
love and care. And there is careful explanation and cultured behavior overall.
So by this, we can also get many many people to Krishna and fulfill Krishna's
mission of reclaiming the conditioned souls who are mislead by various
philosophies.

So, to summarise, let us, we discussed today about whether different paths lead
to different goals. We discussed how logically, you know, trains go into different
directions. All go to same destination. People who are doing different
activities, which will lead, which will lead their consciousness in different
directions, will not be able to pursuit the same Absolute Truth.

And then we discussed scripturally how scriptures again and again teach by
contrasting. Isopanisad ten and thirteen. And Bhagavad Gita, we discussed
3.31-32, 4.39-40, 16.23-24, 18.58 and especially 9.25.

Then, we discussed Bhagavad Gita 4.11. The verse is not saying all paths lead to
Me. It says, it says that all people are on My path.

And then we discussed about exclusivism, inclusivism, pluralism. How the Vedic
path does not say that only our path is right. Nor does it say that all paths
are right. It says that there is one path. And the progress or regress on that
path is dependent on objective criteria. How much love of God one is developing.
Or how much love of material things one is developing. It is like a patient can
follow different treatments. But the test is one has to become cured.

So, philosophically, we have to be convinced that all paths do not lead to the
same goal. But at the same time, most people today are under mayavadi influence.
And they know so many different spiritual organisations. They are more or less
think that, ok, all spiritual organisations teach the same thing. That is not
true. But they have some respect for all spiritual teachers. And now, if we
become dismissive in the name of following Srila Prabhupada, then we can
alienate a lot of people. So, we have to build a bridge by which people can come
to Krishna. Not break the bridge before they can, they can start coming on the
bridge. By carefully guiding the souls to come to Krishna, we can fulfill
Krishna's mission of reclaiming all the souls and taking them back to His lotus
feet.

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande hari haribol. Thank you.
