Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YhRXBbulgO0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=YhRXBbulgO0&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_011_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_09_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=mdz2-INBeSwxMgDnSug8kqzzLQF8MTU0MDEwMjM3MEAxNTQwMDE1OTcw

Hare Krishna.

So, today, we start with the third section of the Isopanisad. We have completed
from the introduction to mantra eight. So, the invocation to three, we were
talking about live in harmony with the Ishvara. Then mantras four to eight
talked about the Ishvara can be understood by spiritual vision. Now, how do we
develop that spiritual vision? That is through cultivating vidya and doing the
right upasana. So nine to eleven will talk about vidya and twelwe, thirteen,
fourteen will talk about upasana. Now, these verses, nine, ten, eleven, if we
look at them literally, their meanings seems to be quite confusing. The nine, we
will look at them in detail, but here a quick overc..., overview. The ninth
verse basically says that:

        andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti
        ye 'vidyām upāsate
        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u vidyāyām ratāḥ

That those who are in, those who are in ignorance, they will go into darkness.
And those who are in knowledge, they will go into greater darkness. And then,
after that, it says that those who are in knowledge, and those who are in
darkness, actually speaking, there are two different results of this. And the
wise understand this. That, then after that, then one result is obtained by
cultivation of vidya, and another by the cultivation of avidya. And then the
ne..., third verse says that actually, when one cultivates vidya and avidya both
together, then one will go beyond the cycle of birth and death, and attain
liberation. So, now, first, it is saying that both vidya and avidya are bad.
In fact, vidya is worse than avidya. Then, it seems to say that vidya and avidya
will give two opposite results. And then, it says that vidya and avidya both
have to be cultivated together to beco..., attain liberation. So, what is going
on over here? So, actually, here, in these three mantras, as well as similarly
in the next three mantras, twelwe to fourteen, the same words, vidya and avidya
are used. But their meanings are different in each of these mantras. So, we
will look at the meanings of these mantras through a table, and we will see how
the same word can have different meanings depending on a different contexts.

So, in the fir..., ninth mantra, wh..., what does avidya mean?

        andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti
        ye 'vidyām upāsate

So, there, avidya means the ignorance and the ignorant pursuit of sense
gratification. That is avidya. So, those who live for sense gratification. They
are going to enter into darkness. And then:

        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u vidyāyām ratāḥ

So, here, "vidyāyām ratāḥ", this is not knowledge, real knowledge in terms of
vidya, but so called knowledge. It is the knowledge that promotes sense
gratification. So, so..., those people, who with knowledge engage in sense
gratification, they usually commit far greater sinful activities. And that is
how they go deeper into darkness. So, here, avidya is ignorant pursuit of sense
gratification. And vidya is pursuit of sense gratification with knowledge. So,
then, then tenth mantra says:

        anyad evāhur vidyayā-
        nyad āhur avidyayā
        iti śuśruma dhīrāṇāṁ
        ye nas tad vicacakṣire

So, it is saying that one result is obtained by the pursuit of a..., a...,
avidya, and another result is obtained by the pursuit of vidya. So, what does it
here avidya and vidya do not mean the same thing? Although, the terms are the
same. Here, it is basically referring to material life and spiritual life. So,
that:

        anyad evāhur vidyayā-

So, what was called avidya and vidya in the first mantra? Both of them are
clapped together as avidya over here. So, here, especially, it refers to the
vidya, but essentially, pursuit of sense gratification is avidya, whether one
is doing it with in ignorance or with knowledge. So, what this mantra means is
that by pursuing sense gratification one result is obtained that is classified
as worshiping avidya. And another result is obtained by pursuing spiritual life,
ultimately Krishna Consciousness. So, here, vidya refers to the pursuit of
spiritual knowledge, the pursuit of spiritual goals. Avidya refers to material
knowledge and the pursuit of material pleasures. And then in the last mantra, it
says that:

        vidyāṁ cāvidyāṁ ca yas
        tad vedobhayaṁ saha
        avidyayā mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā
        vidyayāmṛtam aśnute

So, it says that with vidya and avidya, one can attain fearlessness and go
beyond the cycle of birth and death. "avidyayā mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā", by avidya, one
will go beyond "mṛtyuṁ", and "vidyayāmṛtam aśnute", by avidya, one will attain
amra-tattva, "āmṛta", eternality. So, what does this here refer to? Here, avi..,
the same words again with avidya and vi..., vidya, vidya are used, but here,
avidya refers to the knowledge for bodily maintenance. That means here, avidya
refers to the basic knowledge by which, how we have to keep ourselves healthy,
how we have to e..., earn a livelihood, how we have to maintain basic family
stability, and social harmony at a basic level. We cannot become happy in this
world, but we have to live harmoniously in this world without too much
disruptions. The knowledge for bodily maintenance here is called as avidya. So,
that avidya is required if one is to practice spiritual life. And then, so,
"avidyayā mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā", one will be able to navigate through this ocean of
material existence, if one has some knowledge of the ocean. You know, how the
waves can become too much. How the waves are,  become too less. But ultimately,
one has to go to the destination of eternity. That is the only way out of the
ocean. So, that destination, eternity will be attained by the practice of
spiritual life. Also, that is why vidya here refers to the knowledge of pursuit
of Krishna Consciousness.

So, to repeat here, so what is called as avidya and vidya in nine ver...? So,
that means basically common denominator is pursuing sense gratification in both
of them, in ninth mantra. And tenth mantra, both avidya and vidya from ninth
mantra is called as avidya. Because in both cases there is pursuit of sense
gratification. And, in the tenth and ma..., eleventh mantras, the meaning of
vidya remains the same. It is knowledge for the pursuit of Krishna
Consciousness. But the meaning of avidya changes from ten to eleven again. Ten
to eleven, it is, the change is that, eleven, it is not knowledge for pursuing
sense gratification. It is knowledge for bodily maintenance. So, we will look at
this table once again if it is little confusing right now. You, when we go over
the mantras, things will become more clear. But the main point I want to make
over here is that we cannot understand scripture just by knowing words. There is
text. And there is context. And unless we have a whole picture of the context,
just the text is not enough to comprehend things. By the texts, we will, we may
use a dictionary, and by the dictionary, we may get some basic understanding.
But we cannot get complete understanding just by dictionary alone. To get a
complete understanding, we need to have a, a broader understanding of the
context.

So, what vidya means, what avidya means, one has to carefully study and then
understand. So, the Upanishad especially, because they use words that are
multivalent. The words can have different meanings in different contexts. That
is why they are even more difficult to understand than the other books in the
Vedic library. So, the Upanishads are for the jnanis, and this is the kind of 
speculation that jnanis like to do. Why is this statement and this statement
contradictory over here? Why is this and this over here like this? And they are
trying to figure out, and come up with their own explanations. But actually, if
you want the real explanation, we have to come through guru saddhu sastra.
Because they are, the guru saddhu sastra parampara goes directly to Krishna.
And, it, it is not just historically going towards Krishna. It is also
internally going towards Krishna because the great acharyas are connected with
Krishna in their heart. And that is how:

        dadami buddhi-yogam tam
        
Krishna gives them the intelligence to understand things in a proper way. So,
now, let us move to the mantra:

        andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti
        ye 'vidyām upāsate
        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u vidyāyām ratāḥ

So, "andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti", they will enter to the darkness of ignorance.
Who? "ye 'vidyām upāsate", those who worship avidya.

And "tato bhūya iva te tamo", that even "tato bhūya", again, even more, "iva
te", even greater "tamo", greater the "atmana" will be for those who "ya u
vidyāyām ratāḥ", so here "vidyāyām ratāḥ" means those who are absorbed in
knowledge. But actually, this knowledge is not spiritual knowledge. It is so
called knowledge. Those who are in so called knowledge, they will enter into
greater darkness. Let us look at this, translation. So, Prabhupada writes:

"Those who engage in the culture of nescient activities shall enter into the
darkest region of ignorance. Worse still are those engaged in the culture of
so-called knowledge."

The, so, let us look at the purport in terms of its flow. So, Srila Prabhupada
will explain first in the purport, why it is said that vidya is actually worse
than avidya. Normally, we would say vidya is better than avidya. So, we will
explain that in the first paragraph, then, second paragraph to four paragraph
will explain what exactly is "'vidyām upāsate". How can one worship avidya. What
exactly does that mean. Then, he will talk about vidyayam ratah, so those who
are in so called knowledge, what is the so called knowledge? So, halfway through
the fourth paragraph, he starts that. And then he divides this into three
categories. The so called vi..., vidya can be Godless modern education. Then,
there is Veda-vada-ratah, there are those who study the Vedas, but they think
the Vedas are meant only to give us material knowledge, and they focus on that
material knowledge coming from the Vedas without looking at its, the spiritual
side. And mayayapahrita jnanah are those people who have knowledge, but maya has
stolen away their knowledge. These are the mayavadis. Those who claim to be God.
So, it is, this Srila Prabhupada will elaborate later also about Mayavadis, but
these are the three kinds of ca..., broad categories of people who have
knowledge, but they attain actually a destination, their knowledge does not give
them an auspicious destination. So, they are the Godless materialists. They are
the irreligious materialists, the gross materialists. Then they are the
religious materialists. And then they are the monists. Monists are those who say
everything is one. These are the mayavadis. So, let us look at these sections
now. So, why vidya is worse than avidya? So, Srila Prabhupada writes:

"Modern civilization has advanced considerably in the field of mass education"

So, where credit is due, we can due credit. Sometimes, we may say that Srila
Prabhupada has criticised scientists a lot. It is not that Srila Prabhupada was
criticising scientists. He says, yes, where scientists have done something good,
we can give credit over there. But the point is often they go beyond where
credit is due and make unwarranted, unscientific claims. He is saying, yes, as
compared to the past, we can say that, mass education is much more, more
civi..., as one, considerably in the field of mass education, but the result is
that people are more unhappy than ever before because of the stress placed on
material advancement to the exclusion of the most important part of life, the
spiritual aspect. People are more unhappy than ever before. Now, is this a claim
that can be substantiated? Maybe, we can say that happiness cannot be measured.
That is true. But still, we do see that as compared to the past, stress,
depression, addiction, suicide, all these are at proportions which were never
there in the past. You know, stress is such a m..., disastrous modern disease
which was not there in the past. So, now, in this century, there are, WHS
declared that mental diseases, mental health will be the greatest challenge.

So, diseases are serious problems. So, people are not happy. So, this is,
although, we may say we cannot quantify happiness. But if we look at the
statistics of overal well-being of people, as compared to even a few decades
ago, what to speak of centuries ago, you know, stress, depression, suicide,
addiction, these four having increased enormously. So, therefore, it is
undeniable that people are not happy. And they may be more comfortable, but they
are comfortably miserable. People have become comfortable physically. But
mentally, they are suffering. Now, in the past, people may be, may have been
sweating because of having to work under the Sun in the fields, but now, people
may have their plush AC offices, and inside the AC offices, they sweat, not
because of cold, but because of stress, because of tension. So, as far as
happiness is concerned, what Srila Prabhupada is saying is we just have to look
around. And there are many books which talk about statistically also how the
proportion of stress, suicide, addictions, depression, all these are far far
more than before. So then, what is the cause of this? Prabhupada explaining,
that he result is:

"people are more unhappy than ever before because of the stress placed on
material advancement to the exclusion of the most important part of life, the
spiritual aspect."

So, it is not that, we are specifically against material progress, What we are
against is the exclusion of the material aspect of life. When the material side
is neglected and only spiritual side is focused, sorry, material side is
highlighted excessively, and the spiritual side is neglected, then that leads to
serious imbalance. And people have lots of things. But they do not have
happiness. Martin Luther king said that we have guided missiles, but misguided
men. Our technological power has outrun our spiritual power. The means have far
run ahead, have exceeded the ends, for which they are meant to be. So, we have
uncontrolled machines, and we have, we have controlled machines, and
uncontrolled minds. It is the disastrous tragedy of our modern society.

Now, after this, Srila Prabhupada explains "'vidyām upāsate". What exactly is
"'vidyām upāsate"? So, forgetfullness of ishavasya principle, the principle that
the Absolute Truth, that the Supreme Lord is the owner of everything, is
the controller of everything. The forgetfulness of ishavasya principle is
avidya. So, will we, what is the practical implication of ishavasya principle?
That, if God is the controller, if God is the controller, then that means God is
the owner. God is the controller. That means things are not meant for my
enjoyment.

        tena tyaktena bhunjitha
        ma grdhah kasya svid dhanam 

Take only what is meant for you, not anything beyond that. But when I forget
that God is the controller, then the idea becomes, becomes that, ok, whatever I
can grab and get my hands on, I can enjoy. So, the immediate result of rejection
of God is enjoyment, enjoy mentality. In the Bhagavad Gita also, in the
sixteenth chapter, when Krishna talks about this:

        asatyam apratistham te
        jagad ahur anisvaram
        aparaspara-sambhutam
        kim anyat kama-haitukam

So, He says, in 16.8, in the Bhagavad Gita that those who say "anisvaram", they
say no "isvaram", they immediately come to the conclusion "kim anyat
kama-haitukam", what other purpose of this world is there beyond "kama", beyond
sensual enjoyment? That is the purpose of life. That is the, that h..., that,
that is how the degeneration of thoughts happens. We reject God, and then gross
sense gratification becomes the result. So, Srila Prabhupada writes that how can
one worship avidya? We do not have to make a deity of avidya, and start doing
aarti, and chapanho for avidya. So, avidya means forgetfullness of God. And
worship of avidya means, when we forget God, we pursue sense gratification.
Pursue sense gratification, not only we pursue sense gratification, but we make
sense gratification itself as the ultimate reality of life. You know, there are
some people. So, this, Prabhupada writes it, profitless pursuit of sense
gratification? Why profitless pursuit? Because, actually, in sense
gratification, the happiness is so little as compared to the effort, when we
c..., when we crave for sense pleasure, sometimes hours, and hours, and hours,
people are dreaming, I will do this. I will do this. I will enjoy. But the
actual pleasure, the body's capacity is for a few minutes. After that, it is
over. So, it is profitless pursuit of sense gratification. But this pursuit of
sense gratification has itself become like a religious activity for people.
You know, today, the kind of adulation that is offered to movie stars and other
such pop icons, is actually moldering on religious worship if not exceeding it
at the times. When these people co..., when some movie star comes along,
thousands of people are there, cheering that person, and that person is able to,
when George Harrison was at a speak, you know, what happened was that, he was in
a hotel staying, and then there was a, in the washroom of that hotel, there was
a towel, and he used that towel. And then the owner of that hotel took that
towel and sold it in auction and they made sixteen parts of it, and people
purchased each part of it at a huge price.

So, just as people take a deity, and the paraphernalia of the deity, a small
plot of the deity is considered sacred, so here, people are considering the
cloth that has been used once in a washroom by a, s..., by a music icon as
almost sacred. So, people go to place, whereas, film star was born and they
consider it to be sacred pilgrimage. And so, in this way, basically people make
sense gratification into a secular God. And they start worshiping those who
provide them sense gratification. But actually, they are temporary Gods. Because
as long as a person is providing sense gratification, that person is the object
of adulation. But as soon as the person becomes old, becomes disfigured, is no
longer able to provide sense gratification, person is tossed aside, and some
other person is brought over there. And when that person is put on the pedestal,
temporarily worshiped, and when that person no longer provides sense
gratification, tuck, that person is tossed off the pedestal and somebody else is
placed on the pedestal.

So, so, this is actually worship of avidya. So, worship of a..., avidya means,
the h..., zealous, almost fanatical and irrational pursuit of sense
gratification. That is what is seen in today's society. So, just a..., there are
some people who say why do you worship images of Gods? You know, do not worship
images of Gods. Well, you do not worship images of Gods, but then they put
images of movie stars, and f..., sport stars all around. And people look at them
as if they are taking some sacred darshan. So, essentially, worship of avidya is
this what is happening in society today. So, actually, whatever worship was
meant to be directed towards God, now, it is directed towards some other people.
So, this is how sense gratification is pursued by people, and this is called by
the Isopanisad as "'vidyām upāsate". Because we, we, we have nothing against
f..., movie stars or sport stars per say. But the ignorance because of which
they are put on a pedestal as if they are God, that is a tragic abuse, misuse,
underuse of human intelligence. And what is the result of that?

        andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti

People stay in the ignorance of material existence. You know, if we are
attracted to certain people, we will try to become like them. If a film star,
we, has a particular kind of hair style, everybody wants to have that kind of
hair style. And people keep imitating about it. People keep, keep thinking about
it, and the thinking of another materialistic person is, a movie star or sport
star, when they die, then what will happens?

        yam yam vapi smaran bhavam

Krishna described in the Eighth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, fifth, sixth,
seventh, eighth verses, he describes how what we think of at the time of death,
will determine our next destination and what we think of throughout our life
will determine what we will think of at the time of death. So, if we are
focusing on thinking of those, this "'vidyām upāsate", this worship of movie
stars, then the end result will be that, we will think about those movie stars
at the time of death, and then we will again continue on material existence. You
know, depending on the kind of consciousness that we have cultivated, the ki...,
depending on the desires that we have, which will largely be materialistic,
sensual, immoral because that is the kind of activities that are glorified by
these movie stars, many times. So, this is "'vidyām upāsate".

Now, "an...", here "andhaṁ" refers to the darkness of material existence. The
spiritual world is  "tamaso mā jyotir gamaya". It is full of light. And the
Upanishads are, just go from this darkness towards the light. But here, people
stay in the darkness of material existence. They do not come out. Now, let us
look at

        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u vidyāyām ratāḥ

Like that, those who are in so called knowledge, they are going to still greater
darkness. Let us see what this refers to. So, modern Godless education is what
is being talked about. Now, we will have to recognise this, what is so bad about
modern education? It, they, we can understand in three degrees. To be in
ignorance is bad. So, if I do not know, if I am going along a s..., if I am
driving a street, and I do not know the traffic laws, it is bad. I should, it
is, I am, moral responsibility, legal responsibility to know the traffic laws if
I am driving on the street. If I do not know it, that is bad. But to be
ignorance, and claim to be in knowledge is worse. That means, I have no
knowledge, but I think that I know. And I claim to others I know. Suppose, I do
not know the way, I do not know the way along a road, and still, as it come, I
tell you. This is the way. Come along this way. Now, that is worse. If I do not
know the way, that is bad. If I do not know the way and somebody asks me, and I
tell, I know the way. Come with me. I am misleading the person. I am myself
mislead. I am misleading others. So, that is the non-theistic scientist. That
means the scientists who talk about this material world and completely divorce
God from it. They say God does not matter at all. So, actually, the whole of
creation ultimately leads us towards God. How? Because when we look at the
world, we see such artistry, such intricacy, such harmony in this world that it
cannot have come by chance. There may be some mechanism by which it may have
happened, but ultimately, that mechanism itself is not automatic or by chance.
There is some designer behind it.

So, to c..., just to try to divoce God from this world, and to just focus on
studying the world alone, that i..., and say that, if you study this world, we
try to improve this world and we will become happy. There is no need to bring
God. So, this is like saying that I do not know the way, but I will show you the
way. Because it is, without God, we are, when we try to enjoy the kingdom of
God, it does not work. It does not work because this world is ultimately meant
for the service of God.

So, worse than this is to be ignorance, and to claim to be in knowledge, and to
condemn real knowledge as ignorance. What does this mean? That, this is the
third level. So, for example, say, if I am here right now, and going this way is
the right way. And I do not know that. But I start going this way. And somebody
is going that way. And I tell him, hey, that way, that is nonsense. Do not go
there. Come this way. So, what is happening? Not only am I going on the wrong
way. Not only am I claiming that I, I am on the right way. But worse still,
somebody is on the right way. I am saying that that person is wrong, on the, on
the wrong way. And I am condemning that person and trying to drag him on the
wrong way. So, this is the worst. So, how does this work out?

That in today's society, people who live with faith in God often, there are
people who say, there are, we often hear about right-wing religionists,
right-wing muslims, right-wing christians, right-wing hindus, but there are
actually right-wing atheists also. Right-wing atheists are extremely fanatical
people who believe that atheism is the solution to the problems of the world
because religion is the cause of all problems. Such people, they condemn God at
every opportunity. And they condemn religion at every opportunity. And they try
to drag people away from religion towards atheism. Such people are, they condemn
real knowledge as ignorance. So, they try to, they may study, if, for example,
science also. But their study of science leads them not towards God, but away
from God. And they claim that actually, science takes people away from God. So,
this is the worst of all. This is the greatest ignorance. So, this is, this is,
this kind of education which is Godless education, it keeps people in great
ignorance and it keeps them away from God. And that is the misfortune of today's
educational advancement. And we will see this. The, the result of this is
people's moral values are slipped down terribly. Although, people may have lot
of technological power. They have very little moral power. They have very little
willpower. Hmm.

So, this is Godless education. And, essentially, if we look at today's
technology, what is it being used for in many ways? You know, the technology in
and of itself is not bad, but what is it today being used for? Actualy, it is
basically used to promote sense gratification in many ways. So, for example,
television is there. So, now, television, there can be good things shown on
television. Through internet, one can go to good sites, and learn from useful
information, even useful spiritual knowledge, one can get. But how many people
are actually doing that? Very few. So, most of the technological advancement is
being used by people to fuel their sense gratificatory desires and to make them
more and more degraded. So, because of this, the fac..., when people are
provided with more and more knowledge and the result of knowledge is technology,
technological gadgetry with sense gratification coming through it, then they
become more and more degraded. So, this is the misfortune that even children
today get unfiltered access many times to obscene content, to content on the
internet that will be, can be very psychologically damaging for them. Hmm.

So, they get exposure to such content. Then, it is very damaging. And what to
speak of there are people who even become addicted when they are older people?
And youth especially can become addicted to things like pornography. So, now,
there is technology. And it is advanced technology in computers and internet.
But what is that being used for? That is not being used for anything very
laudable. So, this is, that this happens because the whole underlying ethos of
today's society is "'vidyām upāsate" that sense gratification considered to be a
goal of life. And all of material knowledge and material technology, it is
considered, this is all meant to promote sense gratification.

So, now, I did my Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering. And I was
fascinated to understand how the whole field of eletronics works. But when I
came to the fourth year, and then I studied one of the main applications of
Electronics and Telecommunication was television and entertainment. So, then, I
was quite disappointed. I said that, you know, I studied f..., I studied four
years of my life, using all my hard work. And at the end, what am I doing with
this? Do I really want to just spend it all to entertain people? We have to make
a better radiate box for people. Technology again, if it is not integrated into
a world view that promotes holistic living that gives adequate space for
spiritual life, then technology can suck a person and just as vacuum cleaner
sucks an air, so the titillation that, titillation that is offered through
technology, that can just suck in a person so much that person has no time, no
mental freedom of thought, and no, practically, capacity left to think of
anything else. There are many people who are so titillated by these multiple
variety of sense gratification that are offered that unless something is offered
in a hyperstimulated way to then, they just cannot respond to it. So, this is
the result of "avidyāyām ratāḥ", sorry "vidyāyām ratāḥ". Now, this is Godless
education.

Now, if we go beyond that, there is the veda-vada-ratah. So, veda-vada-ratah,
Srila Prabhupada talks about in three paragraphs. So, they are the karma-kandis.
So, the Vedas talk about many things. The Vedas talk about material sense
gratification for those who want material sense gratification. But that is only
that beginning topic. And after that, they take people to higher spiritual
knowledge. So, karma-kanda is the beginning of Vedic spiritual knowledge, Vedic
knowledge. But there are some people who mistake the side issue in the Vedas as
their ultimate purpose. That means they say that, actually what are the Vedas
teaching? This only.

	yam imam puspitam vacam
	pravadanty avipascitah
	veda-vada-ratah partha
	nanyad astiti vadinah

So, the, this word "veda-vada-ratah" comes from 2.42 in the Bhagavad Gita. And
Srila Prabhupada uses it in his purport to talk about materialists. So, first,
we talked about Godless materialists, it, completely atheistic materialists or
non-religious materialists. Now, we are talking about the religious
materialists, those who believe in religion, those who believe in, believe in
God also. But they think that the main purpose of God's existence is to provide
us sense gratification. And this is their level at which most religions are
today. You know, whether it is Hinduism, or Islam, or Christianity, people think
the purpose of dharma is to get artha and kama. That is one purpose, but that is
not the highest purpose. And those who think that this is not just the highest
purpose, this is the only purpose of religion, only purpose of religion is to,
dharma, is to give artha and kama. So, that is a serious mistake.

So, people who think like this, they mistake side issue in the Vedas as ultimate
purpose. These people actually reduce religion to just another form of
materialism. For them, religion is just materialism with a good face on it, with
a pious face on it. That is all. So, r..., they do not have any conception of
anything beyond the material. And because of not having any conception,
anything, beyond the material, they cannot achieve anything beyond the material.
So, Krishna talks about the, their mentality first in 2.42-43, and He says they
are "avipascitah", they are non-discriminating. They do not understand the
difference between matter and spirit. And in 9.20 and 21, Krishna says that such
people, they:

        te tam bhuktva svarga-lokam visalam
        ksine punye martya-lokam visanti

That even if such people achieve some result by their religious materialism,
even if they achieve some enjoyment, that enjoyment is temporary. It will be
lost. So, even if they attain heavenly planets, from the heavenly planets, they
will have to fall back. Even if from this world, they attain some prosperity,
that prosperity is not eternal. Because nothing in the world is eternal. That
will also end. So, the..., why are they "avipascitah"? The human form can be
used to attain something eternal. But when they use it to attain something
temporary in the name of religion, then they are depriving themselves of the
gift of religion. And that is how they are also unfortunate.

So, now, the, those who mistakes additional Vedas as their ultimate purpose, as
they, there can be many religions also. And today, we have pious materialists,
who actually just give nominal lip service to the Vedas, but do all sorts of
things themselves. For example, we may have, we have in many places in India,
Chennai, and other places, say, Visa Ganesh temple. What are these Visa Ganesh
temple? People think that the goal of life has to go to America. Indians think
like that. And for that purpose, they say that, oh, oh, Lord Ganesh, you are the
remover of obstacles. The biggest obstacle for me to go to America is the, the
Visa department. That is not giving me Visa. So, I will do worship to you and
you please arrange to give me a visa. And long queue there, people are looking
for Visa. Similarly, there may be the, this worldy enjoyment, there is another
worldly, other worldly enjoyment. There are many, in Islam, there are many
jihadists, who are ready to kill them, kill other people, innocent people,
become suicide bombers. Why? Because according to one interested interpretation
of the Coran, they had, they have been told that those who die in Jihad, they
will be awarded with seventy-one virgins in Jennath for all of eternity.

So, actually speaking, this is gross misinterpretation of whatever is there in
the Coran. But the more important point is this is what is alluring people to
l..., give up their life. They think that in this w..., if I am so poor at, I,
that I cannot get even one woman to enjoy, seventy-one virgins. There is nothing
like it. So, that is how they are not attracted to God. They are attracted to
the virgins. So, this is religious materialism. And this is distorted religious
materialism also. But it is there in all religions. You know, so, ka..., we,
karma-kanda is our feature of religion that is there in all religions where
people use religion to get beteri..., better material enjoyment. Now, what
happens because of this? Prabhupada writes this "veda-vada-ratah". They misguide
people. They misinterpret the Vedas. And that is why "tato bhuya iva te tamoh".
So, they are going into darker ignorance. In what sense? They also stay in
material existence. Because that is what they want to do. But because they are
misguiding people, that is why it is said that they are going to go to darker
ignorance, misinterpret Vedas. So, if somebody is, somebody, as I said, does not
s..., know, that is bad. But somebody pretends to know, that is even worse.
Because such people, because they say that, this is the conclusion of the Ve...,
somebody says that, oh, you know, we want to study the Vedas. We want to know
who is God. Forget about who is God. The Vedas have so much knowledge how you
can get better enjoyment. How you can do material things better. Just focus on
that.

So, there are many people who want to divorce the material knowledge in the
Vedas from the spiritual knowledge. They say that, Indians about, Indian culture
has, for e..., got so much advanced material knowledge. But because it is
mix..., become mixed up with the spiritual knowledge. So, we are rejecting
that, those. You should at least value the material knowledge and do not bother
about the spiritual knowledge. In one sense, if we recognise the value of the
material knowledge, that is given in the Vedas, that is valuble. But if we think
that is all that the Vedas are supposed to give us, and the spiritual knowledge
is irrelevant. Then we are depriving ourselves and depriving others of the
essential gift to the Vedas. So, this is "veda-vada-ratah partha". These are
people who are, Krishna is telling in the Bhagavad Gita that these are people,
they are just absorbed in the rituals of Vedas meant for material enjoyment. So,
"ratah" is the common word between this verse from the Bhagavad Gita, 2.42 and
mantra nine in the Isopanisad, "vidyāyām ratāḥ". That is it.

So, now, after describing these karma-kandis, now, the classic example of these
karma-kandis are in the Tenth Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, Chapter Twenty-Three,
the jnani brahmanas. That they were so busy in the rituals, that even when
Krishna came, they did not pay any attention to Krishna. They just kept doing
the rituals again. And they not only neglected Krishna. They rejected Krishna's
off, Krishna's request for help when He sended through the gopas. So, his wives,
the wives of these brahmanas, they did not do that. They went immediately. So,
they were not veda-vada-ratah. Their husbands were.

Now, worse than that are the "mayayapahrita jnanah". So, who are the
"mayayapahrita jnanah"? This word, Prabhupada is using again in purport, and
this comes from 7.15 in the Bhagavad Gita. In 17..., 7.15, Srila Pra..., there
is the verse which talks about four pe..., categories of people who do not
surrender to Krishna.

        na mam duskrtino mudhah
        prapadyante naradhamah
        mayayapahrta-jnana
        asuram bhavam asritah

So, among the four categories of people, there are "mudhah"s, people who are
like donkeys, "naradhamah", lowest among human beings. "mayayapahrta-jnana",
those who are, whose knowledge is based all on by illusion. And "asuram bhavam
asritah", those who are outright demoniac. So, among these, the
"mayayapahrta-jnana" is singled out by Srila Prabhupada to explain in this
purport because the "mayayapahrta-jnana", they have knowledge. And this verse
is talking about "vidyāyām ratāḥ", these people have knowledge, but that
knowledge takes them further, deeper into darkness. So, now, the
"mayayapahrta-jnana" are basically, those, here, in this context, Srila
Prabhupada is using "tato bhūya iva te tamo", those who go into deeper darkness.
He is talking about impersonalists. Especially, he is talking about mayavadis.
So, let us l..., first look at the difference between brahmavad and mayavad.

So, "vada" means argument, not just one argument, but it, it often refers to
school of thought, that is meant to make a proposition, advanced argument,
establish a system of thought. So, brahmavad is the idea that Brahma is the
ultimate truth. So, generally, the brahmavadis, they focus on Brahman. And they
do not know about Bhagavan. Or somehow, they are not attracted to Bhagavan. This
is what happened to the Kumaras and to Sukadeva Goswami before they were able to
contact the Lord through the devotees. So, brahmavadis do not offend the Lord.
They do not know about the Lord. They are not attracted to the Lord. But if they
are fortunate enough to meet with devotees who are also advanced and attracted
to the Lord, then they can become attracted. So, these are talking about by
Krishna in 12.4 and 5 in the Bhagavad Gita where He says that, such people,
they, their spiritual advancement is very difficult.

        kleso 'dhikataras tesam
        avyaktasakta-cetasam

Krishna says that "kleso 'dhikataras tesam", that for such people, the "kleso"
is immensely high. Why? Both in the process and in the destination. For the
mind, to become detached from everything, and to just decide to think of
something impersonal is very difficult. And because there is no higher taste.
There is no object of thought to contemplate on and relish, therefore, Krishna
says, this, this progress is difficult. But He says, over a period of time, they
will attain me. But then Krishna talks about mayavadis, as a separate category
in 9.11-12. So, who are the mayavadis? So, their vada is that maya is the
ultimate reality. That actually, there is nothing, but maya. In the sense that,
even the Lord's form is maya. Even the Lord's pastimes are maya. So, this world
is maya. And even the Lord's pastimes are maya. They imagine Bhagavan to get
temporary manifestation of Brahman. They say actually the formless Brahman is
the ultimate reality and from that formless Brahman, sometimes the formless
Brahman takes a form and that form is Bhagavan. So, because they imagine
Brahman, Bhagavan to be temporary. They, Bha..., imagine that we have to go
beyond Bhagavan also. And Krishna strongly condemns this.

        avajananti mam mudha
        manusim tanum asritam

Those who think that I have taken a temporary human form, they are "avajananti".
They do not know. My "param bhavajanti", they do not know my transcendental nature.
And then after that, in a, next verse, Krishna says that how such people are
completely frustrated.

        moghasa mogha-karmano
        mogha-jnana vicetasah

So, He says "mogha". "mogha" means waste. So, the goal is their desires for
liberation, their fruitive activities, everything becomes "mogha". Because they
defy Krishna. They offend Krishna's form. Now, now, some people may say what
is so wrong with the mayavadis? You know, they have their philosophy. We have
our philosophy. If, why did Srila Prabhupada have to criticise mayavadis so
strongly? Cannot we just tolerate them? Yes. This idea seems to be good. But
actually, there is, there is a fundamental misunderstanding, there is happening
about the nature of mayavadi. Mayavadi is not just another philosophy. It is
another philosophy in the sense that, it is one among many philosophy, but the
problem is, it is gi..., giving a totally disastrous misunderstanding of the
Vedic literature. So, let us see how. You know, among all the great religious
traditions of the world, the only place where the personal activities of the
Lord are delineated are the Vedic literature. Apart from the Vedic literature,
any other literature, the Abrahamic re..., religions, Judaism, Christianity,
Islam, there is very posi..., little positive description about God. What He
looks like. What He does in His abode. What are His likes and dislikes. At a
personal level, that is not talked about at all.

So, God's personal descent, so many times the Lord descends and performs
pastimes. So, God's personal descent is the unique boon of the Vedic literature.
And the unique boon, and what has happened to it? It is made into unique bane by
imposters. How is that? We will understand this. Bane is like a curse. Boon is a
blessing. So, how is the boon made into a bane by imposters, by the mayavadis?
Let us see. See. Materialism, monism are the two schools of thought which are
classified by Srila Prabhupada in this "vidyāyām ratāḥ", those with so called
knowledge. And both have misconceptions. So, imagine that if I have, was given a
hundred rupee note, or a five-hundred rupee note. And then I looked at it. I
thought it was authentic. When I go to some bank or some shop, and now they
tell, where you got this note? This note does not work. What is the way you have
brought this note? It is a counterfeit note. Counterfeit note? So, actually, to
mistake a counterfeit note to be real is foolish. It is unintelligent. So, that
is what materialism does. Materialism mistakes the counterfeit note to be real.
Materialism mistakes the counterin, counterfeit note to be real. It tells us
that, it, oh, this enjoyment, you know, there are the movie stars who were
enjoying. You can also have your romance. You can also have a very happy life
here. Just 47:24
