Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=06T-lgvxO5A
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=06T-lgvxO5A&redir_token=NozFcFtUmOlw7tHWZNzuiZpW8j98MTU0MDEwMjQ1MUAxNTQwMDE2MDUx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_013_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_11_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Isopanisad course.

Today, we will do the tenth, eleventh verse now. So, yesterday, we completed
tenth. Let us have a quick overview of nine, ten, eleven, to see what is
happening. So, I have put a paraphrase trans..., simplified translation of these
verses over here. Avidya takes to darkness, and vidya to greater darkness. That
is ninth. Then tenth is vidya gives one result. And avidya gives another result.
And now, eleventh will say vidya and avidya together grant immortality. Now,
wha..., what does this mean exactly? Here, if you see, first, if we just look
at, vi..., v..., avidya and vidya, straightforward way, then it will seem very
confusing, even contradictory. So, we discussed how avidya and vidya mean
different things. Let us look at that once again. And then we will understand
what vidya and avidya mean, and the eleventh verse that we are going to study
today.

So, so, in the ninth mantra, avidya means ignorant pursuit of sense
gratification. A person does not know what any higher values of life, that is
why the person chases after sense gratification. There, vidya refers to it, so
called vidya. It refers to having knowledge and using one, that knowledge to
pursue sense gratification. So, that will take up a, it will make a person do
more damage because the intelligence will be used to create suffering, in a more
sophisticated way for oneself, through greater pursuit of sense gratification.
Now, in the tenth mantra, avidya refers to both, what was referred to in ninth.
It refers to knowledge for pursuing sense gra..., sense gratification. That
means it includes, both the ignorant pursuit and the knowledge of pur...,
pursuit with knowledge. Both are included in sense gratification. And vidya
refers to knowledge for pursuit of Krishna Consciousness. So, one result is
obtained by this and another by this. Now, in eleventh mantra, avidya refers to
not knowledge for the pursuit of sense gratification, but knowledge for bodily
maintenance. And here, vidya refers to knowledge for the pursuit of Krishna
Consciousness. So, let us look mantra:

        vidyāṁ cāvidyāṁ ca yas
        tad vedobhayaṁ saha
        avidyayā mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā
        vidyayāmṛtam aśnute

So, "vidyā" and "avidya", "yas tad vedobhayaṁ saha", so, "veda" means to know.
"ubhayam" means both. So, when one knows both, both of these, "vidyā" and
"avidya". That means knowledge for material maintenance and knowledge for
spiritual advancement. Then, what will happen by it? "avidyayā mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā",
the cycle of birth and death, this death that is there, journey in this life,
that is there, for that, we need material knowledge. So, when we have material
knowledge, we would be nagi..., navigating the journey of life. And then
"vidyayāmṛtam aśnute", by "vidya", one will attain eternal existence. If I am in
an ocean, I need to know two things. I need to know how to ride the boat in the
ocean. And then, I need to know where the land is, and get to the land. If I
just know how to get to the land, but I do not know how to take the boat towards
the land. I need to have some basic knowledge about the boat. So, without that,
even if I know where the land is, I will not be able to get there. So, if one
has only spiritual knowledge, and one does not have basic knowledge for bodily
maintenance, at least, then one will not be able to live in this world. And one
has to live, so that one can ultimately attain the destination. So, both
material and spiritual knowledge are important. But better knowledge is not the
knowledge of how to become happy in this world, but it is to, how to live
fruitfully in this world. How to live so as to fulfill the purpose of the world.

So, both when we have, so knowledge of the riding the boat takes us through the
ocean. And knowledge where the land is takes us to the land. Similarly, material
knowledge helps us to navigate with the problems of life. But, what, what is the
ultimate purpose of navigating the problems of life? What is it that ultimately
I am meant to achieve. We cannot solve the problems of life at a material level.
But if we live intelligently, then we can arise our consciousness and go beyond
these problems, ultimately back to the spiritual world. So, let us look at Srila
Prabhupada's translation.

"Only one who can learn the process of nescience and that of transcendental
knowledge side by side can transcend the influence of repeated birth and death
and enjoy the full blessings of immortality."

So, "full blessings of immortality", "āmṛtam aśnute". So, both have to be
cultivated side by side. That is what Srila Prabhupada says. And the translation
based on the mantra. Now, let us look at the overview of the purport. So, this
is a long purport among the longest in this book, Isopanisad with fourteen
paragraphs in it. And Srila Prabhupada in the first five paragraphs tells about
how immortality is impossible materially.

Then, he describes immortality is possible only by following Krishna's
teachings. And then he describes how, what these teachings are, and how these
teachings can be applied briefly.

Then, he says, actually, the Krishna Himself descends from the spiritual world
to material world to make us immortal. So, now, actually, how this is, the title
immortality is possible only by following Krishna's teaching. That is like a
mega title, or a big title. And the remainings are subtitles. So, six to seven
is Krishna comes to make us immortal.

And then, how do we become immortal? Krishna is teaching us the process, first
thing is, sense gratification binds us to mortality, so restrict it.

Then, apara dharma teaches us how to balance our material side and the spiritual
side. That is in two paragraphs.

And then the last three paragraphs talk about how para dharma grants
immortality.

So, in this way, Srila Prabhupada is giving us a systematic overview of the
process, how by, by which we will attain, "vidyayāmṛtam aśnute". We will attain
immortality. Now, why is it impossible to attain immortality materially? Srila
Prabhupada gives us scriptural example and then he gives a logical analysis also
briefly. The scriptural example he gives is that of Hiranyakasipu. Hiranyakasipu
uses full intelligence, that enormous austerity, got the kind of power which
none of us can even ever get, but inspite of all that, in one moment, everything
was destroyed.

        kalatmano panayama nija vrutya parsom

Prahlada Maharaja says, my dear Lord, I saw that in one moment, "kalatmano
panayama", that by the power of time, by you manifesting as time, what happened
is, everything was destroyed, and therefore, I do not consider any of these
things valuable. They are all temporary. No matter, even if one gets opulence,
to the extent, not just of Indra, but to the extent of Brahma, still that will
be of no use. Actually, it is only the association of devotees, and through the
association of devotees, that one gets devotional service. "nija vrutya parsom",
that is a factual value. So, Hiranyakasipu demonstrates to us through his
negative example of what will not get grant immortality. There is some le...,
anecdote of Ravana. Ravana when he was going around and this universe,
desecrating campaign, he was going around conquering the universe and wherever
he would g..., find some beau..., beautiful da..., woman, he would desecrate
them, or abduct them. He would defy them. So, when he was doing all this, he saw
Narada Muni around. Now, Narada was associated with the sages, with the Lord,
with, and with the Gods. So, he thought Narada is my enemy. And he decided to
kill Narada. Now, when he started shooting Narada, at that time, what happened?
All the arrows that he shot, the arrows which even the Gods could not withstand, the
arrows, which he caused Gods to flow or flee, those arrows just went into
Narada's body and they just disappeared in Narada's body. And Ravana used all
his formidable weapons and nothing happened. Finally, Ravana saw boredom. He
says, what is this person? How has he got so much power? He says, oh, Narada,
please come. And he just come down. It were, the idea of, the strategy of demons
is, if you cannot conquery somebody, befriend that person. So, they can just
change their faith, their attitude, depending on what will favor the sense
gratification. He says, oh, this was so powerful. Maybe, I can find out what is the
secret of his power is? Called Narada, please come in, please come in, have a
seat. Narada sat down. He said, you know, he said, you are a great sage, please
tell me how is it that none of my weapons are affecting you. He says, because
simple, because I have a spiritual body. He says, spiritual body, what is that?
It is, spiritual body means that is eternal. That is indestructible. He says
I want that. How can I get it? He says, simple. He says, I am chanting the names
of the Lord. You start chanting the names of Lord, become His devotee. And He
will give you spiritual body in future. He said, I cannot do that. Get lost.
So, he says, no, I do not want to do that.

So, the demoniac mentality is that there is an authorised way of get
immortality, that is become devoted to God, raise to the spiritual level of
consciousness, and there, one will attain immortality. But the demoniac
mentality is they want immortality, but without the consciousness, that will
take one to immortality. They want immortality at the material level. Now,
Hiranyakasipu, Ravana, they were all, failed. Now, today, there are atheistic
people, materialistic people, who try to also get immortality. Now, essentially,
Srila Prabhupada explains that mystic power and scientific power are similar.
Because both are ultimately attempts to manipulate material nature. Mystic power
taps into the higher sources of energy that are there among the higher beings of
the universe. So, Ravana does austerities. Hiranyakasipu does authorities, and
gets powers from the higher beings. Scientific power comes from not
acknowledging any higher beings, even the Supreme Lord, nor His representatives,
but recognising the power of nature, trying to figure out how that power of
nature is working, and then trying to catch that power for oneself. But
essentially, the idea motivating mystic power and scientific power in many ways
are similar. That both are attempts to control material nature. Srila Prabhupada
tells in his Nectar of Des..., Devotion, Intru..., Instruction that a, yogic
siddhis are similar to much of modern scientific technology. The yogis fly. And
sci..., with science, we fly using airplanes. Essentially, the activity is
similar. The activity is do in material nature, with material nature, what we
are not normally able to do. So, today, people do not believe in mystic powers,
mostly. And they almost entirely do not have access to mystic powers. So, today,
people are diverting all their efforts, to control material nature, towards
scientific and technological power.

So, is it possible that by future scientific advancement one will be able to
attain immortality at a material level? You know, there is a huge hype about
this. But Srila Prabhupada gives a simple reasoning why it is not possible, why
material immortality is impossible, because matter undergoes six changes. And
these six changes in matter are unstoppable, even incomprehensible. Uns...,
in..., unstoppable means we cannot check them. And incomprehensible means we
cannot even understand them. And wha..., how do we understand that we cannot
understand? That is ensouled matter. This is the word that I have used because
scientists often use the word living matter. But actually, our philosophy says
that matter is never living. We could say matter that has apparent life. So,
ensouled matter, that means matter where soul is present. Consciousness is
present. It undergoes three extra changes which ordinary matter does not. It
grows. It reproduces. It preserves itself. Whereas ordinary matter does not do
that. Ordinary matter, it is, it is created. Since after its creation, it just
exists. Next phase is it deteriorates. And finally, it is destroyed. You know,
if we create a house, the first phase is it is created. If we live it as it is,
by the passage of time, by the effect of the elements of nature, it will
deteriorate. And ultimately, it will be destroyed. So, ordinary matter, it
basically undergoes th..., these three phases of its existence, creation,
deterioration, destruction.

Now, as in contrast with this, if we see matter which scientists call as living,
living matter. Actually, from our philosophical perspective, it is oxymoron.
Oxymoron means two words, which are brought together, which are contradictory in
meaning. So, for example, if somebody says, that person is a chaste prostitute.
You know, if somebody is a prostitute, how can somebody be chaste? Or say, that
person is a courageous coward. How can somebody be courageous and coward?
Similarly, these are oxymorons. So, living matter, from our perspective is an
oxymoron. Because matter itself is defined as having no consciousness. So, we do
not, but matter in which life is manifest, so like our bodies right now. The
bodies are phased living beings. So, they have some further phases to their
existence. It is not just creation, deterioration, destruction. In addition to
this, there is growth. You know, if I keep a laptop here for twenty years, the
laptop, if it has a particular size screen, it will not go into a bigger screen.
It just stays as it is. If I have a house of a particular area, it will not grow
into bigger area. So, non, non-living matter, actually all matter is non-living,
but inanimate matter, non-ordinary matter does not undergo any growth. Whereas,
wherever there is life, there is growth. Small baby grows. A plant grows. Even my
crops grow. Now, not only is there growth, there is also reproduction. There is
no such reproduction in ordinary matter. You know, sometimes, we may call, if we
have some tools, a carpenter may say that if one part fits into another part, he
may say this is the male part. This is the female part. But it is not that the
male and female come together and produce other, other tools. That does not
happen. So, actually speaking, all that is there is, just a nomenclature is
there, but essentially, when there is living, the living things, and they are,
they are, they are reproduced. The male-female, in what species they are, they
are reproduced. In some exceptional cases, when some soul has done such sinful
activities that a soul is not even given the fac.., faculty for sexual
enjoyment, facility for sexual enjoyment. Then in those cases, there may be
other sexual reproduction among some very, or some organism with reduced
consciousness. But either way, there is reproduction. Now, matter does not
reproduce. Whereas, actually, where there is life, where there is soul present,
there is reproduction.

And then, beyond that, there is preservation. Preservation means, you know, if I
take this watch, I cut it, cut off the handle of the watch. Now, the belt, if it
is cut off, it will just stay cut off. Now, there is no blood clotting process
that will happen by which it will start healing itself. On the other hand, if I
take a knife, tuck, and cut my hand over here. There will be bleeding. But
afterwards, there will be clotting and heal itself. So, m..., whenever there is
life.  And then life is present in the body, that body tries to heal itself.
That preseves itself.

So, growth, reproduction, preservation, these are things which differentiate
between ordinary matter and ensouled matter. They are in one sense the physical
symptoms of the presence of the soul. Now, scientists may have some mechanisms
about clotting happens. How growth happens. How reproduction happens. But
mechanisms are essentially hows. They are not whys.  There is a fundamental
difference between hows and whys. Hows is the mechanism of how something
happens. Why is the purpose. Why does that happen? So, why does this kind of
matter that makes a laptop not reproduce or mai..., preserve itself, or grow?
And why such a matter that is present in a living person, grow, reproduce and
preserve? So, the point is these changes are largely incomprehensible. So, we do
not even understand them. What to speak of stopping them? If you cannot
understand them also, is there real chance of stopping them? And this is happens
by the work of material nature. So, now, there are many researchers or
especially business men who make business out of research claims, who say that
in the future, you know, you will never grow old, or rather, we have got a
medicine by which you will again become young. So, actually speaking, is it
possible that somebody can become young? No. Why is it not possible? Because
essentially, this body is something which we cannot control. You know,
researchers have found out that, you know, the cells in the body are in constant
state of flux. So, new are created and old are destroyed. But somehow, as an
organism keeps growing, then they find that, the num..., there is a number of
cells that are reproduced, are less than the number of cells that are destroyed.
You know, that is how aging takes place. You know, they are trying to find out
are there some gens that control this? They found, maybe there is one gen. So,
if we can just find that gen, and then take out that gen, or deactive that gen,
then the decrease in the self-reproduction will not happen. And then the person
can stay on forever. So, people tried this. But this does not work because they
could not isolate any gen like that. And eventually, they said, now, c..., the
current opinion is there is a whole network of genetic mechanisms, which causes
the decrease in the growth of the cells, reproduction of the cells. They say if
you now try to deactivate this whole mechanism, so, all kind of disruption in the
bodily structure will happen. So, we cannot do that. So, the International
Genelotogical Association which made an announcement that, you know, there is no
technology, there is no medicine, there is no surgery, there is no therapy of
any kind at all that can either reverse, stop, or slow the aging process. We
cannot reverse it. That means we cannot make old person young. We cannot
slow it. Whatever age a person is going to grow old, the person will grow old
at that age. And we cannot stop it also. Everybody has to grow old. So, what can
we do? We cannot do anything at all. We can just do something cosmetic. The hair
has become black. We can try to make it... Hair has become white. We can make it
black. Some wrinkles on the face. We can try to remove the wrinkles. Some tooth
has fallen out. We can put in the teeth. But this is all cosmetic. It does not
improve the inner health of the body.

Now, Srila Prabhupada says in a lecture, you know the material nature will
quietly, helplessly make all of us old. And when Srila Prabhupada was on a
morning walk, and once a young man said, Swami, why do we have to, why do we
have to bow down to God? He says, why does, he says, Prabhupada said, forget
God. You know, you have to bow down to material nature. He says, no, I do not
have to bow down to anyone. He says, will you not have to grow old? He says,
you know, that is simply biology. Nobody can force me, he was saying that,
nobody can force me to bow down. Nobody can force me to submit to anything. He
says, won't you have to grow old? He says, yes. Then, you are forced to grow
old. He says, no, no, no, that is simply biological nature. That Prabhupada says
that means biological force. Do you want to grow old? That still, you have to
grow old. That means, it is biological force. So, biological force means that
the biology of the body is such that it forces us to grow old. Basically, we
have to submit. We may not believe in God, but we have to submit to some higher
principle which makes us do things against our will. So, material nature is too
powerful for us to control and it is not going to allow itself to be manipulated
so that human beings can counter the basic principle of material existence. That
is mortality. So, we cannot avoid death. Death is inevitable. No matter how much
we may try, we might get lots of technological advancements. But we should not
let those technological advancements deceive us. There are technological
advancements of different natures. So, making a, we had a computer of this size.
And now we have a computer of this size. This is basically manipulating nature
within a particular zone. We are not changing the nature of nature. We are
simply changing the way we process nature. The nature of nature is mortality.
Nature of nature is destructibility. And no matter what we do, we can make some
changes within, within the way nature works. But we cannot change the nature of
nature. The nature of nature is that, it is mortal. And that is why so many
people try different things and people will keep trying different things, but
nothing will work.

So, now, if mortality is not possible at a material level, then the question
arises where does our urge for mortality come from? If we were just biological
creatures who are doomed to death, then would we ever want to live? You know,
why would we ever desire something that is utterly impossible? Whatever we
desire at a gro..., at a universal fundamental level that is provided for
nature? You know, we have thirst, there is water. We have hunger, there is food.
You know, we feel, we feel cold. There are things which make us warm. So,
whatever the basic needs, they are provided for. Whatever the innermost
cravings, longings, that are there, they are provided for. So, if this longing
for eternity, longing for ever-lasting existence is so deep rooted within us,
where does it come from? And it is not just present in human beings. It is
present in all living being. You know, sometimes, there are flies troubling us,
and we are try to hit the fly. All that happens is we hit ourselves in different
parts of the body. And the fly just expertly runs away. How does it do that?
Because it loves life. And because it loves life, it uses all its speed and
alertness to evade any attempts t..., any threats to its life.

So, actually, all living beings love life. And they try their best to preserve
life. So, where does this come, urge come from? So, actually, the Vedic
scriptures explain that this urge comes from a part of us, that is actually
immortal. And that part is the atma. So, we can infer the existence logically of
something immortal within us through the presence of a longing, of a, for
immortality within us. So, what that something immortal is, we cannot know
through logical inference. We can just know its presence, but we cannot jo...,
know its nature. For that, we have to look at scripture. And scripture tells us,
there is an atma. And this atma belongs to the spiritual world. So, the soul is
in the material world where everything is temporary. Because the soul is
eternal, the soul desires eternity over here. But eternity is not possible over
here when the soul moves from here and it turns back to the spiritual world,
eternity will be possible over there. So, Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport
that actually we cannot make any attempts to, we will not be able to succeed.
Prabhupada uses example of Hiranyakasipu. And he says:

"The whole point here is that even Hiranyakasipu, the most powerful of
materialists, could not become deathless by his various plans. What, then, can
be accomplished by the tiny Hiranyakasipus of today, whose plans are thwarted
from moment to moment?"

Tiny Hiranyakasipus of today. Nobody today can have the kind of control that
Hiranyakasipu had. You know, who can cause rains to come and just by glancing?
But even he could not attain immortal, what can we? Therefore:

"Sri Isopanisad instructs us not to make one-sided attempts to win the struggle
for existence."

What is the struggle for existence? All of us are trying to survive. Darwin got
some things right. His idea was survival of the fittest. But Srila Prabhupada,
and it is true that there is a big big struggle for existence. And everybody has
to struggle in that, for survival itself. And he had the idea of survival of the
fittest. But Srila Prabhupada actually gave a penetrating one sentence
reposting. He said even the fittest do not survive. So, the, relatively
speaking, the fitter may survive more than unfit. But ultimately, even the
fittest do not survive. So, there is no use making a one-sided attempt to win
the struggle for existence. There is one soldier on one side, and there are
million soldiers on the other side. And this soldier does not have any
extraordinary weapons, does not have any extraordinary powers. Then, what is the
chance of that person will win? You know, there is no point in fighting. Better
to find some other way to deal with that situation. Now, if there is no other
way to deal with that situation, when, then maybe you can, you can just keep
fighting and I. But if there is some other way to deal with the situation, why
go in for a lost cause? So, the scriptures tell us that, the odds of one soldier
winning against a million soldier, actually, that is far far less. That is
extremely small. But the odds of a s..., person becoming immortal at a material
level is lesser than that. In fact, it is zero. It is impossible.

So, why fight for a lost cause? Do not make a one-sided attempt. Prabhupada is
stating over there. Then, rather find out some other way to deal with the
situation. So, immortality is possible. But it is possible by raising
the consciousness to the spiritual level. That is what is done through apara
dharma. So, Srila, Srila Prabhupada writes further that Sri, Krishna descends
from the spiritual world and comes to just tell us how to go back to Godhead.
So, Prabhupada writes here interestingly that Krishna sends not just scriptures
in the Vedic tradition, but other scriptures also, he sends. All these are sent.

"The Lord has kindly delivered the above-mentioned scriptures in India and other
scriptures in other countries"

So, above-mentioned scriptures for the Vedic scriptures.

"other scriptures in other countries to remind the forgetful human being that
his home is not here in this material world."

So, Srila Prabhupada had this vis..., understanding that ultimately, the various
great religions of the world are arrangements by the Lord to gradually elevate
the soul to back to the supreme destination. So, there may be specific
differences within various religions, but the essential purpose and essential
message is the same. That is take away the soul from matter, back to God. Now,
Prabhupada further says that, why should the soul want to go back to God?
Prabhupada says:

"The miseries of this material world serve to indirectly remind us of our
incompatibility with dead matter."

Very profound statement, the miseries of this material world. The miseries are
there. What are the miseries? There is old, death, death is there. Let us
consider death itself. Now, what does death remind us? There is, there is so
much suffering. They serve to indirectly remind us of our incompatibility with
dead matter. So, what does this mean? That I do not want to die. Yet, I am in a
situation where death is forced upon me. There must be something incompatible
over here. There must be something incompatible. What is that incompatible
thing? That incompatible thing is that the eternal soul is striving for
enjoyment and existence in a temporary arena. So, whenever there is
incompatibility, what is done? Sometimes, there are marriages in which the two
partners feel very incompatible. And then sometimes, when there is separation,
that is there, that is irresolvable, incondemn..., incompatibility. So, like
that, the Vedic culture does not encourage divorce with..., within marriage, but
encourages divorce of another kind. What is that divorce? The divorce of spirit
from matter. It recognises spirit and matter are intrinsically and irresolvably
incompatible. Spirit cannot enjoy through matter. So, therefore, they have to be
divorced from each other. Now, that divorce is not a rapture you can do in one
moment. There is a process for disentangling the soul from matter. But first, we
have to understand that there is incompatibility. And actually speaking,
Prabhupada writes they indirectly remind us of the incompatibility. Why
indirectly? Because we may not learn that lesson unless it can be taught in one
way. Directly is the scripture's teacher. Scriptures tell us this is not your,
you are not your body and this world is not your home.

So, many people have fascination with aliens. You know, somebody sees some
flying saucers and some green little men. And people make movies out of them,
ba..., ET and others. And then people are fascinated. Are there aliens? What
does the Vedic world view see? Actually, there is life on various planets. And
different people from different planets in come on the earth. So, there is
nothing to get excited about the aliens. One of Srila Prabhupada's disciples,
Sudaput Prabhu has correlated between the alien sightings and the description of
Bhagavatam of shalvas, airplane. So, there are similarities. But the important
point is rather than getting excited about aliens, the scriptures tell us, do,
tell us that we ourselves are the aliens. We ourselves are the aliens means we
do not belong to this world. Rather than thinking that, ok, some other people
are coming on this world, where we be..., where, and they are not, they do not
belong here, so they are aliens. He says, we ourselves are the aliens in this
world. And we have to go out of this world. We have to go back to the spiritual
world. So, this direct message is given by scripture. And indirectly, that means
through the consequences of not living according to this messages, indirectly,
we are taught through the life in this world.

So, for example, a doc..., a doctor or a parent may say do not overeat.
Otherwise, you will, you will suffer. Now, this is the direct message. Now,
indirectly, we will learn the same thing if we overeat. And then we get certain
severe stomach upset and we suffer, then, we, oh, I should not overeat. So,
there is the direct teaching is what comes straightfoward. So, what comes
through hearing. Indirect teaching is through experience. So, now, the
experience has to be connected with the education, then learning happens.
Otherwise, the experience will go in vain. So, come again, I will repeat this.
Experience has to be connected with the education for learning to happen. So,
education means what is taught. Experience is what is experienced. When the two
are connected, then learning actually happens. So, if I get the experience of
stomach getting upset, but I do not think, oh, why does stomach get upset? Just
by chance, et cetera. What can I do? I am just mis..., unfortunate. I am
unlucky. That person ate. Nothing happened to him. I ate, I suffer, unlucky.
And tomorrow, I will be more lucky. And tomorrow, I will overeat again. Then,
what will happen? Again, I will suffer. So, experience has to be connected with
education. Education was what the doctor told me, my eldest told me, do not
overeat. So, when the experience is connected with education, then learning
happens. But if the experience and education are divorced, there is no
connection between them. Then, I get the experience. I keep getting the
experience, but I do not learn anything. So, that is what happens to most people
in material existence. So, they either do not get the education or they do not
take the education seriously. And then they get the experience of miseries in
material existence, but they do not learn. They think, ok, you know, I made this
plan. This plan suffered. That person made a plan, that person suffered.
Yideshthuma says:

        anya aha bhutani
        gachanti hiyanam
        sesa stavar michanti
        kim ascara mitaparam

He says millions of people in the beginning of creation all died with no
exception at all. Yet, we think we will be the exception. What can be more
wonderful than that? Actually, we have to take except..., exception to the hope
for an exception. There is going to be no exception in material nature. Every
single person has to die. And to ta..., and the mind's hope for exception,
is itself, something which we have to take exception to. Nothing going, not
going to listen to you. So, when we connect the experience with the education,
then we will get learning. We will learn. And then we will be impelled to make
spiritual advancement. So, the union of experience and education is what each of
us has to do. We hear, this is not something which the scriptures can do for us.
The scriptures can give, share with us others' realisations. The sc..., and the
devotees can share their realisations. The devotees may help us to make the
connection also. But it is we who have to make the connection. Yes, the
scriptures, sometimes devotees get disturbed. I am practicing devotional service
and still, there are so many problems in my life. So, why is Krishna not helping
me? Actually, sometimes, our faith may be decreased because of this. But
actually, for a serious devotee, the problem in sufferings will increase the
faith in Krishna, not decrease the faith. Why? Because the devotee says, I have
a s..., scriptures told me that this world is dukhalayam, and now I am
experiecing this world to be dukhalayam. So, what does it mean? Scriptures are
true. Now, I am experiencing the scriptures to be true. So, in this way, a
devotee's faith will increase.

Now, of course, that does not mean that we all have to stay miserable.
Scriptures give us a process by which we can gain shelter of Krishna and
minimise the miseries of material existence. But sometimes, we compare our
miserable situation with others' comfortable situation and think, why am I
suffering? The problem is that we have a very short term perspective. Others may
be comfortable now. But in the future, they will be miserable. We may be
miserable now. In the future, we may be comfortable. Overall, there is ups and
downs. Sometimes, we are miserables. Sometimes, we are comfortable. But overall,
this is a doomed journey where the misery will keep increasing, increasing,
increasing, and there is no escape from it. So, for a serious devotee, the
miseries of material existence confirm the teachings of Krishna. This world is a
place of misery. See, the materialistic world view, the spiritual world view are
exactly opposite. If you seek, the movies often depict, HEA, happily ever after.
You know, the hero and the heroine came together and they lived happily ever
after. Now, happily ever after is the exact opposite of what Krishna tells in
8.4... 15 in the Bhagavad Gita. So, He says "duhkhalayam asasvatam". So, the
movies tell us happily. Krishna says "duhkhalayam". The movies say ever after.
Krishna says "asasvatam". So, it is exact opposite. Now, who is true? Actually,
nobody lives ever after. And very few people live happily. So, it is not true.
This word is "duhkhalayam asasvatam". So, as long as we have this lollipop idea
of spirituality. Lollipop idea of spirituality is, a child likes a lollipop and
when he gets lollipop, oh, I am happy now. Everything is fine. So, like that, we
think that if just some thing that we want. If we get it. Some problem that we,
we are having, if it gets solved, everything will be alright. And spirituality
will provide me that, everything will be solved. No. If we have this lollipop
idea of spirituality, then we will not be able to be steady in spiritual life.
Because that is not what spirituality actually teaches. What the scriptures
teach us this world is a place of misery. And we have to raise our consciousness
to go beyond misery.

So, now, let us look a little bit more seriously at how this world is a place of
misery. So, when we understand this, then we will be able to go beyond it. So,
Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport that the body is a bad bargain. So, how
is the body a bad bargain? So, we can look at it from four perspectives. So,
this is acronym DIVE. When we understand this, then we will dive deep into
Krishna Consciousness. We will move far away from material enjoyment. And we
will dive deep into Krishna Consciousness.

So, 'D' is duration. Let us look at the body and consider. The body provides
some enjoyment. And the body causes us some suffering. So, if we contrast, what
is the duration of the enjoyment and what is the duration of the suffering? If
you think of the enjoyment. Actually, the enjoyment lasts for a few moments, few
minutes. People fantasize about sex, goes throughout their youth, throughout
their life. But actually, sexually enjoyment, how long does it last? For a few
minutes. And after the body's capacity gets exhausted, one cannot enjoy. But in
contrast, how long does suffering last? Now, if somebody gets a, some toothache,
then the toothache may make their throughout the day for days and days,
together. Somebody has ulcer. Any movement of the tongue causes pain. Somebody
has back pain. It is a constant pain. And some, nowadays, people get terminal
diseases, like say, cancer or something like that. And you know, they are
sometimes screaming in pain for weeks and weeks together. The only way they can
becalm is by giving heavy doses of painkillers. So, what is happening? If you
look at comparatively the amount of time, amount, the duration for which the
body gives us suffering, is far far greater than the duration for which the body
gives pleasure. And therefore, if one thinks about this seriously, one
will recognise that the body is not a very good bargain. If my goal in this
bargain is happiness, then I am going to get far more misery than enjoyment. And
if we look at the sense enjoyment that we get, not everybody gets that. And
those who get that also, they get for little time. And, but ultimately,
everybody has to grow old. Everybody has to get diseased. And everybody has to
die. So, people getting diseases is far far greater in proportion and then
duration than people getting enjoyment. So, for duration wise, the body gives
far greater suffering than pleasure.

Then, after that 'D' is 'I'. 'I' is intensity. What does intesity mean? That
when we try to enjoy the body, actually speaking, the body is made in such a
way, that it is sensitised far more for pain than for pleasure. Do not imagine
this, but suppose there is a man who, he is in a sensual virgin of paradise
where he is lying down on a soft cushion bed. And there are soft hands of some
beautiful angelic women who are massaging him, caressing him. And his whole body
is getting, uh, wow, he is, he is feeling great pleasure. And somehow, on the
bed, on which he is lying, at one place, there is a, there is a pin. And that
pin pricks. Aaa. The, all the pleasure that was there in all the other parts of
the body, that is countered just by that one pricking sensation of the pin, pin.
Or suppose, somebody is eating some delicious item. Suppose there is some
delicious sweet rice made. And he is eating the sweet rice. And the sweet rice
is delicious so that one thinks, you know, I want every square millimeter of my
tongue to taste the sweet rice. So, where the sweet rice comes, I do not just
drink it. I do not just chew it. I let it move around in my tongue. So that,
now, imagine, the delicious sweet rice in every millimeter of my tongue is
relishing the sweet rice. At that time, as I am moving my mo..., tongue to taste
the sweet rice, cut, the tongue is caught between the tooth. Aaa. Now, there is
a delicious taste on the whole tongue. But one small part of the tongue is
bitten. And what happens? All the pleasure that was there, it disappears. So,
actually, if we think of it, the body is sensitized much more for pain than
for pleasure. And again, it is a bad bargain. In terms of intensity, the pain
that the body can experience is far greater than the pleasure.

Then, there is variety. Variety means that actually the bodily parts. The ways
they can give us pleasure, and the ways they can cause us pain, they are not the
same. The body can give us pleasure in a few ways. But it can cause us pain in
far far greater ways. You know, the, the 'I' is, how can the eyes give us
pleasure? We look 44:18
