Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uY5XQVRo75M
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_012_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_10_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=O_Yr8UaJGXwGb4EQvTvIZZJLfKp8MTU0MDEwMjQxNkAxNTQwMDE2MDE2&event=video_description&v=uY5XQVRo75M

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to the Isopanisad course. We will today discuss mantra ten. So, we are
discussing the third section of the Isopanisad. In this third section, the topic
is vidya. How vidya can lead us to the Absolute Truth. So, in the previous
verse, mantra, we discussed how those who are in ignorance, those who are in
avidya, those who worship avidya going to darkness. And those who continue
to worship avidya, but imagine that they are in vidya. Those who are having so
called knowledge, they are going into deeper ignorance. So, now, this verse will
say that in contrast to both these two people. These two people that means both
of them are basically in avidya, but they think tha..., one of them thinks that
we are in avi..., vidya. So, as contrasted to this avidya, is vidya. And this
ver..., mantra will say that by the cultivation of vidya and the cultivation of
avidya, different results come about. So, let us look at this mantra, mantra
ten:

        anyad evāhur vidyayā-
        nyad āhur avidyayā
        iti śuśruma dhīrāṇāṁ
        ye nas tad vicacakṣire

So, "anyad", "anyad", means, "nyad āhur", "evāhur", it is said, "āhur" is said,
"evā", certainly, "vidyayā-" that by "vidya", "anyad", one, some result comes.

"nyad āhur avidyayā", it is said that by "avidya" another results comes. One
results comes by "vidya", another by "avidya".

"iti śuśruma", thus we have heared "dhīrāṇāṁ", from the great souls.

"ye nas tad vicacakṣire", they have explained this to us. So, here, "vina", so,
so Jango Manu is speaking this to Jagna Avatar, as prayers of invocation. And he
is saying that, I have heard that by the cultivation of knowledge one result
comes about, and by the cultivation of ignorance, another result comes about.
So, let us see Prabhupada's translation.

        "The wise have explained"

That is "dhīrāṇāṁ", "vicacakṣire".

        "... that one result is derived from the culture of knowledge"

"anyad evāhur vidyayā-"

        "... and that a different result is obtained from the culture of
        nescience."

"nyad āhur avidyayā"

So, basically, the scriptures use different methods, for, in, for conveying
their message. One of the most potent methods that the scriptures uses is
contrasting. Contrasting m..., means if you do this, this will happen. If you do
this, this will happen. Now, you decide what you want to do. So, Krishna uses
this repeatedly in the Bhagavad Gita also. And this makes things very crystal
clear.

        mac-cittah sarva-durgani
        mat-prasadat tarisyasi
        atha cet tvam ahankaran
        na srosyasi vinanksyasi

In 18.58, in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says that if you become conscious of me,
you will pass over all obstacles by my grace. If, however, you act out of false
ego, not hearing me. Then, you will be lost. "vinanksyasi". This is constrast
Krishna is doing. So, instructing by const..., contrasting is a very clear and
empathetic way of intrus..., instructing. So, this is what the Isopanisad is
also doing over here. It is contrasting vidya and avidya. Now, in this ca..., in
this mantra, avidya refers to, in general, the knowledge o..., the pursuit of
sense gratification. And even knowledge that helps in the pursuit of sense
gratification is called as avidya. And vidya refers to knowledge that helps us
to develop in spiritual understanding, ultimately in Krishna Consciousness. So,
let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport. Vidya leads to desirable qualities.
So, that is the first two paragraphs. In fact, here, Srila Prabhupada lists the
twenty characteristics of knowledge that are given in the Bhagavad Gita,
13.8-12, and then in con..., Srila Prabhupada, after describing this, contrasts
this with the result of the cultivation of avidya, as is seen in today's
society. Avidya leads to undesirable qualities. And how those undesirable
qualities are seen in today's society? Prabhupada explains.

And then, finally, paragraphs six to nine, he explains only a dhira can teach
vidya. That means, we intellectually think, ok, I, I want vidya. I do not want
avi..., avidya. But actually, from a practical point of view, it is only a
person who is sober, who is not deluded by material things, can actually teach
knowledge, in a systematic way. That is why the word "dhīrāṇāṁ" comes over here.

So, let us go back to the first section. Now, Sri..., here, Srila Prabhupada
lists the eighteen chara..., twenty characteristics of, given in the Bhagavad
Gita, as a list of long eighteen statements. And actually, seeing these eighteen
statements is quite insightful. So, for example, the first qua..., quality over
here is:

        amanitvam adambhitvam
        ahimsa ksantir arjavam

These are the first five qualities, then, 13.8-12 in the Bhagavad Gita, 13.8.
Now, let us see how Srila Prabhupada translates "amanitvam". So, "amanitvam"
means humility or pridelessness. That is how it is there in the Bhagavad Gita.
And now, Srila Prabhupada translates it here as:

"(1) One should become a perfect gentleman and learn to give proper respect to
others."

That means how do I say, how do I know that somebody is humble? Somebody says,
oh, Prabhuji, I am so fallen. Oh, mataji, I am so fallen. I am good for nothing.
I am this. Is that really humility? It may not be. It may be a
self-centeredness masquerading as humility. So, actually, real humility is more
directly expressed by how we respect others. "amanina manadeva". So, "amani",
how much we res..., want respect for ourselves. That is very difficult for us to
e..., deal with, to get rid of, or even to curb. So, but, we can surely start
res..., offering respects to others. And that is a positive way in which we can
cultivate humility because when we are respecting others, we are giving them
thought, attention, and regard. And that essentially is humility. Actually,
pride means we are so filled ourselves that no one else matters. When we start
respecting others, that is a positive, more Krishna Conscious way to develop
humility. Because we think about others and give them thought, attention, time,
and that way we become less self-conscious. So, humility is not so much thinking
low about ourselves. It is more about thinking less about ourselves. You know, I
am not such an important person in the world that I have to think about myself
all the time. I will think about others. You know, think about others. Then that
naturally makes me less filled of myself. And that is how I become humble. So,
learn to give proper respect to others. Then "adambhitvam", Srila Prabhupada
translates as:

"(2) One should not pose himself as a religionist simply for name and fame."

So, "dambh" normally means, so "amanitvam" r..., refers to when I have good
qualities. But still, I do not demand respect. I do not expect respect. That is
"amanitvam". "dambh", now, "dambh", when I do not have qualities, and still, I
ask for respect. That is "dambh". That means I am, I do not know anything about
Bhagavad Gita. I just know one or two verses. And then I say, Bhagavad Gita is
just:

        karmanda vadikar aste ma phale suka dachana

Bhagavad Gita is just work is worship. So, I pretend to have knowledge. So that,
people will respect. No, such a scholarious. So, that is "dambh". And Prabhupada
says here "One should not pose himself as a religionist simply for name and
fame.". So, these are all cha..., characteristics of vidya. So, this is a
remarkable and consistent correlation we will see that Srila Prabhupada brings
about between Isopanisad and Gita Upanishad. So, Bhagavad Gita is also known as
Gita Upanishad. In fact, it is the essence of all the Bhagavad Gitas as the Gita
Mahatmya says.
        
	sarvo panishado gavo
	dogdha gopala nandanah
	partho vatsah sudhir bhokta
	dugdham gita amritam mahat 

So, all the Upanishads are like a cow, and just as the essence of the cow is
the milk, similarly, the essence of all the Upanishads is Bhagavad Gita, the
Gita Upanishad. And just as the milk comes out in the presence of a calf,
"partho" is the calf, and there is a milkman, milkman, a cowherd is required to
bring out the milk, that is Krishna. And when the milk comes, it is not only the
calf who takes it. Other people also take the milk. So, like that, "sudhir".
So, "dhīrāṇāṁ" is the word over here also in this verse. "sudhir" is those who
are sober. All those people will drink the nectar of the Gita. Now, this is Srila
Prabhupada correlating Isopanisad and Gita Upanishad. So, the Isopanisad talks
about Gi..., vidya, and Srila Prabhupada explains vidya based on Bhagavad Gita.
This is, now, this is called as jnana:

        etaj jnanam iti proktam
        ajnanam yad ato 'nyatha

13.8-12, the twelve C and D says that this is knowledge, and apart from this,
whatever there may be, it is ignorance. Now, the, "ahimsa". Now, Srila
Prabhupada gives extraordinary translation of "ahimsa" over here. Normally, we
will say non-violence. But Srila Prabhupada gives a much and deeper translation.

"(3) One should not become a source of anxiety to others by the actions of his
body, by the thoughts of his mind, or by his words."

So, this means that one not only, should one not commit violence to, to create
agitation and anxiety to others, that is also way of committing violence. And
that also, one should not do. And one should not be anxiou..., cause anxiety to
others by our thoughts, words or actions. This is a very profound definition of
"ahimsa".

And then, like that, Srila Prabhupada g..., gives the list, So, "acaryopasanam".
That is worship of the spiritual master. That is the sixth item. Srila
Prabhupada translates that as:

"(6) One should search out a bona fide spiritual master who can lead him
gradually to the stage of spiritual realization, and one must submit himself to
such a spiritual master, render him service and ask relevant questions."

So, what is this? This is a translation of 4.34 in the Bhagavad Gita. 4.34 is:

        tad viddhi pranipatena
        pariprasnena sevaya
        upadeksyanti te jnanam
        jnaninas tattva-darsinah

So, how one should approach the spiritual master. Srila Prabhupada is giving
that also. So, actually, when Srila Prabhupada gives us his purports. He gives
us, like there are some cars. So, the cars, they say maximum mileage per hour,
or per litre. Maximum mileage. It will go this much miles. So, like that, Srila
Prabhupada gives us maximum mileage per purport. You know, whatever purport he
gives us, he gives us maximum knowledge in it. Just, prof..., Prabhupada's
translation is not just a cursory function, which he has to do. This is
Engli..., This is Sanskrit. This is English. Let me translate and put it.
Prabhupada wants to convey the profound wisdom that is there in the Vedic
literature. And knowing that, it is, that, in wisdom has to be conveyed in a way
that people can apply and benefit. Therefore, it is there, it is, the, the
Bhagavad Gita says that "acaryopasanam". Now, Krishna was speaking at a time
when people knew how to do "acaryopasanam". Now, people today do not know.
Therefore, Srila Prabhupada says that, ok, you have to go to the spiritual
master and search out. Our spiritual master, what kind of spiritual master? Not
simply an ashravat guru. Not simply a person who will smile and just raise the
hands and blessing. No. A person who will lead one gradually to the stage of
spiritual realisation. So, Prabhupada is, that, well, "acaryopasanam", what kind
of acharya should we do "upasanam" of it else that? And how "acaryopasanam" has
to be done, it is not just that we take aarti plate and do "upasanam".
"upasanam" is done by submission, service and inquiry, "SSI". So, that is what
Sri... Submit. Service. And Inquiry.

So, this is how Srila Prabhupada gives us maximum mileage in every purport that
he gives us. And then he go..., goes on like this and gives the various items of
knowledge, he translates. And then:

        janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-
        duhkha-dosanudarsanam

This is an important point. So what has Prabhupada translated that?

"(12) One should always remember that as long as he has a material body he must
face the miseries of repeated birth, old age, disease and death. There is no use
in making plans to get rid of these mar..., miseries of the material body."

Why is that no use? Because it is impossible. Everybody has to die.

"The best course is to find out the means by which one may regain his spiritual
identity."

So, therefore, if we see, this is knowledge. Wha..., what exactly is knowledge?
Knowledge means to recognise h..., that a..., why I am suffering and what is the
solution for my suffering. Why am, am I unhappy? Why am I dissatisfied? Why am I
having problems? So, that when we understand. And they were, we try to find
solutions to those problems. So, the scriptures tell us the specific problem
that we are facing may be many. I may have lost a job. I may have some
relationship problems. My health may not be good right now. I may have some
tension with my neighbour. Or my laptop may not be working. We may have so many
problems like that. But these are all specific problems which will come and go.
But actually, there are generic problems which are far bigger. And they are
birth, old age, disease and death. And we recognise these problems and then we
try to solve these problems. How do we solve it? By raising our consciousness.
We are at the material level of consciousness where we suffer because of this.
But when we understand I am atma. For the atma, there is no "jara-vyadhi-" and
"mrtyu". And then, there is no open urgent modes.

Now, Srila Prabhupada goes further and gives translation of all the items. And
then, he gives:

        vivikta-desa-sevitvam
        aratir jana-samsadi

That is the item. And interestingly, Srila Prabhupada groups the last four items
as two, as a, as a pairs. That means, in the Bhagavad Gita, at least, seventeen
and eighteen, becomes seventeen over here. And Bhagavad Gita, basi..., nineteen
and twenty becomes eighteenth over here. So, what is that? Seventeen and eighteen?

        vivikta-desa-sevitvam
        aratir jana-samsadi

So, "vivikta-desa-sevitvam", Prabhupada translates it:

"(17) One should develop a liking for residence in a secluded place with a calm
and quiet atmosphere favorable for spiritual culture"

So, he is giving so much ex.., explanation. And:

        aratir jana-samsadi

"one should avoid congested places where nondevotees congregate."

So, by this, because when, if, there are nondevotees congregate, their, their,
their collective presence creates a, a mass materialistic psychology, which can
be quite draining for our consciousness. Which can just s..., s..., reap us off,
our feet, and submerge us in materialism. That is why we avoid such place, as
much as possible. And then:

        adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam
        tattva-jnanartha-darsanam

These are the nineteenth, twentieth item, Prabhupada translates these as:

"(18) One should become a scientist or philosopher and conduct research into
spiritual knowledge"

So, "adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam". And then, "tattva-jnanartha-darsanam". So,
"tattva-jna", one should conduct research into spiritual knowledge.
"tattva-jnanartha-darsanam", so why one should study spiritual knowledge?
Why "adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam"? Because only spiritual knowledge is eternal.

"... recognizing that spiritual knowledge whereas material knowledge ends with
the death of the body."

So, again, it is interesting. Srila Prabhupada equates here, scientist or
philosopher. So, how can those two be equated? Now, today, philosophy is
considered to be a branch of humanities. And science is a, considered a branch
of sciences. And these two, there is, if you study academic circle, there is a
factor and a rapture between the two. And the scientists, those who are in
sciences, they feel that we have made all the practical progress. We have made
all the practical contributions. The technology, the help for humanity, huma...,
that has come from us. Humanity has nothing for us. And they look down on
humanity. Whereas the, those who are in humanity, they say that, ultimately, you
know, science has just made things faster and better, faster and better at a, at
a technological level. But as far as human values are concerned. You know,
science cannot do that. It is humanity is only which talks about the things
which make human beings human beings. So, there is this conflict between science
and philosophy. In fact, within science only, there was a whole, almost a decade
of what was called the science wars. The wars between philosophers of science
and scientists. You know, huge intellectual wars with books and papers being
written and counter written, and counter counter written.

But from Srila Prabhupada's perspective, you know, ultimately, all knowledge is
meant to take us towards spiritual truth. So, through philosophy, one can do
research and come to spiritual knowledge. And through science, one can come
through spiritual knowledge. So, philosophy, we can call it as metaphysics. Of
course, philosophy itself has branches. Metaphysics is one of them. And science,
we can say, it is physics. Science has again other branches. But took, I
mean, the parallel clear over here. So, whether it is physics or metaphysics,
ultimately, we have to understand spiritual knowledge. So, physics can also lead
us to spirituality. Metaphysics can also lead us to spirituality. Therefore,
Srila Prabhupada emphasizes it, whatever one studies, ultimately, come to
spirituality. And spiritual knowledge is permanent. Whereas material knowledge
ends with the death of the body. So, whatever we acquire, is not going to go
ahead with us. But spiritual knowledge will stay:

        purvabhyasena tenaiva
        hriyate hy avaso 'pi sah

Krishna describes in the Bhagavad Gita, in a response to Arjuna's question from
6.37 to 39, he describes the reply from 6.40 to 45 that whatever spiritual
knowledge we acquire, so 42-43 say that, in the next life, it will come back to
you. And, you would be attracted to k..., the spiritual principles, almost
helplessly. And thereby, you will keep making spiritual advancement. Now, what
are these, now we may say, if, what is your education, if we ask today people?
The person may say, ok, I am a B. I am a BA. I am an LLB. I am a CA. So, people
may tell their degrees. But these degrees, they have their value, no doubt. But
actually speaking, real knowledge is the development of character. So, we will
look now from a historical perspective here.

Changing conceptions of knowledge. So, talking Prahlad Maharaja, Socrates and
Francis Bacon. So, Prahlada Maharaja says in the Bhagavatam, you know, when
Hiranyakasipu asks, what is the best thing that you learnt? So, he said that the
best thing I learnt is devotional service to Lord Vishnu. So, he says that:

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
        smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam
        arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ
        sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

He describes these nine items of devotional service and then he says:

        iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau
        bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā
        kriyeta bhagavaty addhā
        tan manye ’dhītam uttamam

This is the best education, I say. What is the best education? When these nine
elements, nine activities, "iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau", when these are offered to
Lord Vishnu. "bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā", "nava-lakṣaṇā", "bhaktiś", when they
are offered to Lord Vishnu, then create a "bhagavaty addhā", they increase the
attraction to the Supreme Lord. And that is the best knowledge. So, he says what
is the test of knowledge? Knowledge inspir..., knowledge comprises of doing the
activities that engender. That foster devotion. That lead to devotion. So,
essentially, knowledge is devotion. So, this is the transcendental understanding
of knowledge. All the knowledge that we acquire is ultimately meant for
increasing our attraction to the Supreme Lord. And the Bhagavatam says that if
we do not increase our attraction to Supreme Lord, whatever else we may do, it
is actually simply a waste of time. "Śrama eva hi kevalam".

Now, from the transcendental perspective is, knowledge is meant for increasing
devotion. And that is what we see in the Bhagavad Gita also. When Krishna says,
what happens to a person who is Buddha, in 10.8, the first verse of the chator
sloki Bhagavad Gita, he says:

        aham sarvasya prabhavo
        mattah sarvam pravartate
        iti matva bhajante mam
        budha bhava-samanvitah

So, one who understands that I am the source of everything material and
spiritual. Such a person becomes a buddha. A..., such a person becomes
enlightened. Such a person becomes enlightened. What is the result?
"bhava-samanvitah", person wholeheartedly worships me. So, knowledge leads to
devotion.

Now, from the transcendental perspective, we will come down to one rank lower.
That is sattvik perspective. Sattvik perspective is knowledge is virtue.
Knowledge is virtue means, Socrates said this, that knowledge should lead to the
development of good qualities. And a person, the knowledge that is there, it
should be something which is reflected in the character of the person. If that
is not happening, then whatever the person has acquired is actually not of much
use. Now, the idea that knowledge is virtue is very much cons..., consistent
with the Vedic understanding of sattva guna knowledge. "sattvat sanjayate
jnanam", sattva guna leads to knowledge. So, sa..., it is, Krishna does not say
abyasat sanjayate jnanam. It is not study alone that leads to knowledge. It is
living in the mood of goodness. So, when we live in goodness, then knowledge is
cultivated not just as information in the head, but as a transformation of
character. So, this is also what the Bhagavad Gita is talking about in 13.8-12.
Here, Krishna is not focused, focusing on the transcendental perspective,
speaking from the gu..., sattvik perspective. That knowledge should lead to the
development of all these qualities.

Now, as Kali-Yuga progressed, let us look at Francis Bacon. He was a renaissance
thinker, post-renaissance thinker in the European history, one of the pioneers
of empiricism. And he, his thoughts led to the development of science and
technology, especially. He envisioned technology being able to control and
change the world in the future. So, he said, knowledge is power. Now, this is
clearly rajasic. In raja guna, the essence of a person's mental attitude is
controllership. What the person wants to do is, how can I make everything happen
according to my will? And the knowledge that I have is also for that purpose of
making things happen according to my will. So, technology is essentially about
make, bending nature to human being. Knowledge is power. And today, when we have
these hightech gadgets, you know. You press one button, and an email goes
somewhere else. We press one button, and a phone call goes to somebody else.
Now, it is not necessarily bad. It is useful. It can be even useful even for
devotional service. But the point is that when knowledge is reduced to this.
This is one aspect of knowledge. When we acquire knowledge, we, we get some
control. But if the whole conception of knowledge is shrunk down to the power
that it gives one. And what kind of power? It is external power. It is not
internal power. That is a technological power as we discussed. There is not
enhanced willpower. So, knowledge is virtue means, knowledge leads to willpower.
And willpower leads to the person be able to use even technology properly.

So, knowledge is power means, people are simply concerned with how much I can
control. And if I have, if my knowledge did not lead to go..., the development
of good qualities, then the more power I have, that power will be used by my bad
qualities for doing harm. So, this is the current definition of knowledge. It is
la..., largely equated with power.

So, let us look at this further now. So, the divorce of education from
transformation leads to disruption. So, education was originally associated with
transformation. Education comes from educare. Educare means to bring out that
which is within. What is within? Within, we are souls. As souls, we are pure. We
are godly. And that godliness has to be brought out for education. But when
education just becomes something, a matter of skills for external control, then
there is a divorce of education from transformation. And then that leads to
disruption. Disruption in that person's life, disruption in that, in the soc...,
social f..., structure because of the way the person behaves. Why? Because that
person is not having the self-mastery to be able to contribute properly. That is
why we have in so many, so much in today that, in United States, sometimes,
s..., young children, young students, young. They take guns. And they just go
crazy. And they shoot others. And some of the, sometimes, it happens in elite
universities also. And it is not just in United States. It happens elsewhere
also.

So, again, what is happening? According to modern definition of knowledge,
modern definition of success and education, there is just the capacity to have
information. That is all that is considered important. But transformation is not
counted very important. Now, value education is there in many universities
nowadays. And it is good. Value education is important. But how are values to be
developed? That is something which is not really very well understood. Is it
that just by speaking about values, people will be able to develop values?
Actually, there has to be a culture, which supports and exalts those values.
For example, if there is a value of respectfulness. Let us say, we should
respect others. We should respect our elders. We should respect our equals also
appro..., as appropriate. Now, we may talk about how we should respect others,
but if the whole culture is of satire and sarcasm, and sar..., and sardonic
speech, then w..., that culture will more than counter whatever value education
that is taught. So, values have to be coupled with a culture. Then, they will
lead to transformation. Today, the campus culture is such that very few values
are cultivated in their cultu..., campus, campus culture. That is why the
divorce of education from transformation happens. And that is why the students
who may be top person in the Universities, but they are often, prey to bad
habits. Smoking, drinking, illicit sex, now, even if we do not say from
spiritual perspectives, but even from material perspective, smoking, drinking,
drug addictions, these are very harmful. So, it leads to disruption. So,
knowledge is not for pooling, but pulling towards Krishna. Pooling means
accumulating. So much information is there in the head. But there is no effect
to transformation that happens. In fact, I talked about knowledge and passion.

But there is knowledge in, in ignorance is just irrelevant information.
Irrelevant information means often there are, there are, you know, talk, talk
shows and there are quizzies, in which all sorts of irrelevant information is
talked about. How many daughters does this particular film star have? And
somebody who wins that quiz gets it right, that was made one quarter piece for
that. Now, actually, what is a use of such information? You know, there is no,
we do not disrespect that filmstar or his daughters. But the point is, does
having this kind of information add any value to the person's life? So, what has
happened is, in especially today's society, irrelevant information is valued so
much. So, that information does not even give any power, so we have to create a
context where some power will come. So, we create this sort of quizzies. So,
that is actually the decline in the conceptions of knowledge that is there.

So, now, what you know is not as important as how you live. This is the Vedic
understanding. What you know is not as important as how you live. Somebody may
talk a lot about Krishna. But if that person is not actually devoted to Krishna,
then what is the real k..., value of that person talking about Krishna? When
Srila Prabhupada met George Harrison. George Harrison was a superstar at that
time. Super superstar actually. And he had met several spiritual teachers before
he met Srila Prabhupada. And they were all trying to influence and attract him.
And he s..., said to Srila Prabhupada. Prabhupada, how can one know a true
spiritual teacher? So, now, Prabhupada knew that George Harrison has read about
Krishna. And he is attracted to Krishna, accepts Krishna as God. So, he said,
you know, if, the spiritual master is to, supposed to tell us about God. Now,
if you want to know who is an actual spiritual master, you should see who is
addicted to Krishna. Who is the most addicted to Krishna. Prabhupada used a
very precise and profound word, addicted. Not just attached. Not just attracted.
Not just devoted. But addicted. You know, in addiction, there is a helplessness
by which, one is instinctively pulled. So, that addiction has a negative
connotation normally. But when it is used in the context of Krishna and brings
out an image of irresistible attraction. So, Prabhupada said one who is
at..., at..., addicted to Krishna. So, what you know is not as important as how
you live. It, you may say that you can talk a lot about Krishna. But in your
life, are you attracted to Krishna? So, of course, all this is from a
transcendental perspective. But even from the material perspective. If somebody
says that, oh, we should be kind to animals. We should not, we should have
ethical treatment of animals. You know, if somebody, if s..., it sometimes happens
that, you know, if some dog has a little bit of, not adequate long enough leash.
Then, that l..., less leash is seen as cruelty to the dog. And then a complaint
is made against them. And when the, that people are complaining, at the same
time, they are taking break first, which is, which is flesh. So, what is
happening here?

One is actually killing animals for one's tongue and then saying that animals'
neck should not be tied so tightly. So, this is a mismatch of the standards.
This happens because there is a divorce between one's learning and one's living.
So, that divorce has to be bridged. And bridging that divorce happens only when
one understands that learning is for living. Learning is not for earning.
Learning is not just for earning. You know, Eu..., Euc..., Euclides is a pioneer
of geometry, Euclid in geometry is considered foundational mathematics. So, once
when he was teaching geometry. One of his students asked. Sir, what is the
practical use of this? What are we going to do with this? So, then, Euclides
called one of his servants. He says, give this fellow a coin. And he said, he
thinks that if he does not get a coin, then, there is no, if, he is not going to
get a coin by this, then there is no use of studying this. So, even he was able
to point out that knowledge is not just for earning. Learning is not just for
earning. Learning is for living. So, today, thi..., thi..., this emphasize has
been lost.

Now, let us see what are the consequences of this. So, avidya leads to
undesirable qualities. That is what Srila Prabhupada talks in the remaining part
of the purport. So, he says that the students today have no "amanitvam". That
means they have no pridelessness. Students often like to make caricatures of
their teachers, and top behind their back, and make fun of them. And often, you
know, the person who can crack the most satirical joke about others is
considered to be the cleverest person. Now, this is a very perverse standard of
cleverness. Actually, we live in Kali-Yuga which the scriptures describe to be
"kaler doṣa-nidhe rājan", it is an ocean of faults. So, finding faults in
someone in Kali-Yuga requires as much cleverness as finding water in an ocean.
Now, water is everywhere in an ocean. So, finding water does not require any
cleverness at all. It is everywhere. Actually, if we are in an ocean and we want
to show our cleverness, let us see where the land is. Because that land will
give us shelter from the ocean.

Similarly, what requires cleverness, especially in Kali-Yuga, is finding the
good in others. So, unfortunately, we have this perverse standard that one who
can in the most creative ways speak destructively, that person is considered
to be the cleverest person. Which is a very unfortunate standard.

"nasya aucam". Such person, so no cleanliness means that Srila Prabhupada says
that there is so much illicit sex that happens. And nobody is trained in sense
control at all. Actually, even hundred, hundred fifty years ago, most education,
whether it was in the west or the east, was based on a culture of self-mastery.
It was understood that a student, unless the student wants to be, wants to. If
the student wants to study seriously, student has to control the senses. You
know, the greatest agitation for the mind and senses is created by contact with
the opposite sex. So, there was separ..., se..., there was a list of
co-education, separate education. And Aritotle was once asked, when should we
have sex? One of his students asked him. So, Aristotle replied that whenever you
want to be weaker than yourself, whenever you want to be weaker than yourself.
Why? Because although sexual feelings, lust, may create the f..., illusion that
I am a big hero, or temporarily, but it just sucks away our energy. And when it
sucks away our energy, you cannot focus on things. So, this, especially in the
student phase, there is some amount of regulation in discipline that is
required, which will lead to real education. Otherwise, not much education
happens. "nasya aucam", so there is no cleanliness. And because of this, lack of
training. Then, there is so much, you know, illicit sex. And then abortion. And
then sexually transmitted diseases that happen. And then sometimes, there are
teen pregnancies. And then there is, there is, there are heartbreaks. And
sometimes divorces happens. Sometimes, suicides happen because of that. So, the
whole complex comes up when it is, we should be actually focusing the energy on
development of character.

So, now, further Srila Prabhupada says the students grow up to be, when the
students, when they are at the student life, they do not need, learn
respectfulness. They do not learn cleanliness. And when they grow up, there is
no ahimsa. So, how there is no ahimsa. He talks about scientists developing
weapons of mass destruction. So, now, there are so many weapons of mass
destruction that practically, you know, we can kill all the life on the planet
several times over. Of course, all life, all human life will start probably,
some mic..., some small life forms, like a cockroaches will live. Because they
will not be affected by the kind of weapons that we humans use to kill each
other. But the point is that developing weapons for causing destruction to
others is, is really a tragic abuse of God-given intelligence. So, in the,
before the Second World War, there were many scientists. They, when they saw the
kind of weapons that will be developed. And the kind of destruction that would
be caused. They said, you know, we cannot use our intelligence to kill our, our
fellow human beings. And they were resigned. They said that unfortunately that
whenever the scientists, the, it is eliquate industry took up developing
weapons, and others took up developing weapons. Now, of course, we have a
catch-22 situation. You know, there are countries having hostility. And if one
country develops weapon, the other country also has to develop weapons, for, at
least for deterrent purposes. And where this deterrence will stop, that no one
knows. So, so much of the national exchequer is diverted towards f..., just
making defense, making, spend on, spending on weapons. So, when scientists
create weapons of mass destruction, what is happening? They have intelligence,
but that intelligence is unfortunately abused.

Now, Albert Einstein is considered to be the greatest brain of the last century.
And it was he who sent the letter to the US president which led to the
development of the Manhattan project. Which eventually led to the development of
the atom bomb. And then when that atom bomb was dropped on Japan and it just
wiped out these two cities, Hiroshima and Nagasaki. And then eventually, you
know, later on, when Einstein saw the extinct of the destruction that had
resulted by it. He said sending that letter was the biggest mistake of my life.
He said my fear was that, you know, Hitler may have developed it. And that is
why I wanted America to develop it beforehand. But actually, it was found that
Hitler was not very close to developing it. Hitler, of course, had some sympathy
for Indian culture, and he had sent s..., some team of researchers to India to
see if somebody could find out, some ways, in which, the kind of weapons, like
brahmastra and all those weapons, could somebody make it for him. He thought he
could win the war that way. So, he had the idea that he was an aryan. He
had misappropriated that title for himself. But the point which we are making
over here is that, it, it is, it is symbolic that the biggest brain of twentieth
century and his best invention, or his best insight, that was e equals to mc
square, the interchangeability of mass and energy. So, the biggest, the best
brains, best insight led to the worst destruction of the last century. In fact,
we could say the worst desctruction in recent human memory, in one single
incid..., in one single attack.

So, what is happening, the culture of ahimsa is not there. The culture of
violence has been cultivated. So, is, so, now, when the scientists make these
weapons, are they responsible? They may say that, we are only using the
technology. Yes, they are only developing the technology. But it can fall into
moral, mo..., the hands of terrorists. That will cause havoc. So, nowadays, you
know, there is, there are, there are chemical weapons of mass destruction,
which, that can be something as small as a cellphone. And if that explodes, that
will just send inflatable gas, in, in a distance of several kilometers around
sometimes. And then one spark, and then everything will be up in flames. It can
be devastating. So, this is all tamasic actually. This kind of terrible
destructiveness that happens. So, now, we may say what is a solution to this?
The point is, there is an underlying misdirection of the values of life.
Misunderstanding of the purpose of life. That is breeding this kind of
destructive use of the human intelligence.

So, then, Srila Prabhupada talks about pseudo-religionists who have no
"adambhitvam". "adambhitvam" means, as I said, not wanting to show off to
others. So, there are pseudo-religionists whose religion is only for showing off
to others. Now, they will do religious activities in a public way so that people
can see how religious I am. So, pe..., the goal is not to actually be devoted to
God. The goal is actually to show people that I am devoted to God. And that they
will do if it is politically correct. So, fifty years ago, it was politically
correct in India to show oneself to be religious. Now, it has become politically
incorrect to show that one is religious. So, people will not show that also. So,
the idea is "adambhitvam" means there is not, there is no emphasize on substance.
There is only emphasize on appearance. So, whatever way one can have a positive
social image, one will have that without trying to cultivate the substance at
all. So, many times, people, say, when there is no serious education, then even
the religious activities become just done for "dambh". So, for example, there
are religious festivals where people make big big pandals. So, there are Ganesh
festivals in Maharashtra, in se..., various parts of India, especially
Maharashtra. So, then, different people make the Ganesh images. And then, it
basically, the size of the Ganesh image becomes an expression of the size of the
false ego of the pattern. That means, you know, I, I made such a big Ganesh
deity. And then somebody says, I made such a big Ganesh deity. Then, I made such
a big Ganesh deity. And then, actually, we will make such big Ganesh deities and
have them for a week, or ten days, or fortnight. But then what happens? You
know, people just come over there, and with, in front of that Ganesh deity, there
are film songs going on. So, there is no genuine religious culture or spiritual
understanding or illumination that happens. There is just the appearance without
the substance. That is pseudo-religion.

So, pseudo-religion is extremely common. Even there are spiritual teachers,
s..., who want to be spiritual masters of many many disciples. So, often, they
give initiation in what way? They will say that, you know, the mercy of the guru
is causeless. So, they will wash the feet of the guru, and that caranamrta,
whatever that water is, that is sprinkled, and whoever is fortunate of to have a
drop falling on their, that person is initiated. So, now, everybody wants to be
initiated, because ev..., whoever does not want to have something for which
nothing is the cost. So, in this kind of initiation, there is no commitment
made. There are no regulative principles. There are no rules. And there is just
the glamor that I am initiated of such a guru. So, these people, it is, it is a
mutually self-serving and self-deluding arrangement. How is it self-serving?
Self-serving because the guru wants to have the honor that I have many
disciples. The disciple want to have the honor that I have a guru. So, they are
self-serving for each other. And they are self-deluding. Because the disciple is
not going to make any spiritual advancement. And the guru is also, actually not
doing the function of a guru. Guru is not doing any service to anyone. So, by
su..., sort of intiative, even the guru is not going closer to God.

So, "adambhitvam". So, there is just a "dambh". There is the, just a show of
religion that is there without the substance. This leads to undesirable
qualities. As we said, avidya. This is also a kind of avidya. Then, Srila
Prabhupada talks about nationalists. Now, this can be a little sensitive. We
have to understand Prabhupada's mood carefully. Srila Prabhupada takes this
things from a global perspective, or a universal perspective. And he says, in
the vastness of the space, you know, there are so many planets. And among those
planets, our earth, artha is just like a spec of dusk floating in the sky. So,
now, on that earth planet, you know, we human beings live for a few decades. And
while we are on this decade, for a few decades, we try to divide the earth into
countries. And we try to make boundaries. You know, this is my land. This is
your land. No, this boundary should be here. No, this boundary should be there.
Now, from a social political point of view. These are very serious issues. And
people fight wars over these. But if we look at from a transcendental
perspective, it is quite absurd. We are here for such a short time. The land
does not belong to us. And we are ultimately meant to leave this world. So,
while we are here, just keep fighting over, how mu..., is mine, how much is
mine, then it is, it is very short-sighted.

So, nationalism seen from a transcendental perspective is not very, very
intelligent. So, Srila Prabhupada writes in a quote that, you know, because of
bad system education, false system education, people are developing bad
qualities, like pride and nationalism. Now, nobody would consider our
nationalism to be bad quality. Isn't it? Now, of course, it all depends on
words. So, often, people consider patriotism to be a good quality. The pat...,
the word patriotism has some good connotations. That person is a patriot. Oh,
that person loves the country. As the person is nationalist. Nationalist means
that person is fanatical about one's nation. And he says, my nation is the best.

So, Srila Prabhupada makes it clear. He is talking about nationalism over here.
This is. Now, why is that bad quality? Because that is ultimately based on
ignorance. It is based on the understanding that I am the body and this body was
born in this country. So, this country is special. And I have a special born
with this country. Now, in the Vedic scriptures, there is apara dharma and there
is para dharma. Apara dharma is mun..., mundane religion. So, attraction to
one's family, one's dynasty, even one's country, it is not necessarily
condemned. But from the transcendental perspective, it is con..., it is not
approved. Because that is also a form of illusion. In the Bhagavatam, the
Bhagavatam gives dharma from the transcendental perspective. So, here, we are
not condemning nationalism per say. The point here is m..., real vidya should
raise us above these things. It should not just create nationalistic feelings
within us. But it should take us beyond nationalistic feelings to transcendental
feelings. So, in the Bhagavatam, there is a famous verse which says that:

        yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij
        janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

So, it describes that su..., "bhauma ijya-dhīḥ", it describes the list of
qualities, the list of activites which are considered normally to be good. But
these, but if they are done without proper spiritual understanding, then they
"sa eva go-kharaḥ", they are like the behavior of a cow or an ass. So, what were
those qualities? F..., F..., it includes even religion co..., activities within
that.

        yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke
        sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

So, to think that I am this body made up of various material elements, that is
the first ignorance. And second is to think that those people who are related to
us are my actual relatives. That is our second ignorance. Third is, "bhauma
ijya-dhīḥ", to consider one's land or birth as a place of worship. And then
lastly, to give, go to the holy place just to take a bath. So, actually, if we
look at the vision of the Bhagavatam, it is so, it, so penetrating that it just
goes to the substance. And it is not just relec..., rejecting material things,
like say material attachments based on bodily identification or family. It is
rejecting, not just nationalism, but is, it is rejecting even religion that is
superficial. And it is focusing on that little substance. What is substance?
"janeṣv abhijñeṣu", we have to associate with people who are enlightened and in
their association, we make genuine spiritual advancement. If you go to the holy
place, just for taking a bath, then there are cows and donkeys also in a holy
place, and they also take bath in the holy rivers. So, how are we higher than
them? So, here, the Bhagavatam is penetrating to substance. And the Srila
Prabhupada is giving us that advanced knowledge of the Bhagavatam. So, if we are
functioning in this world at the level of para dharma. If we are living in a
particular nation, we have to follow the laws of that nation. And we can offer
respect to whatever is expected of a citizen of a particular nation. But that
should not shrink our consciousness. That should not fixate us in a bodily
conception. We should be able to raise to a higher understanding of life. Then,
only, we will be able to make genuine spiritual advancement. So, this is also to
consider that I am an Indian. I am American. I am a Euro..., a Pakistani. These
are all conceptions based on ignorance. Because ultimately, we are none of
these. We are souls who are transcendental. And in that sense, any kind of
bodily misidentification is undesirable.

But, like we discussed in an earlier class, you know, we do not have to pinch
peope's false ego. And nor do we have to massage people's false ego. We have to
pat it and help them move forward. So, Srila Prabhupada would use it sometimes
that, you know, you are all Indians. Bhagavad Gita is your culture. Bha..., part
of your cultural tradition, cultural legacy. Understand it and share it with the
world. So, like that, we have Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu also saying this.

        bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra
        janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

So, those who are born in India, they should take the opportunity, practice
spiritual life and, and share its spiritual legacy with the world. So, now,
wha..., when Caitanya Mahaprabhu is saying this, what is the implication over
there? The implication is not some nationalistic patriotic sentiment. The idea
is that, "bhārata-bhūmi" is considered to be punya bhumi, the souls who get
birth in "bhārata-bhūmi", are those souls who have pious and spiritual credits.
Srila Prabhupada says that, actually, spiritual substance flows in the body of
Indians. That means that Indians have actually a lot of spiritual inclinations
deep within them. So, they can practice spirituality and share spirituality. So,
it is a focus not on India, but focus on spirituality that is latent within
India and Indians, and the message, or a call to bring out that spirituality.
So, that is what Caitanya Mahaprabhu is focusing on. So, in this way, we can
actually recognise that real knowledge should take us towards the development of
transcendental qualities. And how will this happen? When first of all, it all
begins by hearing from a "dhīrā". So, a "dhīrā", a sober person is a person who
is not deluded by material things. And Srila Prabhupada talks about a "dhīrā" in
the last section of this purport. And therein he describes, "dhīrā" realises
that, so Prabhupada first defines "dhīrā" as:

"A dhīrā is one who is not disturbed by material illusion."

And then:

"No one can be undisturbed unless he is perfectly spiritually realized, at which
time one neither hankers nor laments for anyhting."

So, Prabhupada is correlating "dhīrā" with 18.54 in Bhagavad Gita:

        brahma-bhutah prasannatma
        na socati na kanksati

Such a person neither hankers, not laments. And now, this is very significant
statement that Prabhupada makes:

"A dhīrā realizes that the material body and mind he has acquired by chance
through association are but foreign elements"

Now, the word "by chance" is very significant over here. Now, the first lesson
in spiritual life is that nothing happens by chance. Everything happens by
plan. Everything happens by the will of God. So, then, why Srila Prabhupada
saying that we acquired the material body and mind by chance? So, here, by
chance is not meant to indicate that there is no plan, or there is no order.
There is no pattern according to which we get the body. By chance is used, is
spoken to convey that actually, there is no intrinsic connection between the
soul, and the body, mind c..., setup. The soul depending on the kind o.., the,
the kind of culture that was exposed to, the kind of psychology that was created
by that, according to soul gets a, gets a particular mentality, and then
accordingly, gets a particular body. So, the emphasize of the "by chance" over
there is that there is no intrinsic connection between the soul and the body.
They are essentially different. And because of some f..., circumstances, they
have come together. So, those circumstances are not disorderly or chaotic. There
are certain principles underlying it. But the point is that I have nothing to do
with my body actually. It is just something which I have acquired by my past
karma. And I may have had so many bodies like this in the past. And I may have
so many bodies in the future if I do not purify myself and get liberated.

So, there is essentially no connection between me and my body. And that, that is
emphasized by the term "by chance". So, they are but foreign elements. We have
got nothing to do with them. And therefore, he simply makes the best use of a
bad bargain. So, why is the body a bad bargain? Because it brings so much
suffering. F..., and it also causes limitation. You know, it brings suffering in
terms of old age, disease, death. And before that adhya, atmikar, potikar,
devikles also come to use. And then, along with that, even if you want to do
good, even if you want to serve Krishna, the body holds us down. The body limits
us physically. And the body distracts us psychologically. We want to chant, but
then after some time, our throat gets tired. We want to do some service. Our
body gets tired. Then, even if we want to, even if we have bodily energy and
strength of voice, still, our mind is distracted. So, the body pulls us down and
distracts us in the service of Krishna. So, they say they are bad bargains. But
the bad bargain we have already got. So, what do we do? Make the best use of a
bad bargain. So, we use it to whatever capacity we can. And by that, we purify
ourselves. So, then, Srila Prabhupada concludes by talking about. A "dhīrā" must
come in disciplic succession. And "dhīrā" must learn from non-vid..., we must all
learn from "dhīrā", from vidya. And adhīrā cannot be an instructive leader. So,
"adhīrā" means one who has not undergone the training of a "dhīrā". So, a
poli..., sometimes, politicians also quote some Bhagavad Gita verses. Some
politicians may also appear to be learned. But actually, Prabhupada says:

"They are simply busy seeing to their own remuneration in dollars and cents. How
then, can they lead the mass of people to the right path of self-realization?"

So, actually, as long as one is, you know, self-centered, self-obsessed, one
cannot really think of the good of others. So, the politicians are simply
concerned how can I earn more, and more, and more. There may be a few
politicians who may be actually concerned for society, but majority of them are
simply concerned with their own aggrandizement. And because of that, they cannot
do any good to others. So, even if they speak some pious sounding words, they
are just superficial. They cannot act as "dhīrā"s. So, every field has its
speciality. And every field has its authority. So, the spiritual teachers. Who
can be spiritual teachers? Those who have got spiritual realisation. And the
spiritual realisation is the characteristic of a "dhīrā". And it is when we take
knowledge from them, then the vidya will lead to the development of good
qualities.

So, to summarise, we started discussion by talking about how in this verse,
avidya refers to anything that fosters sense gratification. It will be
ignorance. Or it will be knowledge. And vidya refers to anything that cau...,
fosters spiritual advancement, ultimately Krishna Consciousness. And these two
lead to different results. That is the verse.

Then Srila Prabhupada first talks about vidya. And he correlated that with the
twenty elements of the Bhagavad Gita. And we talked about how Srila Prabhupada
gives maximum mileage in his purports, it, through every rendition that he
does.

And we discussed the changing conceptions of knowledge. So, knowledge is
devotion. Prahlada Maharaja says. Knowledge is virtue. Socrates says. So,
knowledge devotion is transcendence. Knowledge is virtue is goodness. And
knowledge is power. Says Francis Bacon. That is rajasic. And today, knowledge is
just irrelevant information. So, that is actually tamasic.

So, the divorce of education from transformation leads to disruption. There is
disruption because students have no training. And students grow up to be,
cannot do, they do not have moral, cannot become moral responsible citizens.

And we looked at it how there is violence. There is uncleanliness. There is
wastefulness. And there is destructiveness that comes about. And we discussed
about how the Bhagavatam goes to substance of things. And it, things which are
considered to be good, like, you know, love for one's country, love for one's
family, and inclination towards religious rituals, Bhagavatam says even those if
they are not done properly, with proper spiritual knowledge, they are also at
the level of animalism itself. And this way, the Bhagavatam takes us to the
essence. The essence is that we have to purify ourselves and realise ourselves
as servants of Krishna. And this happens only when we learn spiritual knowledge
from a "dhīrā".

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande hari haribol.
