Hare Krishna.

So welcome back to our Isopanisad course.

So let us start with the overview of the first section once again, to understand where we are. The invocation and the introduction, or the mantra one, give the principle. What is that? Everything is perfect. And that perfection is based on the fact that everything belongs to the Ishvara.

So in the verse yesterday, we discussed about how ... living in harmony with Ishvara and the isavasya principle, benefits people. People can live life long, for hundreds of years. Now in this verse, the contrasting point is made. That how living in disharmony with the isavasya principle harms us.

So let us look at this verse, so before we go into that verse, let us first look at the purport, which Srila Prabhupada has given us. So this verse is:

        asuryā nāma te lokā
        andhena tamasāvṛtāḥ
        tāṁs te pretyābhigacchanti
        ye ke cātma-hano janāḥ

So, asurya nama te loka, that those worlds are called the abodes of the demoniac. Why? asurya nama te loka, those worlds are called as the world of the demoniac, adnhena tamasavrtah, those are covered by ignorance of, by darkness and ignorance, by the darkness of ignorance, avrtah is covered, andhena is darkness, and what kind of darkness, tamasa, of ignorance, and tams te pretya, tams te means those words, pretya means after that, so abhigacchanti, one will attain that. Who will attain that? ye ke catma-hano janah, so those janah, those people who are atma-hano, who are the killers of the soul, and ye ke indicates that whoever they may be, they will go to these dark abodes.

So basically, this verse is a warning, it is a warning that if one lives in a soul-killing way, if one lives without awareness of one's spiritual nature, without taking care of one's spiritual responsibilities, then one will, because one lives ignorantly now, one will go into further deeper ignorance in the future. So in this way, this is like a parent telling the child, if you do not study, you will fail, and if you fail, then you will have no career ahead of you. You will live in poverty. You will live in ignominy, nobody will respect you, nobody will employ you. You will be miserable. So it is a warning that is given.

So similarly, here it is said that if a person does not accept one's spiritual responsibilities, then one will have to suffer. That suffer is, one will go deeper into ignorance. So let us look at what the purport is saying. So the purport basically has three sections, six paragraphs.

So in the first paragraph, which is brief, Srila Prabhupada explains who is a demon. Here the word is, asurya nama te loka, so asura, Prabhupada explains, covered asura. Then who is a soul-skiller? The word atma-hano, the killer of the soul comes in the last line of the mantra. So what is that soul-killer? That Prabhupada describes, so he clarifies these two terms from the sanskrit verse and then he elaborates on the basic message. The basic message of the purport is, liberate the soul, do not kill the soul.

And the first paragraph talks about how we human beings misuse, so we will discuss the paragraphs in details, but first, let us look at who is a demon. Now Srila Prabhupada said: the killer of the soul, whoever he may be, must enter into the planets, known as the worlds of the faithless, full of darkness and ignorance.

So Srila Prabhupada first explains that asura is one who is demoniac. Now, the word asura has many meanings.

In general in sanskrit or in any language, there is a field of study, called as etymology. Etymology means we study the origins of the words and by understanding the origins of those words, we understand how their meaning is built up. So for example, there may be the English word, say, lexicographer. So graphy means who writes, lexico means dictionary, so lexicographer is a person who makes a dictionary.

So like that by looking at the etymology, we can understand the roots of the words, and then we can understand their meanings, so this is an elaborate field of study.And in some cases, the etymological meanings may not be historically precise, but they are semantically precise. Historically precise means, that may not be the exact way the words have evolved in the history, but from the meaning point of view, some meanings become well illustrated.

So asura, so what does asura mean? So "asu" refers to breath and "ra" means to enjoy, "ramante" to enjoy. So the word "asu" as breath comes in a famous verse in the Bhagavad Gita:

        ...
        gatasun agatasums ca
        nanusocanti panditah

So in 2.11 in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says, one who is asu, one whose life air has gone, and one whose life air has not gone way, such a person, wise person does not lament for either of those situations, so "asu" means life air. So, "ra" means to enjoy. So "asura" means one who enjoys the life air. That means the life air is in the body, one who wants to enjoy the body. So, one who wants to enjoy at the bodily level, sense gratification, in a Godless, sanctuous materialistic way, that person is called as an asura.

So Srila Prabhupada explains that in the Rigveda, it is quoted: "Vishnu bhakta smritodevo, asurasta viparyaya". Those who are devotees of the Lord, are bhaktas, and others are the asuras, and "Sada Vishnu paramam padan sada pasyanti suryaha", the Supreme feet of Lord Vishnu, the suras are all seeing that, and the asuras are exactly opposite.

So now, an important point to understand is: asura is not a species, but is also a mentality. We generally think of a demon as maybe somebody having teeth coming out of the head, teeth coming out of the mouth, horns on top of the head, but that is not necessary. There can be demons like that and we see in the Ramayana when the battle is there, now on one side are the human beings along with the monkies, and other side, there are the rakshasas. And when the rakshasas have ferocious forms, Ravana had ten heads, Kumbarkarna was a gigantic body. Many of the rakshasas, especially those rakshasis who were guarding Sita, they were hideous forms. So there can be rakshasas who have terrible forms also, but if we look at the Mahabharata, the battle is not between manavas and rakshasas, it is between manavas and manavas, human beings and human beings.

And actually in the Mahabharata battle, there are rakshasas on both sides. Now, there is Gathodkachandra on the side of the Pandavas, he is the son of Bhimatrumahidimbi, hidimbi was a rakshasi, so Gathodkacandra was a rakshasa. And there is Alongbush, who is also a rakshasa, who was the relative of Bakasura, who was killed by Bhima. So he wanted to take revenge, so he joined Duryodhana's part. So there are rakshasas on both sides.

So the point here I am making is in the Mahabharata war, both sides were human beings. But still, Duryodhana and those who were assisting him actively, they are considered demoniac. So Duryodhana did not have the body of a demon, but he had the mentality of a demon. So asura is not just a physical form. Asura is a mentality. And that mentality can be persist by human beings also. In fact, in the sixteenth chapter of Bhagavad Gita, when Lord Krishna describes the "daiva asura sampada vibhaga yoga", so he says divine characteristics and demoniac characteristics. So there he is describing human society itself. When he is saying, they can have demoniac characteristics. So asura is not just a physical form.

So Jayadvaita Maharaja has written an article in Back to Godhead, called who is a demon? So he says, we think of a demon as a horned, jolt person with deep portion, but that is not necessary. He says that your local politician might be a demon, your grocer might be a demon, your neighbour might be a demon, you might be a demon. So, all of us have the demoniac mentality within us, and if we let ourselves become dominated by that demoniac mentality... we have a divine side and a demoniac side. If we let the demoniac side take control of us, then we behave demoniacly.

So here, when it is using the word "asurya nama te loka", so now, there are mentalities which are demoniac, and for the demoniac beings, there is also localities within the cosmography of the Universe. So we know that the Earth is intermediate, often the fourteen planetary systems are referred to as three lokas. The upper, the middle and the lower. So the middle planetary system is the earthly planetary system. The lower is that which is below. And the demons often go to these lower planetary systems.

So "asurya nama te loka", so for the demoniac people, there are also some localities within the Universe. And those are the places where people who live Godlessly will go. That is the meaning of this verse.

Now let us look at a very important point. That is the term atma-ha. Atma-ha is a, is means literally killer of the soul. Now, the first lesson of the Bhagavad Gita is that the soul cannot be killed. In 2.17 for example, Krishna says:

        avinasi tu tad viddhi
        yena sarvam idam tatam
        vinasam avyayasyasya
        na kascit kartum arhati

So in 2.17, Lord Krishna is setting, "avinasi tu tad viddhi", that the soul can never be killed. But that same Bhagavad Gita, towards the end in the sixteen chapter, Lord Krishna tells in 16.21:

        tri-vidham narakasyedam
        dvaram nasanam atmanah
        kamah krodhas tatha lobhas
        tasmad etat trayam tyajet

So Krishna says that there are three gates to hell, and these three destroy the soul, and a wise person should stay away from them, and those three are lust, anger and greed. Now interestingly, what is Krishna is saying? "dvaram nasanam atmanah", "nasanam atmanah" means they destroy the soul. So now, in 2.17, Krishna has said the soul can never be destroyed, and now, in 16.21, he is saying lust, anger and greed will destroy the soul. So is Krishna contradicting himself?

No. He is not contradicting himself. He is talking here in a non-literal sense. So there can be literal readings of words, and in some cases, there can be non-literal readings of words. So, we know that as a fact, the soul can never be destroyed. So, killer of the soul means killer of the spiritual consciousness of the soul. So what does lust do? We may be aware spiritually that I am not the body, I am the soul. Life is meant for spiritual realisation.

But then if I expose myself to certain pictures, certain circumstances that make me lusty, then that lust makes me forget that I am the soul and it arouses bodily consciousness within me. So with lust kills my spiritual awareness. So when we talk about the killing of the soul, it is not killing the existence of the soul, it is killing the spiritual consciousness of the soul.

So here, atma-ha is a figurative expression. Now, in the Caitanya Caritamrta, this is referred to as Mukhya-vritti and Gauna-vritti, or the Caitanya Caritamrta says abhida-vritti and lakshana-vritti. So there are multiple names. Vritti means mode of understanding. So Mukhya-vritti is the primary mode of understanding. Gauna is the subordinate mode of understanding. Abhida is again central, lakshana is secondary, symptomatic.

So these are both ways in which scripture can be understood. We can take the direct literal meaning or we can take the indirect non-literal meaning. So when do we take the direct meaning and when do we take the indirect meaning? So, we cannot just arbitrarily take a non-literal meaning. Srila Prabhupada was very strongly against taking the non-literal meaning of scripture when that is not based in scripture.

For example, many Indian nationalist thinkers who use the Bhagavad Gita as a tool in their political struggle for independency, were embarassed by the idea that the Bhagavad Gita was spoken to make Arjuna fight a war. So they try to say that this whole war was metaphoric. That actually it is just a battle within our consciousness.

So Srila Prabhupada says where does the Bhagavad Gita say that? It is, the historical event was there, and the historical context makes it very clear that the Bhagavad Gita was a battle, led to a battle that was actually fought. So, such interpretation, if it is not based on scripture, is wrong. But if the scriptures themselves support a little non-literal interpretation, or a figurative interpretation, then that can be accepted.

So now, in this case, in the Srimad Bhagavatam, in 11.20.17, there is another verse, which literally explains what the word atma-ha means. So this verse is actually a correlation for what is being said over here. That means when we talk about scripture, we cannot understand scripture in isolation. So this is the verse:

        nṛ-deham ādyaṁ su-labhaṁ su-durlabhaṁ
        plavaṁ su-kalpaṁ guru-karṇadhāram
        mayānukūlena nabhasvateritaṁ
        pumān bhavābdhiṁ na taret sa ātma-hā

So "sa atma-ha", such a person is the killer of the soul. So who is the killer of the shoul? It is described "nr-deham adyan", so when we get a human body, and then, what is the nature of the human body? It is "plavan", "plavan" is a boat, so "bhavabdhin", this is, material existence is like ocean, and in this ocean, we are all struggling and drowning, so the human body is like a boat, and it is "su-labhan su-durlabhan", so it is a play of words over here, "su-labhan" means easily obtained, "su-durlabhan" means very difficult to obtain. What does it mean?

That actually among the millions of specfies, millions and millions of living beings that are there, very few get human body, so it is "su-durlabhan", but it is "su-labhan", we get it naturally by the progression through the lower species. So that we got it, and it is "su-kalpan", it is actually well-designed to cross over the material existence. We will see how it is.

"guru-karnadharam", so when we have a boat, we need an expert navigator, the captain. The captain is the spiritual master. The word "karnadharam" actually refers to captain, literally speaking, "karna" is ear, "dhar" is to hold, so "karnadharam" is one who catches the ear. That means the guru catches the ear of the disciple, and corrects the disciple, when the disciple was wrong.

And "mayanukulena nabhasvateritan", that "mayanukul", that which is favorable to me, "nabhasvateritan", the winds that are favorable to me are the scriptures that are given by me.

So, with all these facilities, if the person does not cross the ocean of material existence, such a person is an atma-ha. So when we are in a boat, we need a captain, and we need the guru, the favorable wind, then it is easy to travel. So all of us have got the human body. If you get the guidance of spiritual master and then you study scriptures, when we say scriptures are the favorable wind. What does that mean?

That means that actually if we study of scriptures, the study of scriptures creates spiritual desires, spiritual thoughts, spiritual inclinations and inspirations, and convictions within us, and these enable us to move forward towards Krishna. So if we read mundane stuff, if we watch movies, if we read mundane magazines, then those create material desires within us, and they create opposite wind.

So if Krishna is here, we are here, reading scripture creates a wind that takes us towards Krishna, reading mundane stuff, especially which is esssentially provocative, that creates wind that takes us away from Krishna. So Krishna says, all these facilities are there, but the person does not cross over the ocean material existence, the person is ruining his or her spiritual prospect, and that is why such a person is called atma-ha.

So, our point of discussion here is that the figurative meaning, non-literal meaning should also be based on scripture. It cannot just be based on one's mental concoction.

Now Sripad Madhavacharya explains that we can have three levels of readings in scripture. So, especially with respect to the Itihasas, like the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, he says, there can be a literal meaning, the ethical meaning and the metaphorical meaning.

So literal meaning means that these events happen. For example, Sita went with Lord Rama to the forest, and then Lord Rama went to chase the deer, and then Ravana came and he abducted Sita. So this is a literal event. It actually happened. And just by hearing the pastimes given in the scriptures literally, we become purified. So, there is no need for any further interpretation, any analyses, just Krishna, Lord Rama, these are manifestations of our beloved Lord, and just hearing about him purifies us. It increases our attraction for him. So the literal understanding gives us enormous purificatory benefits.

Now apart from that, there is an thical understanding. Ethical means, from the scripture, we can draw lessons. These historical events serve us moral benchmarks to guide us in our present day ethical decision making. That moral benchmarks means, ok now, it says, Sita was so chaste, and she went with Lord Rama even when she was not obliged to go. That is an ethical decision. So we can learn ethical moral lessons from these scriptural incidents. So Sita was with Rama, but still she was attracted to Marichma, as coming as a deer. So when we are with the Lord, we should not be attracted to other things. This is an ethical lesson we can learn. So this is the ethical level of understanding. And the ethical level is definitely valuable. It has to be taken in proper context so that we do not make any misjudgements where ethical reading is also valid.

And beyond that is the metaphorical reading. Metaphorical reading means these historical events symbolise truths relevant to the seekers on the spiritual path. That means these historical events, they are true, but along with that there can be further meaning derived by looking of them as symbols. So for example, Srila Prabhupada used the example that after the six children were killed from Devaki's womb, then Balaram ji appeared, and after that, Krishna appeared. So he said that these six children referred the six anarthas, and lust, anger, greed, envy, pride and illusion. And after these six anarthas are removed, then the spiritual master manifests in our heart.

That means we can become fixed in guru nistha. We can become fixed in service. And the spiritual master then prepares our heart and then Krishna appears. After Balaram ji, Krishna appeared. So now, this is a metaphorical reading. The children were actually there, but along with that, Devaki's six children represent something else. So metaphorical reading is not wrong. However, it has to be done in such a way that it is in consistency with the scriptural message.

So Bhaktivinoda Thakur also for example, in Krishna lila, his interpretation of Krishna lila given in Krishna samhita, Caitanya Siksamrta, he describes how different demons in Krishna lila represent certain things. For example, Putana refers to false guru, or Shaktasura refers to our past conditionings coming back to us to haunt us. So these are meanings which are non-literal and if the acharyas have given it, and if they are overall in consistency with the scriptural teaching, then they can be accepted.

So, Vedanta Desika gives the example, Vedanta Desika is a very prominent acharya in the Sri sampradaya, and he appears after Ramanuja acharya, some centuries, and he is considered as "tarkaratran" great logican, and he establishes systematically the logical foundation of the personalist school of thought as thought by Ramanuja acarya. And he gives the example of, say, Ramayana in one verse, he says that this Ravana had ten heads and Sita was with Lord Rama, but Sita was taken by Lord Rama, and kept in Lanka. So he says that the soul is with Krishna, soul is with the Supreme Lord, but when the soul turns away from the Supreme Lord for something else, then the mind comes and catches the soul. So Ravana represents the mind and the mind is accompanied with the ten senses, the five karmenriyas, five jnaninriyas, and all these ten, they catch the soul.

And then, Lanka represents the body. So the mind traps the soul in the body, because the mind desires is to enjoy, the soul stays trapped in the body. Now, an acharya has given this meaning, we can accept it. But this does not mean that actually there was no Sita, there was no Rama. No, historically, such incidents happened, but along with that, an additional meaning can be given. So, metaphorical meanings are useful. They can definitely be used when they do not contradict the literal meaning.

So here is the kiss principle to understand is. The metaphorical should supplement, not supplant the literal reading. Supplement means add to. Supplant means replace. So, Srila Prabhupada's objection was that actually Kuruksetra is a geographical place that exists even today, and the Kuruksetra war was a historical event that took place five thousand years ago. So those who try to say that this is just metaphorical, they are not supplementing, they are supplanting the literal meaning. And that was what Srila Prabhupada objected to.

However, Srila Prabhupada himself also uses this metaphorical meaning, you know, in one of Srila Prabhupada's disciples, Hayagriva Prabhu's book, the Hare Krishna Explosion, he describes that when Prabhupada gave the second time initiations, the first early days of ISKCON in 1966, so at that time, he told the devotees, now you need not lament because you have handed the chariot of your life in the hands of Krishna. Krishna has now become your charioteer.

Just as Arjuna was lamenting before, but when Arjuna started taking guidance from Krishna, his lamentation went away. So now with initation, you have accepted Krishna as your charioteer, now you need not lament. So, Srila Prabhupada is basically accepting the analogy that the body is like a chariot and Krishna is charioteer.

So Prabhupada does use the metaphorical understanding also at times, but his point was that it should supplement, not supplant. Now, is it that always it is should not supplant? But it can supplant when the literal reading leads to obvious absurdities. Literal reading leads to obvious absurdities means, for example, the example that is given in Vedic hermeneutics. Hermeneutics is the substudy of scripture, the branch of knowledge which studies scripture. So his house is on the river if somebody says. Now, nobody's house can be on the river. The river is a body of water, and house is basically made of land. So "his house is on the river" means, that his house is on the banks of the river. So although the banks is not mentioned over there, we understand that the literal meaning here is not precise. We have to take a non-literal meaning.

So similarly, why are we discussing all this Isopanisad? Because we are looking at the word atma-ha. So atma-ha is a word that should not be taken literally. Here we have to take the metaphorical meaning because the soul can never be killed, the soul is eternal. So atma-ha refers to one who kills the spiritual awareness, spiritual consciousness of the soul. That person is called as as atma-ha. So let us go back to the purport now.

So now, the third part is: liberate the soul, do not kill the soul.

So how do we kill the soul? If we live materialistically, then by living materialistically, we do not allow the soul to get benefited from its spiritual potential. If we do not use higher facilities of human form, then we have to live worse than animals in this life and go to hell in the next.

So how do we have to live worse than animals? What does worse than animals actually mean? So, Srila Prabhupada explains and elaborates over here, see, today many people have this question that we have advanced so much. So are we still living like animals? So we understand, first of all, with all our scientific advancement, scientific advancement has changed form, but not purpose of activities. What does it mean form, not purpose?

See, animals may gorge on refuse in a garbage pile, so a pig may go to a garbage pile and may eat some refuse over there, whereas humans may titillate their tongues with processed, packaged food. We may eat pizzas, and burgers and things like that, but the essential pleasure that is there in both is the same eating. So technology has changed the form, not the purpose.

You know, animals may mate in the middle of the street, whereas humans may cultivate erotic fantasies, erotic fantasies mean they will imagine about sex, through magazines, television, movies and the internet before indulging in carnal revelry.

So essentially, a person, even if he is surfing on the net, going through various sites, externally it appears, oh animal is just walking along, this person is surfing on the net, knows all kinds of sophisticated technology, but what is the purpose? The purpose is the same. The person is searching for sexual stimulation and that is what the animals are doing. So the form is changed, the purpose is not changed.

Similarly, animals may sleep on the hard street, whereas humans may sink into oblivion on a soft bed in an air-conditioned room.

So essentially, our Prabhupada would say after we are going to sleep, both we forget, where I am and what I am. So the essential pleasure is the same.

Now animals may snarl and show their teeth, whereas humans may brandish weapons of mass destruction.

So what does it mean? Actually, it is the same thing. Both are doing a show of strength. Both are trying to attack others, threatening to attack others. So the essential activity that human beings and animals do, remains the same. Although, there is so much technological advancement, the form has changed, the purpose has not changed.

And actually if we see with respect to modern science, most of the advancement comes by funding which originates in two main sources: one is defense, and the second is the consumer industry. Now defense basically is about defending, isn't it? So most of the technological advances come when there are wars, or there are threats of wars, or some people want to shoot threats of wars. Then they, we got this weapon of mass destruction, we got nuclear weapons, we got this. So much of the funding for scientific research comes from the defense industry. And defense is basically nothing, but the activity of defending.

And then, remaining, most of the funding, comes from the consumer industry. And the consumer industry is basically talking about eating, sleeping, mating. So in this way, if we see, what does the advancement do? The advancement is basically furthering the animal propensities of human beings. For example, we may now have very high class cellphones. So with cellphones, we can click photos. Now what do the people use the photos for? They use the photos they do to attract opposite sex, or for clicking titillating images. So they are using it mostly for sensual purposes. So people have, many of the premier institutes, they have very fast internet. And one of the top search items on the internet is basically unfortunately sex.

So we have sophisticated technology, but what are we doing with that? Quite often, we are doing the same thing which the animals are doing. So in fact, it is an engine, engine for growth, is often this, is eating, sleeping, mating, defending itself. So that is why we human beings with all our progress, we are still doing eating, sleeping, mating, defending. We are not crossing over the material ocean. And that is why the while modern civilisation is, Srila Prabhupada uses in this purport the word, it is a soul-killing civilisation.

So atma-ha refers to an individual soul-killer, whereas today, it is not just one individual soul-killer we have, we have an entire soul-killing civilisation. So, when there is a soul-killing civilisation, what happens? Actually speaking, it is not just spiritually that people suffer, that they will have to suffer in the next life, when they will not be able to have an auspicious destination, they will have an inauspicious destination. But more than that, even in this life, they will have to suffer.

So people who do not believe that in the next life, there may be something wrong that will happen, bad will happen as a consequence to what they have done, for those people, we can tell them, the consequence that will happen in this life and by pointing out those consequences also, we can encourage to take spiritual life seriously.

So let us understand now what are the consequences that happen in this life. So with respect to eating, sleeping, mating, defending itself, we human beings actually suffer many times more than animals.

So animals do not die of starvation because of artificial shortages created by others of their own species.

Now, what does this mean? Actually, there have been many surveys of feminis and quite often, for example, Frances Moore, did a study book called: "Food first". And in that book, a history of several feminis over a decades in Africa was done, and each of these cases, actually food, necessary for feeding the starving was there in the same country, but because of political vested interests, that food was not released from the go downs and people starved.

In fact, many times when wars are over there or when business interests are selfish, then business persons hold grains, hold food, and raise the rates up. And then what happens? That leads to artifical shortage and people die.

So animals, it never happens like this. Human beings, we have so much technology, but despite all the technology being available, people are suffering terribly. They are suffering because they, it is a shortage created by other human beings. So, we are not eating as well as the animals.

Now, the second is that no animal needs to take a sleeping pill to sleep. Now, a dog may sleep in the middle of the street. We may have a comfortable large bed and still, we cannot sleep without the sleeping pill. And sometimes, we cannot sleep even with the sleeping pill. So we suffer. So what happens is we are not getting the basic pleasure of sleeping, the relief, bodily relief and release of sleeping. So are we really advancing?

Similarly, animals do not suffer heartbreaks because of betrayed love. Now, a dog does not think that oh this bitch has ditched me and therefore I will sing songs of sorrow or of that I will commit suicide now. So actually we human beings are suffering more than animals. So eating, sleeping, mating, in all these, we suffer more than the animals, similarly with respect to defending.

Actually, with respect to defending also, for us human beings, the biggest danger is other human beings only. Isn't it? You know, how many of us actually fear that some tiger or lion will come into my house and kill me? But many people live in fear that some terrorists may come and blow up our ... the building where I am in, or some thieves will come, and break into my house and steal, so we are afraid of other human beings only most. You know, which other specy, the members live in mortal fear of the other members of their own specy? It does not happen so much. So actually, leave alone spiritual advancement, even with respect to eating, sleeping, mating and defending, humans are in many ways worse off than animals.

So, now apart from this, suffering in eating, sleeping, mating and defending, humans suffer more in others ways also. What are the other ways? You know, which animal has to do a course on stress management? You know, animals do not feel stressed because of overwork, or loneliness or any other reason. The human beings suffer from stress so much. You know the biggest problem in today's society.

And animals do not fall prey to addictions, isn't it? You know, a fish sometimes gets attracted to a beet, and then it gets trapped by that, sometimes in a mouse trap some cheese may be kept, and the mouse may go over there and may get caught by the cheese. But the animals have their excuses. You know, they do not know in advance that it is a trap. And secondly, whatever they are provided, whatever they are allured with, it looks like their food. The beet looks like food. The cheese looks like food.

But we human beings do not have either of those excuses. Cigarette does not look like food to anyone. And who does not know that cigarette smoking is injurious to health? But stil, we get attracted and still, we suffer. So humans suffer from addictions. So we have higher intelligence, but what is happening? We are suffering more than animals, and, now of course, some cases, some animals who become contaminated by human association, they may also become addicted. That means what? That means if a man has a pet dog. And the man thinks I do not want to smoke alone, so the man teaches the dog also smoking. So that the dog will normally not smoke, who will take fire into his own mouth? But because of the bad association of the master, the dog will also start smoking. So this unfortunately happens at times.

So animals do not commit suicide. Human beings commit suicide so much. According to WHO, one million people commit suicide. So one million is actually more than the number of people who are killed in war or in violent crimes throughout the year. So one million people kill themselves every year through suicide. That means more than the number of the people who are killed by others are the number of people who are killing themselves. What does this indicate? This indicates that there is something seriously wrong in the way we are living, in the way we are living. That is why people are so frustrated with their life that they feel better let me end my life, better let me, I cannot tolerate living this, let me die. Which other animal is commits suicide in this way? Practically none. In such quantity, definitely none. Therefore, there is something seriously wrong with our civilisation.

And Srila Prabhupada called this soul-killing civilisation, with so much suicide, it is also body-killing civilisation. So, people are killing themselves, and what is the reason for this? Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport that we are misusing the higher for the lower. Let us see what this means. Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport. So, if we go to the Isopanisad, in the purport, Srila Prabhupada explains that the, Prabhupada uses the word over here:

"There are swine, dogs, camels, asses, etc., whose economic necessities are just as important to them as ours are to us"

Now, economy necessities does not mean that they have some currency and they have to earn a salary. What Prabhupada means is they also have to make arrangement for food,  they also have to make arrangement for eating, sleeping, mating, defending, but he says:

"but the economic problems of these animals are solved only under nasty and unpleasant conditions."

So what is nasty and unpleasant conditions? You know, suppose, we are sitting to eat prasad, and we are sitting to eat prasad, now we are about to eat prasad, and somebody, bang, hits with a huge stick on the head, ah, we fall unconscious. Now, if we have a threat like that, we will not be able to eat food, peaceful food. We are afraid that somebody is going to beat us up. But what happens to an animal, you know if I want, or a lower specy?

A mosquito comes around, and hits, biting my skin. Now, what is the mosquito doing? The mosquito will not say "maha prasade govinde" before sucking my blood. But the mosquito is basically eating. And what happens? The mosquito is eating. Bum. One blow comes and you know, its food becomes its graveyard. It dies over there. So like that, the animals live in so much danger, their, economic necessities, Prabhupada says, are fulfilled under nasty and unpleasant conditions. So human beings do not have to do like that. Why? Because human beings have higher responsibility. Srila Prabhupada used the example that a judge and a clerk are in the same court, but the judge is paid much more than the clerk. Why? The judge has higher responsibilities. The judge is also honored, judge is paid more, judge is cared for attentively, the clerk does not get all that because the judge is having higher responsibilities.

Similarly, he says, that the human beings have to do higher responsibility. That higher responsibility is spiritual inquiry. So if one does not do the higher responsibility, then one is not entitled to the privileges. You know, if the judge does not do the work of a judge, then it is a serious flow in the legal system.

The humans, when they do not act like humans, when the humans do not pursue spiritual realisation, which is what they are meant to do, they live animalistically, then they are being irresponsible in the whole system of nature. And what is the consequences of irresponsibility? There is suffering. Human body is a very advanced facility. So this advanced facility is meant for advanced purpose.

See, if there were a, imagine if there is a very smooth Mercedes Benz, and there is, let us say, two friends, one friend has been a farmer living in the village, and the other person is going to the city, become very wealthy, and because they were close friends, so the old friend from the city decides to give his farmer friend a gift, and so he comes and brings a Mercedes. When he brings the Mercedes to his friend, and the farmer does not know any news of the Mercedes. So when he gets the Mercedes, instead of a tractor, he puts the Mercedes and starts ploughing the field with the Mercedes.

Now what will happen if he starts ploughing the field? Three things will happen. First is, the Mercedes will get spoiled, the field will get spoiled and the farmer gets frustrated. Isn't it? So, the human body is like a Mercedes. Now, the lower species are like the tractors, or the jogs (?, 42:57), which are used for ploughing this mission. So the human body is meant to go back on the express way back to God. So we have got the specy, but all around us, we live in a culture, where most people do not know about spirituality. They only thing that they know is eating, sleeping, mating and defending.

So, when we get the human body, based on our current culture, based on our past stain or lower species, we start using the human body for low, for eating, sleeping, mating and defending. That is like using a Mercedes for ploughing. So what happens? As I said, the body gets spoiled. We are, say, eating, sleeping, mating and defending. We are suffering so much. We do not get sleep properly. We suffer from starvation. We get diseases, so many diseases. How many animals suffer from indigestion because of overeating? Human beings suffer from obesity so much. Why? Because we are misusing the body.

So, most of the diseases that human beings get, are many of the diseases, are because of the attempt to seek higher pleasures through or the, to seek lower pleasures through the higher instrument, the higher body. So, there is an epidemic of sexually transmitted diseases. Why is this there? Because people are trying to seek more and more pleasure through the body and they cannot get it because the body's capacity is limited.

So using the human body for animalistic pleasures is like using a Mercedes for ploughing. So in eating, we suffer. We get obesity and so many diseases because of obesity which come up. So, well the old saying, which say that you know, what most people eat, on one third of what people eat, they live, and on the remaining two third, their doctor lives. So they eat so much more than, because of eating more, they have to go to the doctor and the doctor survives that way.

So people suffer because of obesity. People suffer because of sexually transmitted diseases. Why? Because they get into sinful activities. So you know, AIDS is such a mene, so AIDS is acquired immune deficiency syndrome, actually AIDS is not just acquired immune deficiency syndrome, it is acquired intellience deficiency syndrome. What does intelligence deficiency mean? That actually people think that sex is just meant for enjoyment, and they engage in sex indiscriminately. And they get infected by the disease. So there is this mentality of thinking that human life is just meant for sexual enjoyment, indiscriminate unlimited sexual enjoyment, that actually is intelligence deficiency. And that is also acquired. How is it acquired? It is acquired through the culture. It is is acquired through the TV, the movies, the internet.

So this intelligence deficiency causes us suffering. So when we use the human body for animalistic activities, the human body suffers. It gets diseases. And then not only that, what happens is, as I said, the field suffers, field gets spoiled when the Mercedes is used for ploughing. So similarly, when we human beings use our advanced technology for trying to enjoy, what happens is we spoil the environment. How do we spoil the environment? There is a biologist, Joberson, among many others, who has said that, in nature, there is a perfect balance.

So every specy contributes to the ecology of the planet. So for example, if the shrubs, and herbs, and plants die out, then all the herbivores animals will suffer. If the herbivores animals die out, the carnivores animals will suffer. So any specy, if it dies, it creates some imbalance in the ecology. But he says, there is one specy, if that specy dies out, there will be no imbalance in ecology. In fact, if that specy dies out, most of the imbalance that is there in the environment, that will be corrected. Which is that specy? That is human specy.

So we humans actually, if humans became extinct, most ecological problems, climate change sort of problems, will be minimised if not completely cured. So now, isn't this very joilting? It is embarrasing. It is humiliating for human being. That we humans are considered to be the most intelligent of all species. Then, how is it that our presence on this planet is only a nuisance for the planet's ecology? If there were a class, and then in that class, we know one student is the most intelligent. Then, we would expect that student's contribution would be the most constructive, not the most destructive.

So how is that when we human beings are the most intelligent among the species in this planet, why is our contribution to the ecology is destructive? That is because we are living in an imbalanced way. Now, we human beings do not contribute to the ecology much at the material level. We are meant to contribute to the ecology at the spiritual level. Now, all the species, when they come to the human, then they can become spiritually realised, then they can become liberated. So we do not have to contribute at the material level to the ecology, we contribute at the spiritual level, by fulfilling the purpose of the whole material nature. That is to elevate, educate and liberate the conditioned souls.

So, when we human beings do not do, when we use our higher intelligence for seeking lower pleasures, we create more sufferings for ourselves than what it necessary.




