Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4YFVuWbnW98
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=Lze9iQpj0Xcg1EP1_RVFGaku1U98MTU0MDEwMjUzMUAxNTQwMDE2MTMx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_015_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_12_part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=4YFVuWbnW98

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to the Isopanisad class on mantra twelwe. This is the second part of
mantra twelwe. First part, we discussed about the demigods. So, demigod worship
is staying in the dark material world. And in this class, we will discuss about
mayavada. And:

        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u sambhūtyām ratāḥ

Impersonalists who mislead people go to the darkest regions of hell. So, we will
discuss why impersonalism is so strongly condemned by our acharyas. So, firstly,
impersonalists are of two broad types. Brahmavadis and Mayavadis. So,
Brahmavadis are mentioned by Lord Krishna, in verses three to five of chapter
ten, chapter twelwe. And they do not commit any offense to the form of the Lord.
They are just attracted to the impersonal Brahman. And Krishna says that, their
progress is slow and troublesome. Now, Mayavadis are talked about by Krishna in
17.24, and 9.14 and 15. And they offend the Lord. So, because they offend the
form of the Lord. So, Bra..., Brahmavadis are not attracted to the personal form
of the Lord. Either way, they do not know about that form, or they have not
associated with devotees who have, who have, a..., who will attract them to the
form of the Lord.

        bhakti sanjayate bhakti

So, bhakti comes from the association of devotees. When there is no association
of devotees, at that time, it may well happen that, they are more attracted to
the formless Brahman. That is Brahmavadis. And Krishna says, those who are
attracted like this:

        avyaktasakta-cetasam
        kleso 'dhikataras tesam

For those people, because they are "avyaktasakta", try to the impersonal. For
them, there is kleso. But then in contrast them. But then in contrast with that,
there is mayavadis. Those who offend the form of the Lord.

        avajananti mam mudha

So, those people, Krishna says they are "mudha". He does not, does not just say,
there is "kleso" in their path. But there is "moghasa", moga karma. Everything
they do go in waste. Now, we will look at mayavada a little bit more deeply. So,
is impersonalism taught in the scriptures? Impersonalism in scriptures is
transitional, not final. So, on the right side, on, on one side in the chart,
you see, the scriptures you are talking about. Vedas. Upanishads. And
Bhagavatam. So, the Vedas talk about karma kanda. The Upanishads talk about
jnana kanda. And the Bhagavatam talks about bhakti, which is the conclusion of
the Vedic scriptures. So, now, what do the Vedas do? You see the arrow moving
upwards. So, the arrow moving upwards indicates that in karma kanda, people are
interested in material things. They are interested in sense gratification, artha
and kama, as we discussed earlier. But they are ready to do it under the
guidance of scripture. So, by this, they are elevated upwards because they are
developing faith in God. And their consciousness is slowly getting elevated.
They are at least not going to, towards tama-guna, although they may be in
raja-guna. Because they have faith in scripture, they will move slowly towards
goodness. Now, the Vedas glorify initially those people who want to gain
material things, but are ready to get, gain those material things through
religious means. But the Upanishads go one step forward. And they, see, what is
the use of all these material forms? You lo..., you are attracted to heavens.
You are attracted to beautiful looking people. It is all temporary. It is all
illusionary. Down with the form. So, now, the Upanishads are transitional. They
take people from material, fr.., material form to spiritual form. Those who are
attracted to material form, the Upanishads said, it is all temporary. It is all
illusory. Give it up. And then, they take them to the spiritual reality. But the
Upanishads are transitional. That means it take, if you consider the material
forms to be negative axis, and spiritual forms to be positive axis, then
Upanishads are at the zero position primarily. They take people from the
negative to the positive. Do they teach impersonalism? They do not teach
impersonalism as their conclusion. But impersonalism is definitely there in the
Upanishads as a transitional teaching. That means:

        arupayoru-rupaya

Like we discussed in the Bhagavatam.

        pasyaty acakshuh sa srinoty akarnah

So, the Upanishads say that the Absolute Truth does not have ears. But then the
Absolute Truth sees also. So, how this happens? While talking about that, while
focusing on the s..., getting materialistic people focus on spiritual reality,
material forms are negated. They are rejected. And as spiritual forms are being
introduced, in the transition, some verses can seem impersonalistic. But if you
look at the conclusion, the final teaching, it is not impersonalism. The
Upanishads take one towards personalism. And that personal conclusion is
actually emphasized the most in the Bhagavatam. In the sattvik Puranas, and
especially the Bhagavatam. Where bhakti and spiritual form, spiritual
activities, spiritual personality, and spiritual relationships are talked about.
So, the impersonalism is there in the scriptures, but it is transitional as a
stepping stone from, for those who are in material form to get them to a.., be
attracted towards spiritual form.

So, now let us try to understand this person..., we look at the history of
Mayavada. So, mayavada is a subsection of impersonalism. So, how Mayavadas
spread during medieval times. Then, how it got the most and it became twisted
during modern times. And what are the disasters caused by Mayavada. So, we will
look at this.

First, let us look at the basic idea of Mayavada. So, Mayavada divides reality
into Vyavaharika and Paramarthika. Vyavaharika means practical. Paramarthika
means transcendental. So, the idea is that all form and variety, that is there,
it is in the realm of operational reality, practical reality. But in actual
reality, there is no form. There is no variety. There is just consciousness.
There is just Brahman. That is the idea of Mayavada. Now, in Mayavada, what
happens is, basing this teaching on scripture is very difficult. Because
scripture in a vast section talks about relationships, talks about
reciprocation, talks about God as a person, and His devotees worshipping Him.
So, how do we re..., how does Mayavada reconcile this? Mayavada says that
actually wherever scripture talks about form, personality, relationships, that
is lower level teaching of scripture. And actually, scripture's teaching is
confidential. And that is whatever teaches Paramarthika. So, they divide
scripture into two divisions. One is higher level reality and other lower level
reality. And they say the most of scripture also teaches us lower level reality.
And actually, the higher level reality is taught in a sma..., few sections of
scriptures. And Shankaracharya who was a proponent of Mayavada, he and other
mayavadis, what they say is that, the scriptures have maha vakhya. And
everything else in scripture is lagu vakhya. Maha means great. Lagu means lower
level, smaller. So, f..., Vaghyana Brahman, Sarvamkalmada Brahman, Aham
Brahmasmi. Like these, sarmah vakhyas. And these all seem to say that the
Absolute Truth with imperson..., tattvo masi. So, you are that. Everything is
Brahma. I am Brahma. Brahma is conscious. These kind of statements, they say,
say, are the conclusion of the Vedic literature. And everything else that is
taught is a phi..., lower level reality. Now, by this tool of dividing reality
into Paramarthika and Vyavaharika, and dividing scripture into that which is
just Paramarthika and that which is just Vyavaharika, what happens is, Mayavada
creates a system of reasoning by which any s..., any sc..., any scriptural verse
and quotation which contradicts their idea, they will immediately relegate it to
a lower level reality. So, it is a very self-serving system by which all
contradictions are conveniently rejected as lower level. Why did Shankaracharya
have to teach this?

Because historically speaking, Buddhism had spread very widely all over the
country, and, and people had to be brought back to the Vedic fold. So, you know,
five thousand years ago, Vyasadeva wrote down the Vedic literature. And he wrote
down all the literature. In those literature, he focused on giving karma kanda,
jnana kanda and bhakti. But then, people started a..., abusing the karma kanda
section for the sake of doing indiscriminate, unrestricted animal killing in the
name of doing yagnas which had animal sacrifices in them. They started abusing
the Vedas. So, at that time, Buddha had to come. Because so many animals were
being killed. And what did Buddha do? He said that, just reject. He said that,
cannot you see that animals suffer pain? If you cannot give life, how can you
take life? Then people said, but Vedas tell us to kill animals. He says, what
kind of books are these if they tell that you kill animals? Then do not reject
the Vedas. Do not accept the Vedas. Reject them. And by that, he said, then what
about God? He says, do not bother about God. Do not bother about God. Because
ultimately, you cannot know. At least, practice morality. So, Buddhism created
a, a, it is, sometimes, people think, oh, Buddhism was atheistic. But Buddhism
is not atheistic. It is non-theistic. It just does not talk about God.
Subsequent teach..., teachers after Buddha made a, made up arguments, which
sometimes seem to reject God. But Buddha just did not talk anything about God.
He did not talk much about metaphysics. Because metaphysics or philosophy, we
cannot really talk about it without scripture, other, without scripture, how can
we know about higher reality? So, everything that we talk about higher realities
without reference to scripture will essentially be speculating. So, Buddha
refers that do not do any speculation, says, just do not bother about.
Practice morality. So, right conduct. Right thought. Right speech. And essential
part of that right conduct, right thought, right speech, is avoid violence. Do
not kill animals. And in this way, he brought people to a level of goodness. And
in, in that sense, it is not just non-theistic. It is pre-theistic. It is
creating a platform by which people can understand theism, understand God in a
proper way.

So, Buddhism spread very rapidly. And when it spread very rapidly because of the
charisma of Buddha and the appeal, historically speaking also, the brahmanas who
were doing karma kanda, they had become very materially minded. And they were
imposing their superiority on other castes due to which the lower caste became
alienated. And many people from the lower caste, they found that in Buddhism and
similarly in Janism, there is no caste discrimination. So, they took to Buddhism
and Janism. And this spread rapidly. That means, at one time, practically, all,
all of India, large parts of India were Buddhistic. And over a period of time,
in order to establish their own intellectual autonomy. That means to show how we
are different from the Vedic tradition, Buddhists wrote many arguments and
books, which exclusively criticised Vedas. And therefore, what was meant to be a
temporary program for, emergency program for checking people from doing
indiscriminate animal slaughter in the name of Vedas, became a whole scale
program against the Vedas. So, then, to get people back to the Vedic fold, Lord
sent Shankarach..., Lord Shankara, Lord Shiva as Shankaracharya. And
Shankaracharya basically did lot of debates. And he refuted the Buddhism. And he
brought India in the Vedic fold. But because Buddhism was talking, had
completely rejected the Vedas. So, he could, Shankaracharya could not give the
complete conclusion of the Vedas at that time. So, he gave a transitional
conclusion. So, Buddha was talking about sunnya. And Shankaracharya said, you
are attracted to Sunya? Actually, the same conception is there in the Vedic
literature. It is called as Brahma.

So, actually, if we look serious..., deeply from the conceptual point of view,
Buddha's Sunya and Shankaracharya's Brahma, they are intellectual clones.
They are basically so similar, just change the nomenclature and bringing the
Vedic framework, and essentially, both are similar. So, he was able to get
widespread acceptance of the Vedas and the Vedic culture by talking of the
impersonal level. At that time, people were not spiritually wide enough to talk
about the higher level of reality. So, and, Shan..., so Shankara's purpose is
both historical as well as in one level scriptural. So, his purpose historically
was to check the spread of Buddhism and get people back into the Vedic fold. And
from the scripture point of view, there is another purpose that is sawn. Padma
Purana gives a verse, a section, where Lord Vishnu is telling Lord Shiva to come
down to the world, and preach this impersonalism, Mayavada. And Sh..., Lord
Shiva is also telling Parvati:

        mayaiva kalpitam devi kalau brahmana-rupina
        mayavadam asac chastram pracchannam bauddham ucyate

"mayaiva kalpitam", by me, it is taught. Oh, devi. "kalau brahmana-rupina", in
Kali-Yuga, in the form of a brahmana, I teach "mayavadam asac chastram",
Mayavada, which is not the true scripture. It is false conclusion of the
scripture. "pracchannam bauddham ucyate", it is actually just cowherd Buddhism.
So, as I said, Shankara's Brahman is an intellectual cloak, clone of Buddha's
Sunya. Because even Buddha was asked. What is the ultimate goal? Then, there is
no scripture. There is no understanding of positive spiritual reality. So, like
I was talking about the origin, negative, zero, and positive. So, Buddha
basically, it takes people to the zero. The Upanishads take people to the zero.
But then from the negative axis through the zero, they take people to the
positive axis. But Buddha, because he had rejected scriptures. So, he could not
speak much about the positive reality. So, he could just take people to zero.
So, both, basically, Buddhism and Impersonalism focus on the zero. One is
through the Vedic fold. The other is, Buddhism is not through the Vedic fold.
Impersonalism, as taught by Shankaracharya and others, is in the Vedic fold. But
what is transitional, if it is made into final, then that becomes a disastrous
blender. So, Shankaracharya was told by the Lord to teach Mayavada because those
people who want defy God and still claim to be religious, Mayavada serves as a
very convenient cover for them. Because the people can, so, people can say that
I am God. Because ultimately, the Absolute Truth is formless. And in this way,
they can boost their false ego in the religious realm. The purpose of religion
is to give up our false ego. But the ultimate glorification for the false ego is
to say that I am God. So, actually speaking, that is not the conclusion of
impersonalism. Impersonalism is that material form is false. And we have to go
beyond this material form. And what is that beyond material form? That is not
very clearly talked about in the Upanishads. It is mentioned and further we have
to go to the Puranas, sattvik Purana, and ultimately, the Amala Purana,
Bhagavatam to understand that conclusion of personal reality.

So, in this transitional journey, if one stage is only taken, then it leads to
erroneous understanding. So, if let us have a long movie, in which the hero and
the villain are constantly at battle, and initially, in the first half of the
movie, the hero and the villain, whenever they are fighting, the villain is
constantly beating up the hero. Beating up the hero. Beating up the hero. And
then, at the end of the movie, the hero wins. And the villain is defeated. But
if somebody just takes one scene from the movie, the middle of the movie, where
the villain is just beating up the hero, beating up the hero, and he says this
is a teaching, this is what the movie depicts, the hero getting beaten. He says,
what kind of movie is this? So, we have to watch the movie to the conclusion.
Similarly, there is a historical masterplan of the Lord which spans over
multiple centuries starting from Buddha, and going up to Lord Caitanya. So,
Buddha, he starts the Vedic restoration process by at least getting people to
follow basic morality, stop animal slaughter. Even if for that sake, the Vedic
authority has to be temporarily rejected. Shankara gets people back into the
Vedic fold by teaching about Brahman which is similar to Sunya.

Now, after Shankaracharya comes Ramanujacharya. And Ramanujacharya says, that
actually, yes, everything is one. But there is difference also. So,
Shankaracharya, what he taught was Advaitavada. Shankaracharya got people united
within the Vedic fold, but by proclaiming impersonalism as the Vedic teaching.
And what is that? Advaita. There is no Dvaita. There is only oneness. But
Ca..., now, Shankaracharya's influence was so great. Shankaracharya's hold on
Indian society was actually stronger than so.., hold of science in modern
society. So, reject him entirely was not possible. So, Ramanujacharya said yes,
Advaita is there, but there is difference in Advaita also. He says
Vishishtadvaita. So, he th.., he countered Shankaracharya's arguments and he
gave an understanding that actually the scriptures do teach about relationships
also. So, the Supreme Lord is like the soul, and material world, and the jivas
are like the body. So, the soul and the body, they are one and they are
different. The body cannot exist without the soul. In that sense, they are
related. But at the same time, there is a difference. So, the soul is the b...,
essence. Soul is a soul. Soul is the sustainer. And the body is what, what is
subsequently coming out from it. So, like that, we have a relationship with the
Supreme Lord. And there is oneness. But there is difference. Vishishtadvaita.
That was his teaching. And this is a very simple understanding. It is very
profound and complex. We will not go into that right now. I am talking, right
now, for the historical flow. So, impersonalism, everything is one. So, then,
Ramanujacharya says, yes, everything is one. But there is difference also.

And then, Madhvacharya came along. And Madhvacharya says, where is oneness?
Actually, everything is different. He says, there is jiva, jagat and jagadish.
So, jiva, jagat, and jagadish. What is the relationship? So, he said, actually,
Madhvacharya said, what is the relationship? So, jiva, so, he says, jiva and
jagat are different. Jiva is soul. Jagat is universe. And jagadish is the
Supreme Absolute Truth. So, Madhvacharya says, what is oneness? He says, jiva
and jagadish is different. Jiva and jiva is different. Jiva and jagat is
different. Jiva and jiva is different means, different souls are different. They
are not one. Jiva and jagat, matter and consciousness, they are different. And
jagat and jagadish, matter and Supreme Lord, they are also different. So, he
says, where is oneness? Actually, there is bheda. There is actually duality. It
is not that there is oneness. So, in this, through this, Madhvacharya countered
Shankaracharya. So, if we consider Shankaracharya's teachings to be one extreme.
Vishishtadvaita comes back to the windstream towards the center. And
Madhvacharya takes them to the other extreme.

And then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu comes along. And Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gives
the, brings things back again in the balance. And He gives the highest
understanding. The whole understanding that actually the relationship between
the Lord, between the Brahman and the atma, is Achintya Bheda Abheda. So,
Brahman is just alternative word here used for Jagadish. So, Jiva and Brahman,
they are, what is the relationship? Same or different? Now, sometimes, the
scriptures seem to say that they are one. Sometimes, they say they are
different. So, what exactly is the relationship between the two? How do we
resolve the scriptural contradiction? So, Mayavada may say, Mayavada, what is
the resolution? Actually, all statements which say that they are different. They
are lower level reality. They are Vyavaharika reality. On all statements that
say they are one, that is the higher level reality. That is Paramarthika. There
is that cohesion. Now, Ramanujacharya says that if we resolve it this way, then
the problem is that majority of scripture we are saying is false. By which,
then, are we actually teaching scripture or are we teaching, our ow..., imposing
our own philosophy on scripture? Not only that, he says, on what basis are we
dividing scripture like this? Scripture does not talk about any such division.
That there is higher, that these verses are talking about higher level reality.
These verses are talking about lower level reality. Scriptures do not teach
anything like this. Scriptures give a teaching. And we have to find out how the
Truth of scriptural statements can be seen. It is not that, if we say that, this
is real and this is false within scripture, then essentially, we are imposing
our philosophy on scripture. And then, we are not actually re..., reflecting
what is the teaching of the scripture. We are forcing scripture into saying what
we want to say. So, this is actually violence against scripture. And
Ramanujacharya was very strong in his care take. And Madhvacharya was even
stronger. And by this, actually, there was, the, gradually, the Vedic
understanding was revealed.

So, we see the, historically, Buddha comes in, talks about Sunya. So, everything
is zero. The ultimate goal is zero. Shankaracharya comes and says Advaita.
Everything is one. Then, Madhvacharya came after Ramanujacharya. And
Madhvacharya t..., as I said, took the pendulum from the Advaita to the Dvaita.
He says ev..., his fingers are raised. Two. Everything is two. So, that is,
offered that progress. But then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu comes in. He used the
balanced understanding. From this pen..., ex..., extreme, Advaita to Dvaita,
Achintya Bheda Abheda. Which Caitanya Mahaprabhu is, hands up raised, in
ecstasy. So, there is two, but there is ecstatic joyful relationship of love
between the two. There is bhakti. And which is, bhakti is filled with ecstasy,
with joy. So, this is the progressive understanding. From Sunya of Buddha, to
eka, to Advaita of Shankara, to the Dvaita of Buddha, sorry, to the Dvaita of
Madhva, to the Achintya Bheda Abheda of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. It is a progressive
evolution of theistic revelation. Progressive evolution of theistic revelation.
So, what is taught in the scriptures is revealed progressively by the Lord
through the great acharyas. That is theistic revelation. But there is a
progressive evolution in the understanding. That is revealed by the acharyas.

So, now, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he, when he came and taught Achintya Bheda
Abheda, Jiva Goswami codified it through the Sandarbhas. And through that, the
highest understanding is revealed. Now, the problem comes up when a transitional
understanding is taught of as conclusion, conclusive understanding. So, Srila
Prabhupada hammered simple points of logic, which are often fatal for Mayavada.
So, what is the problem with Mayavada? So, they say everything is Brahman. That,
but then the question comes up, where does illusion come from? If we are also
Brahman, the two questions which are f..., always fatal for Mayavada, they have,
they have posed serious headaches for Mayavadis right from the inception of
Mayavada. And although they have done a lot of word jugglery, there is no,
really no solution for them. What is it? If everything is Brahman, then where
does illusion come from?

         brahma satyam jagan-mithyä

So, ok, Brahma is "satyam", but where does "mithyä" come from? Where does
illusion come from if everything is Brahman? First question is, what is the
origin of illusion? And second question is, how does illusion overcome Brahman?
Because Brahman is supreme reality. If illusion overcomes Brahman, then illusion
becomes the supreme reality. How is that possible? So, their philosophy is
called as Mayavada. Because in a sense, they say in the form of the Lord. That
which is the reality, they also call that as Maya. So, in that sense, that is,
the idea that Maya becomes supreme instead of Brahman remaining supreme. So,
these two questions. Now, how is Mayavada trying to answer this? They try to say
that actually, reality is so complex that we cannot understand it. They say
this: "anir vachani". So, how did the jiva, how did, how did Brahm..., how,
where did Maya come from? It is "anir vachani". It cannot be put in words. How
did the Brahman come into Maya? It is "anir vachani". It cannot be put in words.

So Ravindra Svarupa Prabhu is a scholar disciple of Srila Prabhupada. And he is
the, he was the temple president of Philadelphia. So, he writes in his book,
"Endless Love" about his encounters with mayavadis. So, at times, one time, when
mayavadis came to Philadelphia. And they had their own posters. Poster said
something like, you know, Jesus, Buddha meditated and became the enlightened
man, divine. Jesus meditated and became the sacrificed divine. Krishna meditated
and became the love divine. You meditate and you become the supreme divine. So,
the idea was you are God. That was the meditation. So, when they wen..., so the
devotees told, you know, we should go for this programme and we should smash
this. So, Ravindra Svarupa Prabhu decided to go for that programme. He was
apprehensive. Because going to somebody else's programme and refuting them, how
it would come out? He was not sure. But he decided to go. And there were these
two mayavadis who were speaking. When they were speaking, both of them, one
of them would speak for some time and another person would speak. And then after
that, after the class, are there any questions? So, now, immediately, Ravindra
Svarupa Prabhu raised his hand. So, now, they looked at him. They saw him with
dhoti, kurta, tilak, sikha. They understood these are Hare Krishnas. They
looked at everywhere around. Now, they wanted somebody else will raise hands,
and they will ask that person to ask question. But when they saw that, people
saw these are Hare Krishnas and these are, nobody else raised hand. They wanted
to see what is going to happen. So, then, he said, yes, reluctantly said, yes.
See, you said that Krishna meditated and became God. Yes? But Krishna killed the
demon Putana when he was just a baby less than a month old. So, when did he
meditate to become God? So, may..., this one mayavadi looked at the other. And
both of them looked at him. The pained expression, and one of them said words.
The other said words, words. And they had some of their, stu..., students, some
of the followers in the audience. They said words, words. He says, my dear
friend, don't you understand that words are the sole cause of illusion? We have
to go beyond words. Words will create illu..., words will perpetuate illusion.
When you go beyond words, then we understand reality. Do not get trapped in
words. Go beyond words. So, then, Ravindra Pra..., Prabhu said, wait a minute,
he says, when two are, when you were speaking, words were not illusion. When I
asked one question, then words become illusion. It is nonsense. He said. This is
how mayavadis. You know, as long as they are speaking, words are not illusion.
But as soon as some em..., difficult question is asked, oh, Absolute Truth is
beyond words. You know, "anirvachaniya". It is, it is beyond words. And by
saying that it is beyond words, they try to escape all problems in their
philosophy. But it does not work because "anirvachaniya" cannot become an excuse
for running away from logical problems and philosophical problems.

So, see, how it is, so on, what we see on the up is a strategy of the mayavadis.
And below is a strategy that the Vaishnavas use, especially Jiva Goswami uses.
So, there are scriptural contradictions. Or, actually, there are no
contradictions in scriptures. There are apparent scriptural contradictions. So,
as we discussed earlier, the paradoxes. So, what the mayavadis do it, they
divide scripture into true-false. That means this is Vyavaharika. This is
Paramarthika. This is higher. This is lower. So, although they will not say
lower is false, but for all practical purposes, they end up saying that it is
false. So, now, when they divide it into true and false, then they run into
logical problems. And when they run into logical problems, how they say? It is
beyond words. It is "Anirvacaniya". So, now, "Acintya" which the Vaish..., which
Jiva Goswami talks about is, is fundamentally differently. What is the basic
understanding of the Vaishnavas, is that scripture is true. Everything in
scripture is true. Now, how that is true, that we may not be able to understand.
Why? Because scripture is the word of God. And God is infinite. Because God is
infinite, so we with our finite intelligence, we may not be able to understand
everything about God. So, now, everything, we cannot understand how
simultaneously. What is simultaneously? That actually how we are one with God
and different from God. When we cannot understand that simultaneously, that is
"Acintya". So, what is the e..., ex..., basic principle of "Acintya" tattva? The
basic principle is that we are finite. God is infinite. So, God has revealed the
scripture. And scripture says something, it is true. How it is true? We may not
be able to understand it right now. But that does not mean that it is not true.
We cannot divide it. We cannot rapture or factor scripture into false and real.
Scripture, what does it say is true, but we have to understand how it is true.
There may be a hierarchy within scripture. There may be a hermeneutic...
Hermeneutic is a method of understanding, required to understand the scripture.
But ultimately, to say that scripture is false is to do violence to scripture.

So, yes, Jiva and Brahman, how are they one? Now, Prabhupada gives simple
example to illustrate that we are one in quality and we are different in
quantity. So, the oneness is in quality. The difference is in quantity. But
beyond that, when we go into deeper philosophical level, there is what is exact
relationship between us and the Lord. Caitanya Mahaprabhu makes it very clear.

        jīvera ‘svarūpa’ haya — kṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’

We are the servants of Krishna. So, that is true ultimately. But when we go into
the Upanishads, there may seem to be statements which are contradictory. And
ultimately, the attributes of the Ishvara, they are not very easy to understand.
So, there may be "acintyatva". "acintyatva" or inconceivability is a
glorification of the Absolute Truth. It is a glory of the Absolute Truth that
the finite human mind cannot conceive it. Whereas "acintyatva", "anirvachaniya"
which the mayavadis talk about, that is what, first of all, rather than talking
about the Absolute Truth having inconceivable property, characteristic, they say
this is that Truth. What is the truth? That the Absolute Truth is impersonal.
And ev..., everything is Brahman ultimately. And when logical problems come up,
then their response is "anirvachaniya". So, scripture itself is first
interpreted, and one's own philosophy is imposed on the scripture, and then when
there are problems with it, then the "anirvachaniya", the, the ineffab...,
ineffability. That is the word they use. Ineffable, that which cannot put in
words. Ineffability is used as a subterfuge, as an excuse, as an escape way, as
a cop out to try to do away with all logical problems. But those logical
problems do remain. You know, Prabhupada would simply argue that, he is putting
the point that, you know, if, if Brahman is the Absolute Truth, then how can
Brahman come under illusion? And if Brahman is the Absolute Truth by extension,
we can use the argument. If you are Brahman. I am Brahman. Everyone is Brahman.
If you become liberated, you and I are one. So, why don't I become liberated?
So, i..., we are all Brahman, then why is it your liberation does not lead to my
liberation? So, there are many logical problems which come up. You know, they
say, no, no, but actually, you are also liberated. But you do not realise
that you are liberated. Ok, I do not realise that I am liberated. But what is it
that makes me, that prevents me from realising that? That is illusion. That
means illusion is controlling me. He says, no, no, illusion is not controlling.
You are only thinking that illusion is controlling. But still, illusion is
causing the illusion of thinking that I am under illusion. What is causing that?
That means illusion is above the Brahman. So, ultimately, the problem is there
which cannot be resolved. So, this is Mayavada.

Now, now this is summary of what we are discussing. Upanishads are a stepping
stone in the Vedic masterplan. How? You know, the chart we discussed about.
Karma kanda is negative axis. Then, jnana kanda is the intermediate a..., zero
point. And then, there is positive form which is talked in bhakti. So, they are
stepping stones. In the, so, now, where impersonalists are wro..., right and
where they go wrong. Where they are right is in saying that material form,
material variety, everything is, that is false, they are right. But where they
go wrong is saying that the rejection of form is the ultimate truth. That
rejection of form is the ultimate truth. That is where they go wrong. So, for
example, the idea is that the Absolute Truth has to be unlimited. So, when you
say Absolute Truth has to be unlimited, they say whenever there is form, it
creates limitation. So, therefore, for the Absolute Truth to be unlimited, the
form has, should be no form. But that does not work because for example, say, I
am in a room. All of you are in a room. Now, the room has a form and it is
limited. But if somebody destroys that room, then the formless heap will come
in. Will that formless heap be limited or unlimited? That will still be limited.
So, just by removing form, we do not actually become fr..., we do not create
unlimitedness. So, unlimited is created, unlimitedness is not a result of form
or formlessness. Actually, matter is always limited. And if you want
unlimitedness, it is not that we have to remove form. We have to go beyond
matter. Spirit is unlimited. And spirit can have form and still can be unlimited.
Krishna, He has a form, which is so, which seems to be so small and so finite
that you can fit on the lap of Yashoda Mayi. At the same time, Krishna, when He
opens His mouth, fro..., while being on the lap of Yashoda Mayi, He sees, oh,
all the universes are contained. I mean, that means Krishna's form is not
ordinary form. It is spiritual. And because His form is spiritual, it can seem
limited at the same time be unlimited. So, the impersonalists are right in
saying that material forms are false. But they are wrong when they say that all
forms are false.

So, what is the progression? See, the impersonalists, what is the reasoning? In
one sense, where they are right? See, material forms and varieties, they lead to
material desires. There are so many good looking objects over here. And there
are vari..., various objects. So, I enjoy one object, then I think I should
enjoy that object. And in this way, my desires keep multiplying, multiplying,
multiplying. And because of this, desires e..., end up in miseries. Because
desires cause bondage. So, now, if I have to go f..., from bondage, I do not
want the material miseries, so what the mayavadis are saying, I do not want
material miseries, so go backward. I should not have material desires. And why
do I have material desires? Because there are material forms and varieties that
attract me. Therefore, I say that material forms and varieties are false. Which
is true. But what the mayavadi says, all forms and varieties are false. But that
is not true. So, to become free from miseries, I have to become free from
desires. And to become free from desires, I have to give up all forms and
varieties. That is the Mayavada philosophy. The Vaishnava understanding is no.
To become free from miseries at the material level, I have to give up desires
the material level. To give desires at the material level, I have to gi..., give
up infatuation with forms and varieties that are material. But there are forms
and varieties that are transcendental. And the more we become attracted to them,
the easier it will be for us to become spiritually advanced and ultimately
liberated.

So, when the transitional is considered to be final, it becomes fatal. It
becomes leedle. It becomes very dangerous for the spiritual advancement. So, let
us see how it becomes dangerous now. So, now, Srila Prabhupada was very strongly
critical of modern Mayavada especially. So, Mayavada itself is a deviation from
the Vedic scriptures. It is not the real teaching. It is a deviant teaching. It
is a transitional teaching. When the transitional teaching is made into
conclusive teaching, it becomes deviant. So, Mayavada itself is a deviant
teaching. But modern Mayavada is an even more deviant teaching. Why is it
deviant? Let us look at it.

So, modern Mayavada is a dangerous hodgepodge khichadi. And its khichadi is made
of four things. The grains of impersonalism are drawn from the Upanishads. There
is some scriptural basis. But then khichadi, it is way delicious. So, sugar of
social service is taken from Christianity. Then, the spice of nationalism is
taken from the Indian Independence Movement. And then, it has become popular
because of the envy of Krishna, that has come from the hearts of the conditioned
souls. So, what does this mean? So, let us look at this. As I said, the
khichadi, the main con..., main content of it is grains. So, impersonalism has
a scriptural basis in the sense that impersonalism are transitional teaching. But
it is perverted, distorted, then it is, it becomes poisonous. Because of the
envy of Krishna that is there.

So, historically, after Ramanujacharya, Madhvacharya, Jiva Goswami and Baladeva
Vidyabhushana, they all refuted Mayavada very strongly. Then after that, there,
Mayavada had become very weak. So, the, actually, there was oliga...,
intellectual war between the Advaitas and Dvaitas, Vaishnavas and
Impersonalists. And the Vaishnavas, generation of generation of their fighting,
they strongly weakened and defeated Mayavada in many ways. But then, due to
centuries of foreign rule, the ksatriyas, who were there, had become weak. And
the brahmanical culture had also become corrupted. And because of brahmanas,
ksatriyas not being good, so the overall economic and social health of the
people, that had become very poor. In the sense that the lower caste were being
exploited. There was poverty. And there was weakness, various factors. Because
of which, the Europeans were able to conquer India. Now, poverty in India, in
the past, was never perpetual. Because people were based on agriculture. So,
poverty would come, but agriculture, regeneration would be there. Crops would
come. And things would become good. So, Europeans came to India. Not because
India was a poor country. Because India was a wealthy country. When I am talking
about poverty, I am talking in the culture and the philosophical understanding.
The culture was still there. But the culture was not just devotional. It had
become mixed with Mayavada. And it had become mixed with karma kanda also, in
the se..., with the smarter brahmana tendency, just religious ritual, rituals
were there without understanding substance. So, in such a sit..., setting, when
the Europeans came to India, and they col..., colonised India, now, they tried
to convert India to Christianity. And Christianity does not have much philosophy
actually. Because the teachings of Bible, if you see, they are basically moral
teachings. They are talking about moral. Then, there is not much positive
knowledge about God also. So, Christians, they started opening schools. They
started doing social service. And they started attracting people. And at that
time, they said you Hindus, what do you do? You know, you, yourself, you say
you are Hin..., the word Hindu was actually, is not there earlier so much. It
was popularised mainly by Christians and Muslims who came before that. They
said, you, you are yourself confused who is supreme. So, one person says one God
is supreme. Another person says another God is supreme. You are so confused. He
says, we believe in one God. And because we care for God, we care for His
children. And they started doing lot of social service. And they started
converting people, you know, through social service.

So, now, many Hindus felt that actually, no, why should just for the sake of
social service, because of getting some material benefits at a humanitarian
level, why should Hindus become Christian? So, we want to keep them Hindus. So,
this is, we should encourage Hindus to decide doing social service. So, I am
talking about the pre-independence Indian history, the bengali renaissance
period, roughly from its, when Bengal was take, the place where Britishers first
came to rule India and after that, from there, British rule spread everywhere.
And Be..., Bengal was the first place which was intellectually and culturally
very strongly influenced by British culture. And the Bengali intellectuals
responded to it. And that response of the Bengali intellectuals, that led to the
development of what is called as modern Hinduism. So, during this period, many
Hindus, many Bengali intellectuals, they started feeling that, Bengali spiritual
teachers, they felt that, you know, if we should al..., we Hindus should also do
social service. And to get Hindus to do social service, they started coming up
slo..., with slogans like mana seva, himadhava sevaya, daridra narayana seva.
So, poor people are there. We are serving poor people. It is actually real
service to Narayana. Now, serving poor people is good. It is a part of Vedic
culture. It is to be done by mainly the ksatriyas. Now, Prithu Maharaja when the
king, when the kingdom was filled with people who were starving because of
droughts. Prithu Maharaja made vigorous arrangement by which the people could be
fed. But serving poor people is not exactly devotional service. It can be
devotional service if it is done in proper consciousness and people are also
given spiritual wisdom and spiritual experience. But that does not m..., if it
is not spiritual, that does not mean it has to be neglected. It has to be done
by ksatriyas who are meant to take care of the material welfare of people. So,
what happened is impersonalists, they started saying that actually, you should
serve poor people. Because everybody is Narayana. Everybody is Brahma. And do not
go into the temple, and serve people over there in the temple. You just serve
the poor people who are the, the Brahma, the Brahman, the Narayan who is there in
the heart of the poor people. You serve them. And this, we have been
well-intentioned in terms of material intentions. Ok, you want to serve poor
people and you want to s..., people, you want to stop people from converting to
Christianity because of social service appeal. But then, the attack was very
malicious in the sense that actually, devotional service was greatly minimised.
There were impersonalist leaders who said that what is the use of watering
tulsi? You know, you water brinjal tree. You, at least, get something to eat.
You know, what is the use of studying Bhagavad Gita? You know, for us, for
children, they should play football. And they should eat meat biologically
become strong. And when they become strong, they will be able to do a lot of
things.

So, the attack on devotional culture that happened, that was very severe, quite
caustic at times. And the, the whole idea was that we have to work at a
humanitarian level. Just working at a humanitarian level was important, but that
is not the ultimate goal of life, humanitarian welfare. We will discuss about
social service a little bit later in our cla..., in a future class, but here,
the point is, we are focusing on impersonalism right now. So, impersonalism said
that, made the idea that social service is not only equivalent to devotional
service because there is Brahman in the temple, and there is Brahman in the poor
people. But they f..., made the further claim that to see Brahman in the hearts
of poor people is higher than to see Brahman as a temple deity. Social service
not only equivalent to devotional service, but social service is superior to
devotional service. And when, this made many people feel, yes, there is no need
to go to the temple and worship. And that was very very severe attack on the
foundation of the bhakti culture that was the essence of Vedic spirituality.
That is why Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur and Srila Prabhupada, they were
strongly responded and they criticised Mayavada. So, Srila Prabhupada writes in
this purport. These are the most dangerous rogues in society. There is
impersonalists who create this so..., they are shackled by the golden shackles
of so..., humanitarian work, social service. But they stay in illusion and they
keep others in illusion.

So, now, along with that, another factor that came in was the spipe of, spice of
nationalism. So, many of the spiritual teachers, they also felt that we want to
unite India. And we want to drive away the Britishers. So, how will we drive
away? You know, in India, religion is a very strong force. So, we can unite all
people religion, under the banner of religion. But the problem is that, in
India, in the name of religion, people are divided. Some people worship Kali.
Some people worship Ganesh. Some people worship Vishnu. Some people worship
Shiva. Some people worship Rama. Some people worship Krishna. They are all
different different Gods they are worshipping. So, how do we unite them? Some
people worship Kartikeya. Like that. So, then, they decided actually the best
way would be that make one thing the reality. What is that? The formless
Brahman. That is the reality. And say that, all Gods are just the representation
of that Brahman. So, whichever God you are worshipping, it does not matter.
Because ultimately, all of us are worshipping the same Brahman. They, they came
off with the idea that all the Gods, they are just means to the Brahman. So,
with this idea, they tried to unite India at a nationalistic level. So that they
could drive away the Britishers. So, in this whole process, the spiritual
aspect, the conclusion of the scriptures, that ultimately bhakti to a personal
God, to Bhagavan, Krishna, that:

        vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
        
That was just swept aside. So, there are many commentators who wrote
on the, commentaries on the Bhagavad Gita, but glorifying Krishna and being
Krishna as a center of the Bhagavad Gita, was not very politically expeditious
for them, or was not very convenient for them. So, they rejected Krishna and
they just made the Bhagavad Gi..., Krishna into a metaphor for some anonymous
genius to speak through. So, because of this, you know, multiprom attack by
modern Mayavada on the fo..., foundational bhakti of the Vedic culture. Our
Vaishnava acharyas have responded very strongly to it. So, we have to understand
the context and the seriousness of the problem. So what happens because of
modern Mayavada. This, people are m..., attracted much more to social service
and to nationalism because these are things which seem to be materially good.
They seem to be materially better than what other people are doing. And at the
same time, they also seem to be spiritual, especially if they are made to seem
to be spiritual. Then, what is really spiritual, that becomes lost for most
people.

So, now, along with that, there is always the envy of Krishna that is there in
the heart. So, for the soul to surrender to Krishna is glorious. Because through
that surrender, eternal love is attained. And eternal happiness is attained by
that. But Mayavada says there is no need to surrender because ultimately, you
are God. So, there are mayavadi teachers. Now, today's mayavadi is so cheap and
so trivialised. So, there is a, there is a mayavadi, who says, you know. There
are many teachers who come and say they are God. So, I have not come to tell you
that I am God. I have come to tell you that you are God. So, this is ultimate
flattering for the conditioned soul's ego. You, conditioned soul's ego loves it.
And the mayavadis do all kind of word jugglery. And they attract people. And
basically, because of the modern brand of Mayavada, spirituality has been just
reduced to a feel good nothingness. It is whatever makes me feel good, that is
spiritual. There is no need for rules. There is no need for commitments. Just
feel. Just experience. You are that light. You are the Brahman. You are God.

So, let us look at what happens and talk about two a.., two disastrous
consequences of Mayavada. So, first is, if there is no God to surrender to, no
God to devote to, then Mayavada deprives soul of the natural higher taste of
bhakti. Why? Because ultimately, I am God. So, if I am myself God, how can I
devote myself to God? If I cannot devote myself to God, I do not get the higher
taste of devotion. If I do not get the higher taste of devotion, then the c...,
whole concept of higher happiness remains a very abstract reality. It is not
allude experience. And naturally, when I do not get the higher happiness. See, I
am practicing religion. In fact, I may claim that to think that I am Brahman is
the ultimate conclusion of the Vedic scripture. That is the highest reality. So,
I claim that I am having, understanding of the highest reality. But I get very
little higher happiness by that. So, when I do not get the higher happiness,
then I think that I am being religious, but at the same time, because of not
getting spiritual happiness, I am attracted towards lower pleasures. And then
what happens is if I look at spiritual reality. Spiritual reality does not seem
very attractive. What do I do when I go back to the spiritual world? Oh, you just
exist. Shanti. Shanti. Shanti. Just exist. Exist for all of eternity. What do I
do? Oh, the only thing to do is that there is nothing to do. The only thing to
talk is that there is nothing to talk. The only thing to think is that there is
nothing to think. So, what is left then?

So, as almost Jayadvaita Maharaja says that the mayavadis, their names end with
anand, and the anand in their life ends with their name. So, what happens is
that, actually, the mayavadis, they may be respected as nationalist leaders, as,
and social leaders, and their contributions at that level, if they have made some
contributions, that can be appreciated that level. But when that is made into
spiritual, and when that is made into not just spiritual, but the conclusion of
spirituality, then it is a very serious misleading that happens. So, people
think that they are spiritual, but in the name of being spiritual, they are
getting no spiritual higher taste. And that is why they get gravitated down to
lower levels of materialism only.

So, the Prabhupada writes right in the first Canto of Bhagavatam itself, in one
of the first purports, the first chapter. He says, Mayavada makes material life
appear more attractive than spiritual life. How is that? Because spiritual life,
the ultimate conclusion is to merge in Brahman. And then what do you do after
merging in Brahman? Just exist. Exist. Exist. Exist. And that is not very
exciting. Is it? It is like, see, i..., it, it is not at all an appealing
proposal. And that is why temporarily out of frustration with material life,
people may be attracted to spirituality. But then ultimately, because there is
no positive vision of spirituality, people come back to material life. So, it is
like, if I am very sick. And if I have got some disease, some, say, I got
arthritis or some other bone pro..., problem because of which, every time I
move, AAA. I move my hand. I feel pain. I cough. AAA. I feel pain. I just breath
heavily. I belch. I feel pain. So, every moment causes me pain. So, at that
time, I feel, if I just stop moving. I will become free from pain. All that I
want is to stop moving. Now, if I stop moving, first of all to stop moving is
very difficult. But even if I stop moving, I may become free from pain. But will
that be the perfection of my life? No. My goal in life is not just to become
pain free. It is to become joyful. And just stopping motion and thereby becoming
free from pain is not the goal of my life. Although, when I am having pain,
which is caused by motion, I may feel that I want to become free from pain.

So, Mayavada is like that. Material activities and material desires cause
entanglement. So, go beyond them. But then when I go beyond them, what do I do
beyond them? There is nothing beyond. So, I go towards that impersonal
realisation. But impersonal realisation is not attractive. And then what
happens? Because I do not know anything positively attractive in the spiritual
realm, so I come back to material life. And this is the paradox that we see in
India. In India, many people are religious. But the same time, people are
materialistic. And the people are so materialistic. And at the same time, they
claim to be very religious. Why is that? Because their religion is not giving
them a higher spiritual taste. And that is why they are being dragged down to
the material taste. So, there are souls. There are all kinds of different
mayavadis who make all sorts of crazy claims.

There is one mayavadi who claimed that, actually, you know, he says, he says in
a public lecture, he says, you know. One time, I was in London. And I was
smoking cigarette in London. So, one man and came. He says, you are a sadhu. How
can you smoke cigarette? That is bad. What is good? What is bad? Ultimately,
everything is illusion. And what is good and bad is all determined by the mind
only. So, if your mind is strong, then nothing is bad. Everything is good. And
if your mind is weak, nothing is good. Everything is bad. Well, it does not
matter whether mind is weak or strong. When death comes, death is going to be
painful for everyone. If I am attached to the body, it is going to be painful.
And just by thinking that everything is good or bad, that is not going to change
my attachment to the body. We need a process of purification. And without the
process of purification, just imagining that I am God is not going to do any
good to anyone. So, the original Mayavada which is taught by Shankaracharya.
That at least taught serious regulative principles. And that did not mixed
populism in the name of nationalism or humanitarianism with Mayavada. But
today's Mayavada mixes everything into a dangerous khichadi. And it deludes
people away from the essence of the Vedic scriptures. That is the pure
devotional service to Lord Krishna. So, it was Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur
and Srila Prabhupada who has strongly countered this. And then they established
the conclusion of personalism, of pure devotion. So, when Srila Prabhupada came
to India, it took some time for In..., because most Indians were steep in
Mayavada. But when they saw people from all over the world have become devotees
and then Srila Prabhupada had his books, in which he strongly, and logically,
and scripturally countered Mayavada. Now, a bhakti resurgence was happening. And
the bhakti resurgence that Srila Prabhupada has done is so remarkable. That
actually now, so much, so many people all over the world have built temples and
they have, they are worshipping deities, and in the last, say, fifty to hundred
years, fifty years, you know, more temples have been built by de..., by people
in general than have been built in the last three hundred, four hundred years.
Because there has been a resurgence of bhakti. That has happened because of,
primarily because of the serious vigorous outreach of Srila Prabhupada. And
deities have been worshipping. And the personal form has been understood. So:

        nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe

Srila Prabhupada came to free the western countries and the westernised
countries, which was India also, from impersonalism and voidism.

So, to summarise, we discussed about how the, is impersonalism there in the
scripture? It is there. But it is transitional. It is not co..., final. To take
people from material form towards spiritual form. In-between they are told that
actually, go away, do not, do not be attracted to the forms. Do not be attracted
to personality, relationships. Because that is meant, we say that, to get people
detached from material form, material relationships.

So, that is transitional. But modern Mayavada, what it did is, wh..., whatever
higher teachings of bhakti were there, sorry, not modern Mayavada, the Mayavada
which was taught by Advaitas, what it did was, whatever higher teachings of
bhakti were there, they said they were lower by calling all of them as
Vyavaharika teachings.

And then when logical problems were there, they used the subterfuge, the
excuse of "anirvachaniya" to escape those subterfuge, to escape those logical
problems.

And then we discussed about how there is a historical masterplan for this.
Buddha came and taught Sunya, Sunya. Shankara came and taught Advaita.
Madhvacharya came and taught Dvaita. And Caitanya Mahaprabhu came and taught
Achintya Bheda Abheda, ecstatic two.

So, if only one part of the whole progression is made the conclusion, then it is
like the part of the movie where the hero is getting beaten. And that is shown
as climax. It gives a wrong picture. So, we have to go through the whole
progression. And then we get the complete understanding.

So then we discussed about how, mo..., mo..., modern Mayavada especially,
Mayavada itself is a deviation from Vedic scriptures. And modern Mayavada is a
greater deviation. Because modern Mayavada, it is like a dangerous hodgepodge
khichadi with grains of impersonalism from the Vedic scriptures, with the spice
of nationalism from the Indian Independence Movement which wanted to unite
India, which so..., social, the sugar of social service from the, from the
Christianity, and envy for Krishna from the hearts of the conditioned souls.

Through all this, it has actually made material life appear more attractive than
spiritual life. And because of that, because people do not get the higher taste
of bhakti. Because they think I am Bhagavan. So, how can I worship Bhagavan?
What is the need to worship Bhagavan? So, because, material life appears more
attractive, so people in, while claiming to be religious, spiritual, i..., 
impersonalistic, they become more materialistic than they were. They become more
and more materialistic. And this way, they thrust. They are trapped in material
existence. That is why the Sri Isopanisad verse says:

        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u sambhūtyām ratāḥ

Those are things that are in so called. They are doing worship of so called
Absolute. They are worshipping themselves imagining that they are God. They will
go into deeper darkness.

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande haribol. Hare Krishna.
