Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Ma88BWipAo
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=-Ma88BWipAo&redir_token=uPgeY1BK3AlBOjjkysVP65_ltEh8MTU0MDAyMTg2OEAxNTM5OTM1NDY4&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_006_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_04_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

So, today, we begin with the second section of the Isopanisad, which talks about
how we can know the Ishvara.

So before we move forward with the fourth mantra, let us look at the Isopanisad
overview once again.

The first section which we completed, discussed, live in harmony with Ishvara.
That was invocation through mantra three. And the last mantra was if we do not
live in harmony with the Ishvara, then we will suffer in this life and the next.

So if we want to live in harmony with the Ishvara, we need to know who the
Ishvara is. So how can we know about the Ishvara? That is the second section.
That is four to eight is, the Ishvara can be understood by spiritual vision. So
this is the section that we will discuss. I want to obey the Ishvara, live in
harmony with the Ishvara. But how can I understand him so that I can feel
inspired to harmonise with him? That will be through spiritual vision.

So we will discuss about spiritual vision in this section. Now, let us look at
the section more closely. So, "Understand Ishvara by spiritual vision", that is
the section title.

Within that, the first two mantras, four and five, talk about "Ishvara is
inconceivable to our normal intelligence". So in these three (?, two?) mantras,
the Ishvara's attributes will be described in terms that seem contradictory.

Then, in the next subsection within this, mantra six to seven, it is said that
ok, how do I make sense of these contradictory ideas? It be... First develop
spiritual vision towards material things, by seeing wordly things, events and
people with equanimity. Do not get caught up with the dualities of this world.

So when we see the spiritual here in the material, then we can see the spiritual
beyond the material. So that is the last section. So first we learn to see
things of this world spiritually with an equal vision and then we look beyond
this world, and when that vision is focused on the Ishvara, then we will be able
to understand that Ishvara.

So we will begin with the fourth mantra. Let us look at the sanskrit mantra
first:

        anejad ekaṁ manaso javīyo
        nainad devā āpnuvan pūrvam arṣat
        tad dhāvato 'nyān atyeti tiṣṭhat
        tasminn apo mātariśvā dadhāti

So, "anejad ekaṁ", that one Lord is situated in one place, "anejad ekaṁ", is
fixed in one place, at the same time, "manaso javīyo", he moves faster than the
wind. Now, actually that, what that is, there is no pronoun used in a specific
sense to describe. That Absolute Truth, that whatever it is, which is a subject
of the Ishvara is described, that Absolute Truth is situated in one place, and
yet that Absolute Truth is swifter than the mind in terms of its movements.

"nainad devā āpnuvan pūrvam arṣat", so none of the devatas can actually approach
that Lord. He is so far away that nobody can approach him.

"tad dhāvato 'nyān atyeti tiṣṭhat", that, when people try to run to catch him,
he leaves all of them far behind.

"tasminn apo mātariśvā dadhāti", and that Lord is actually the master of those
who provide "apo" water, and the various necessities of this world. He is the
master of all of them. So, here the attributes of that Lord are described in the
sense that he is fixed, but he is faster than everyone else, faster than the
devatas, faster than even the mind. And he is the controller of all those who
control the big big elements, like rain and wind in this world.

So let us look at Prabhupada's translation. Although fixed in His abode, the
Personality of Godhead is swifter than the mind, "anejad ekaṁ manaso javīyo",
although fixed in His abode, "anejad ekaṁ", the Personality of Godhead is
swifter than the mind, that is "manaso javīyo", and "tad dhāvato 'nyān atyeti
tiṣṭhat" can overcome all others running, "nainad devā āpnuvan pūrvam arṣat",
that is, the powerful demigods cannot approach him. And although in one place,
that is the beginning, "anejad ekaṁ", that is Prabhupada repeating it here, He
controls those who supply the air and rain. "tasminn apo mātariśvā dadhāti", so
what is the point in saying that? He is controlling those who supply the air and
rain. You see, air is everywhere, rain also is spread everywhere. And the Lord
is in one place, but in one place, he controls everything. So and thus, he
surpasses all in excellence.

So this is the mantra which describes the Absolute Truth in terms that are
mysterious. So now, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport. So the purport
has six, seven paragraphs, which we can divide into five broad sections.

So AT refers to the Absolute Truth. So the first point that Srila Prabhupada
makes is the Absolute Truth cannot be understood by speculation. Then, he says
ok, then how do we understand the Absolute Truth? It is through revelation, not
through speculation, but through revelation. That can help us understand God and
his energies.

And then what is the understanding that we get? That those energies are
non-different, yet different from him. And then we... how is it possible, how is
it, different and non-different? That does not make sense logically, he says.

Then the point comes, as we are limited, we can understand the unlimited only
through revelation. We cannot understand it through logical inference.

And then the concluding part is, ok, then how do we understand? Through
revelation. But what do we have to do? You have to play your part and you will
be given understanding. This is harmonising with the Absolute Truth through
devotional service.

So let us look at each of these sections now.

The Absolute Truth cannot be understood by speculation. So why can the Absolute
Truth not be understood by speculation? Because speculation is always uncertain.
If I speculate about that which I do not know. Suppose I am sitting in this room
and I hear a noise from outside. Now, how can I know what the source of the
noise is? It might be somebody falling down. It might be somebody watching a
movie, in which something has fallen down. It might be anything. So,
speculation, because there is no certainty in it, we always stay unsure. Now,
some people say that actually the Absolute Truth, there is no certain,
conclusive way to know him. So the only thing we can know is that actually
whatever we know is uncertain. So that is fine in principle if there were no
certain way for us to know him.

But there is. So one extreme is, oh, we can never know that Absolute Truth, so
whatever we know is uncertain. The other approach is the approach of some
religions. In their religious traditions, there is no positive knowledge about
God given. So, for example, in the Abrahamic religions, the Abrahamic religions
refers to Christianity, Islam and Judaism. So all these three religions accepts
Abraham as one of their prominent prophets. That is why they are called by the
common reference as Abrahamic religions. Now in these Abrahamic religions, there
is no positive description about God. So what does God look like? What does
Jehova, or Allah, or Christ, what does he look like? There is not much
described. It is indicated that he has a face, he laughts, his eyes are shining,
but beyond that, not much is described.

So they say that God is so great that we cannot know God. So that idea is based
on the notion that there is certain incomprehension. That what is certain is we
cannot know God wholly. And people have that idea, we are finite, God is
infinite, so we can never know God. But it is true that, we are finite, and God
is infinite, so we cannot know God by our efforts. But by his will, we can know
him. So how does it work? So, if God is truly infinite, if God is truly
omnipotent, then he can do anything. And doing anything includes giving the
finite the ability to understand the infinite.

So the finite cannot understand the infinite by his own effort. But when the
infinite desires to reveal himself to the finite, then the infinite has that
power. If, you see, the infinite does not have that power, then that means the
infinite is not truly infinite. Infinite is limited then. Infinite becomes
finite because infinite cannot do certain things.

So how, but gradual revelation through increasing devotional dedication. So the
way we understand God is gradually our understanding increases more and more.
Gradual revelation through increasing devotional dedication. That means, the
more we surrender to Krishna, the more we turn towards Krishna, the more we
start understanding him through increasing devotional dedication.

So, how does this work? When we talk about the sunrise in the morning. Now, in
the morning, when the sun is rising, the sunrise is gradual, slowly, slowly,
slowly, slowly, slowly, the sun is rising, rising, rising, but our realisation,
that the Sun has risen is sudden. Oh, it is morning now. It is dawn now, it is
morning. So in the morning, when we are doing our chanting, and we are closing
our eyes, opening our eyes sometimes, trying to concentrate, and we see the
sunrising in the distance, and suddenly, we oh, the sun has risen. So now, what
has actually happened is, the sunrise is gradual, it is gradual, gradual,
gradual, but our realisation of the Sun has risen, that is sudden.

Similarly, every day that we are practicing devotional service, every day that
we are becoming committed, dedicated to Krishna, we are getting purified, we are
getting illumined. The Krishna Sun is rising in our heart. But our realisation,
oh yes, now I believe in Krishna. I love Krishna. I want to offer my life to
Krishna. That realisation is sudden, it happens at one moment. Although the
background for that realisation has been created gradually, there are moments,
flashes of inspiration that come to us at certain times, but those flashes do
not come abruptly or arbitrarily. There is a background that has been created.

So that way, revelation works by giving us the opportunity to understand the
infinite by grace of the infinite. We cannot understand the infinite by our own
efforts. Now when we talk about understanding the infinite, what does it mean?
So, the first point is that God is not alone. God has his energies. And Srila
Prabhupada gives the example in the purport that fire is always connected with
heat and light. Wheverever there is fire, there will be heat and there will be
light.

At the same time, heat and light, they are different. Now heat is something
which we perceive with our skin, light is something which we perceive with our
eyes. And yet, we cannot really analytically separate. Here there is heat, here
there is light, here there is fire. They are organic whole. They are organic
whole, and still, they have also difference.

So in thinking, there are two categories of thinking, one is called as analysis
and the other is called as synthesis. Analysis means to break things down into
their parts, so when we take, for example, we take a computer and then we
analyse it, ok, here there is the CPU, here there is the keyboard, here there is
the mouse, here there is the power chord, so like that, there is analysis. So
analysis is for understanding, but then when the computer is to work, it is not
that the keyboard will work here, and the monitor will work there. They all have
to come together.

So analysis is for understanding. The synthesis is for working. When we are, the
work has to be done, things are in synthesis. So in real life, analysis alone
does not work. There is synthetic understanding that happens. Synthetic working
that happens.

Another example to understand this is, say, when we talk about grammar. When a
small child learns a language, at that time, how does the child learn the
language? The child hears the mother speaking, the father speaking, maybe the
brother, sister, and other acquaintances speaking, the child starts speaking.
Now when the child is learning the first few words, when the child is, pappa,
mamma, first the parents tell. Oh, pappa is a noun, and then big pappa, big is
an adjective. Now, if you start telling the child adjective and noun, the child
may just get ... (?, 13:59), shut up. ... (?, 14:01). What is a noun? What is
an adjective? What is a pronoun?

So when the child naturally learns a language, how does the child learn the
language? It is not by analysis, it is by synthesis. What does synthesis mean?
The child learns. Mamma, I want water. So, the child hears the mother speaks
this, and the child speaks this. So the child understands the language through
functioning. And then later on, when the child goes to school, mamma, I want
water. So, mamma is a noun. I is a pronoun. Want is a verb. Water is a noun. So
this is something which comes later. So normally speaking, when there is
working, the working happens through synthesis.

So when a child naturally learns language, it is through synthesis. The language
is a working tool for communication and while using the working tool for
communication, the child naturally learns the language also. But say, if I
decide to learn German. Now I do not speak German. Nobody around me speaks
German. And what do I do? I take a German text book. Ok, in German, these are
the nouns. In German, these are the pronouns. These are the verbs. Now I try to
see how sentences made. So this is the analytical way.

So normally speaking, when we learn a language, we learn it through synthesis
primarily. And later on, for more systematic understanding, we may use analysis.
That way, Krishna Consciousness is learnt, not primarily through analysis, it is
through synthesis. That means, when we come in the association of devotees and
we find devotees are kind, devotees are loving, devotees are devoted, committed
to Krishna, then we see the culture of Krishna Consciousness. That attracts us.
For us, Krishna Consciousness attracts, not just because of its theoretical
propositions, but because of its living demonstrations. We see devotees living
in an exemplary way and that is what attracts us. So there we see Krishna
Consciousness in synthesis.

Then, we are, why are devotees so kind? Oh, then we understand, ok, because they
understand they are not the body, they are the soul, because they understand we
should live in goodness, because they understand that as souls, we are all parts
of Krishna, so we are all related as a family, or because they want other souls
also to come to Krishna, that is why they behave well. That may be so many
reasons. But first we see the result, then we look at the reasons.

So the point which I am making over here is, there is the analythical mode of
thinking, and there is a synthetical mode of thinking. So in real life, when
things are working, whether it is the working of a machine, the working of a
language, or the working of relationships. It is the synthesis that makes things
work. And then later on, when we understand: why do things work like this? Why
does the computer work so well? When I type it, everything comes on the screen
properly. Oh, ok, there is a keyboard, then the input goes from there the CPU,
and on the CPU, it comes on the monitor, and there is a power chord. Power chord
makes sure that everything is working.

So analysis, synthesis, both are important. Synthesis makes things work.
Analysis helps us to understand how things work. So now Srila Prabhupada uses
this point of analysis in the purport and he says that, the Vishnupurana, his
potencies are compared to heat and light that emanate from the Sun from a fire.
"Although situated in one place, a fire can distribute its light and heat for
some distance; similarly, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, although fixed in
his transcendental abode, can diffuse different energies everywhere.". So the
Supreme Lord is one unit, one Absolute Truth, and he has energies. And those
energies are distributed everywhere.

Now, let us move forward, to understand, to apply this concept of analysis and
synthesis now. So how do we apply to the Lord? So, the example is given in
Indian philosophy and our Goswamis also quote this. See, fire burns, if I make
the statement. So, now, actually, in a sense, fire is that which burns. And
burning is that what happens when fire is there. So fire and burns, they are, in
one sense, together. Now, if I say there is a fire, but if a fire does not burn,
that seems very odd. If I see something is burning, naturally, I want to see
where the fire is coming from there. So, where is the fire that is causing this
burning? So the fire and burning are two things, naturally related to each
other. But although they are related, are they entirely the same?

Now, fire burns. If they were entirely the same, then there would be no need to
say fire burns. I could just say fire. But when I want to tell the child, I want
to say fire, fire burns. So then I will understand. What does that mean? That
the fire is in this particular sense the source of energy and the burning is the
action of that energy. It is the way things act. Similarly, the Absolute Truth
is one complete perfect being. The Absolute Truth, and the Absolute Truth's
energies, material energy and spiritual energy. So are the energies of the Lord
same or different? They are same and different. So is burning the same as fire
or different from fire? It is same and it is different. It is same in the sense
that there is no meaning to fire without burning. At the same time, burning is a
property of fire. It is different also.

So like that, the Lord and his energies are same as well as different. So, Srila
Prabhupada explains this point that the energies of the Lord are different. Now
let us look further point now.

As we are limited, we can understand the unlimited only through his revelation.
We discussed this point briefly. But let us see this elaborately now, once
again. Be a part, be not apart. What does this mean? Be a part, we have to be a
part of Krishna's plan. We have to be a part in the whole that is the Supreme
Lord. Be not apart, that means do not try to live separate from Krishna. When we
try to live separate from Krishna, that causes us suffering. So 15.7, in the
Bhagavad Gita, says:

        mamaivamso jiva-loke
        jiva-bhutah sanatanah
        manah-sasthanindriyani
        prakrti-sthani karsati

So Krishna says there that "mamaivamso jiva-loke", that all living beings are my
parts and parcels, so they are my parts, be a part, "jiva-bhutah sanatanah", are
eternally my parts and parcels, but when they do not act as a part,
"manah-sasthanindriyani", then they come under the control of mind and senses,
"prakrti-sthani karsati", "karsati" means there is friction, it is constant
friction. When the soul has limited power, but the mind and senses have
unlimited desires. And the soul gets tired trying to fulfill the desires of the
mind and senses. That is "karsati", "karsati".

So what does this mean "be a part"? Our material talents come from God, and are
best used to glorify God - then they will bring us the greatest happiness and
will do the best service for others. So, some, different people have different
ideas. Basically, there are the materialists, there are impersonalists and there
are devotees. So the materialists believe that the material world is the only
thing that exists, the only thing that matters, and they want to enjoy over
here, and they think as jinajaha maranahaja eskesava or janapa. So they think we
have to live here, we have to die here. There is nothing beyond this world. So
that is the materialistic idea. There is no world beyond this world.

Then, the other idea is the impersonalist idea. The impersonalist idea is that
everything in this world is false. That everything in this world is meaningless.
So, we just have to get beyond this illusion and go to the reality of Brahman,
which is just pure consciousness.

And the devotees understand that this world is real, and Krishna's world is also
real, but this world is temporary, that world is eternal. And this world is a
means to go to that world. So, now, let us try to understand this in terms of
practical application. Practical application means that when we talk about the
materialist, they think that, ok, I have, suppose, somebody has the talent of
singing, and that person will just sing songs about everything of this world.
Now, about, say, the attraction between male and female in this world, and by
that attraction, that person will become captivated. And we will try to
captivate others. And basically, that person by singing mundane songs, will
expand illusion. The better, the sweeter the voice of that person, the more
expert the singer, the greater the illusion that will result.

So that person has talents, and that person is using those talents, but the use
of those talents, is actually causing greater bondage for that person as well as
for others. Because, when that person, say, glorifies mundane love, more and
more people can attract to that love, and more and more people get trapped in
the illusion. So using our material talents, only for material purposes, will,
in many cases, expand our material bondage. We will only increase our illusion.

So, on the other hand, the impersonalists say, oh, we are singing, what is the
singing? Actually, your voice is illusion, the subject that you are singing
about is illusion, and you are in illusion. Ultimately, the only thing that
exists is Brahman. Even you do not exist. Your sense of human (?, 24:49) is
false. Then what do I do with my talents? Just forget them. Of course, there are
many different brands of impersonalism. But the broad idea is, they think this
world is illusion, and we just have to go beyond this world. So the material
talents are really not of much use.

Now beyond that is the idea of devotion. In devotion, we understand, if somebody
has singing ability, singing ability is not false. Krishna says in the Bhagavad
Gita, paurusam rusu, he says that it is I am the ability in human beings.

        raso 'ham apsu kaunteya
        prabhasmi sasi-suryayoh
        pranavah sarva-vedesu
        sabdah khe paurusam nrsu

Krishna says in 7.8, that it is a list of various things of which he is the
essence. I am the taste of water. I am the light of the heat and sun. "pranavah
sarva-vedesu", I am the omkar in the Vedas, "sabdah khe", I am sound in ether,
and "paurusam nrsu", I am ability in human beings. So, actually speaking,
Krishna is the ability in people. So if a person has singing ability, that
ability is coming from Krishna. But the question is, is the ability coming from
Krishna, but is it taking that person to Krishna or is it taking that person
away from Krishna? So our abilities are God given. But are they taking us
towards God or are they taking us away from God? That is the free will that we
have.

So bhakti does not deny the fact that there are talents, there are abilities,
but it says that they should be used to take us towards Krishna. Srila
Prabhupada had such an expansive vision of Krishna Consciousness that he said,
even science should be used to glorify God. So in 1.5.22, in the Srimad
Bhagavatam:

        idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā
        sviṣṭasya sūktasya ca buddhi-dattayoḥ
        avicyuto 'rthaḥ kavibhir nirūpito
        yad-uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam

So there, it is described that whatever branches of knowledge are out there, the
ultimate perfection is, "yad-uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam", the ultimate purpose
is to glorify the Supreme Lord. Srila Prabhupada writes in his purport, if a
person is a scientist, that person should use science to demonstrate the
existence of God and to glorify God.

So, in this way, what the bhakti philosophy tells us is that we should use all
our talents to glorify Krishna. And when we glorify Krishna in this way, then
that brings the greatest good for us and the greatest good for others. So, Srila
Prabhupada writes in the purport that all of us have initiatives. So now what
are we talking about over here? The thought flow that was going on in this verse
was that we can understand God through revelation. But when will God reveal
himself? When we serve him. And how do we serve him? By the talents that God has
given us. So Prabhupada writes over here: "Every part and parcel of the complete
whole is endowed with some particular energy to act according to the Lord's
will.".

So we have energies, but what is the purpose of those energies? To act according
to his will. So be a part.

And then, Prabhupada uses the same phrase over here: "Thus from the very
beginning Sri Isopanisad warns us to be very careful to play the part designated
for us by the Lord.".

So how do we know what is part for us that is made by, given by the Lord? That
earlier happened through varnashram. So, now, Srila Prabhupada says that
actually speaking, the essence of varnashram was to help people live in harmony
with God. It was not discrimination. It was cooperation. Srila Prabhupada says
varana is for the body, ashram is for the soul, varanaashram. Varana means the
brahman, ksatriya, vaisya, sudra, that is basically the arrangement by which
people's bodily needs can be taken care of. And brahmacari, grihasta,
vanaprashta, sannyasi ashram, that is the means by which people can make
spiritual advancement. So now the essence of this, so a system of social and
spiritual division is that different people have different talents, different
natures, and they can be most productively engaged according to their natures.

So the varnashram recognises people's individuality, and engages them according
to their individuality. So at one time in the history of our movement, book
distribution was taking off in a big way, and there were some devotees who were
expert book distributors. So, these expert book distributors were told by Srila
Prabhupada that that he was very pleased with them, and he wanted them to
distribute more and more books, and to train other devotees also to distribute
books. So then they came up with an idea and they approached Srila Prabhupada,
and they said that, Prabhupada, we have learnt how to convince people to take
books. Now, if you make certain, say certain sentences, if you have certain
facial expressions, if you make certain gestures, and we talk in certain ways,
then that makes people to take books.

Now can we go to temple, to temple, to temple, and tell devotees that this is
the way you should speak, this is the way you should convince people? When they
heard, when they spoke this, Srila Prabhupada became very grave, and then Srila
Prabhupada said, he said, devotional service, voluntary and spontaneous. When
the soul feels inspired to serve Krishna, then devotional service is performed.
So, Srila Prabhupada says, do not tell people what to say. Basically,
essentially what Srila Prabbhupada told them is inspire them to serve Krishna
and they will find their own inspired way to serve Krishna.

So individual, voluntary and spontaneous. Let us look at what this means. Say,
you are unique. The person next to you is also unique. I am unique. All of you,
all of us are unique, just like everyone one. What does this mean? Now this
uniqueness, that there is no one in all of creation like us. Is this meant to
make us proud? No, this is just a fact of nature. All of us are different. Is
this uniqueness material? That means because of my conditionings, I am in a
particular way, because of your conditionings, you are in a particular way. We
could say like that, but actually the bhakti scriptures describe that even in
the spiritual world, everyone is unique. Every soul is different from every
other soul. And every soul has a unique set of characteristics, and these and
those unique characteristics have a unique relationship with Krishna.

So in this way, actually speaking, individuality is ingrained in our fabric,
whether we want to say material fabric, or spiritual fabric. Individuality is
ingrained within us. Every one of us is individual. And that individuality
cannot be negated or rejected. It has to be dovetailed. So how do we dovetail
it? We individually find out what is the best to serve Krishna. Then it is
voluntarily. No one can force anyone else to serve Krishna. To some extent,
different people can be pushed. Different people can be inspired. Srila
Prabhupada would be asked how much we can push a person. Somebody is not
chanting, somebody wants, somebody is told by others, please chant, please chant
a few rounds, please do this, please do that.

How much can we push a person? Srila Prabhupada would use the example that if a
person is, wants to drive a car, and the person sits in the driver seat, puts on
the key ignition, and then starts, and the car does not move. So sometimes, the
car just needs a push. There are some two to three people come from behind and
start pushing the car, push, push, push, and person from inside also moves the
steering wheels and switching the ignition key and zup, the car starts moooo,
and starts moving. Uff.

So initially, when the car is not moving to give it some initial propulsion,
some starting momentum, other people come and help. But imagine that this person
is sitting inside the car, and people come and start pushing from inside, but
inside this person sits and goes to sleep. Then what will happen?  People say,
why should we push? Or worse still, if that person, are people pushing from
outside the car, and inside this person is pushing the break. If you do not want
to move, how long can we keep pushing? So similarly, you know, we are like
inside this body. We are the driver. The car is like the body.

Krishna says in 18.16 in the Bhagavad Gita that the body is like a vehicle,
yantra. So because of our psychophysical, that means bodily and mental
conditioning, we may have some difficulty in starting off in Krishna
Consciousness. So other devotees will come and help us, and then they will say,
oh Prabhu, please do this, please do this, now if you do this, this is eternal,
this is going to be so beneficial, and if we are also trying to serve Krishna,
that is also helping us, then our spiritual life will take off over a period of
time.

But if we show no interest, like this person inside the car goes off to sleep,
and others will stop pushing. So if we show no interest, then devotees will also
say, ok, maybe we have to wait for some more time, in the future, he will take
interest. Or if we show active opposition, inside we press the break, then what
will happen? And say, devotees are telling me, telling us to practice spiritual
life, and we are telling them to practice material life. And there is constant
opposition, devotees will say, ok, you are where you are, we are where are, they
will find out somebody else who is more interested.

So ultimately, devotional service is voluntary. We can inspire others, but we
cannot force others. So recognising that it is voluntary, it actually often
frees us from the anxiety that comes when we try to control others. When we want
others to do something, and they are not ready to do it, and we realise that it
is voluntary, then, then we have to work through actually take care of things.
So devotional service is voluntary.

And then it is spontaneous. So spontaneous means that actually speaking, it is
something which I have to perform based on my inclination, based on my
inspiration. So only when I have that inspiration, then I will be able to
perform devotional service. So therefore, devotional service is individual,
voluntary and spontaneous. So recognising this is extremely important and
sometimes devotees feel if I just start chanting Hare Krishna, and do everything
that so many other devotees are doing, will I lose my individuality? No, not
all. We will all actually develop our spiritual individuality.

See, sometimes, this is one of the main concerns that people have. You know if
everybody wears the same dhoti, kurta, if everybody takes the same, chants the
same mantra, everybody reads the same books, everybody eats the same, similar,
prasadam, then what will happen to my individuality? Actually, our real
individuality is not based on our externals. Our real individuality is based on
our internals. And internally, every one of us is unique.

So it is like if a person is, if a person is sick, the person has to take
treatment. Now imagine that, there are fifty people who are sick, now all the
fifty people, if they are sick with the same disease or similar disease, they
will be given the similar treatment. Now, all of them are taking the same
medicines, but when they recover, all of them will be dictint unique
individuals, and they will have their own personalities, their own likes and
dislikes, and they will live life in their own individual way.

Similarly, devotional service, the practices of devotional service are like the
treatment. They are not going to curb or suppress our individuality. The
treatment basically is used to cure the diseased side within us, and after that,
the healthy individuality will surface, once we have becomed purified.

So as sadhakas, bhakti does not reject our invidiuality, it sublimates our
individuality. However we are right now, bhakti encourages us to start
practicing devotional service and to start getting elevated.

So, the whole idea of varnashram is from our place, at our pace, join the race.
From our place, wherever I am in varnashram, at our pace, some people may be
very serious about spiritual life, some people may not be so serious about
spiritual life, join the race, ultimately, it is the race that we want to go
back to Krishna. Different people may want to, some people want to take the race
as a sprint, some people may want to take it as a jog, some people may want to
take it as a walk. Different people will go at different paces. But we all want
to go towards Krishna, at least those who are wanting to practice spiritual
life.

So bhakti accommodates it. All of us have our energy and we use that energy for
the service of Krishna. So Prabhupada is emphasizing individual, voluntary,
spontaneous. That means from our place, wherever we are right now, we are all
invidiuals, based on our past choices, conditionings, whatever, we are at our
place. From our place, at our pace. So not everybody can practice spiritual life
at the same level of seriousness. Different people have different natures. So at
our pace we can practice. Some people will be brahmacari, some people will be
grihastas, so within grihastas, some people will be more serious grihastas, some
people will be less serious grihastas.

Now everybody, if they are accepting Krishna as the Supreme Lord, and they are
trying to serve Krishna, then they are making spiritual advancement, and
gradually everybody will become more and more serious as they get taste. But
what Srila Prabhupada is emphasizing here is that we should live within the
shelter of the Lord. We live, we do our part within his plan. Be in harmony with
him, not in disharmony with him. And then join the race, from our place at our
pace join the race.

So we will discuss about this later, ok, more elaborately, but here the point
is, everybody can be accommodated in devotional service. And Srila Prabhupada
says, our initiative is meant to be cooperating with Krishna's overall
initiative and then things will work out wonderfully.

So this world is like a hospital, as I said, and then the doctor has a plan
about how the patients are to be cured. So what are the patients to do? The
patients are to cooperate with the doctor. Similarly, when we cooperate with
Krishna, Krishna cures us in the fastest possible way. And what is the
cooperation? The patient's cooperation is often passive, just lay down and rest,
and take some medicines. But a devotee's cooperation is not like that. Devotee
is actively engaged in Krishna's service.

But the point is the devotee works to please Krishna, to serve Krishna. And in
that way, the devotee gets cured. So Srila Prabhupada would often emphasize this
point of the individuality of a person. So once Srila Prabhupada was in London,
and at the time, the devotees from various parts of Europe had come to London.
London has become like the beachhead, the starting point for the expansion of
preaching in Europe.

And the headquarter of European preaching at that time was London. So Srila
Prabhupada would come to London, devotees from France, Germany, from various
other parts would come there and they would all be giving reports. So Srila
Prabhupada would ask, so Bhagavan, how are things going on in France, so Shivan,
how are things going on in Germany? Like that, he was asking, and all the
different devotees were giving their reports.

So there was one devotee over there, Isana Prabhu. So he was saying, he is
saying Prabhupada is asking everyone, and everyone is offering their services to
Prabhupada, so then he said, why don't I have anything to do for Prabhupada? So
after the various meetings, he went to Srila Prabhupada, and he said,
Prabhupada, can you give me something to do for you? So Srila Prabhupada looked
at him in the eyes, and said, what do you want to do for Krishna? So he
thought, whatever you want Prabhupada, I will do it. Please tell me what I
should do. But then Prabhupada, what do you want do for Krishna?

So he started thinking, so Prabhupada is testing me, no, whatever you want
Prabhupada, I will do it. Prabhupada became grievances (?, 42:19), just try to
understand our philosophy he says. What do you want to do for Krishna? Think
what you want to do with Krishna, and when you do that for Krishna, devotional
service will be performed. You will be doing bhakti. See, I have not thought
like this, that what do I want to do for Krishna? Then he thought, and he
thought, Prabhupada, I will think about it. With Prabhupada, think can come, and
then he tought for some time, and then he came back, and he told Srila
Prabhupada the next day that Prabhupada we have these mrdangas, so they will
bring the mrdangas, clay mrdangas from India and then often while bringing, they
would break, or sometimes while playing kirtan, they would break, and when they
would be break, they are just cracked. He said, Prabhupada, I am thinking
instead of using clay, we can use some other material by which it will not
break. We will make unbreakable mrdangas. And then there will be so much
inconvenience that it is, somebody has to get the mrdanga from Mayapur, that
will not be there. So, Prabhupada said very good. Prabhupada said your
godbrother is very passionate. So make the mrdanga such that even if you throw
it down, it will not break.

And then, he took that as a service, and life long he has been doing this
service, and he has made many many mrdangas, using locally available illegiblous
(?, 43:35) materials and other such things. The point was that Srila Prabhupada
encouraged the devotee to use his individuality to find out what was his
inspiration to serve Krishna. So then when he serves Krishna, he will
whole-heartedly continue on.

Now, this expressing our individuality does not mean whimsicality. It does not
mean that we do something which is not in harmony with the principles of
devotion, and we say this is how I serve Krishna. No. It has to be overall in
harmony with the principle of devotion, but many devotees often wait for their
spiritual master to give some instruction. I want to do some service, but I want
my spiritual master to give me instruction. Then I will do that seva faithful.

But actually speaking, with the practical reality of our movement is such that
the spiritual master has so many responsibilities, not even think of his
disciple very carefully and give a service according to the nature. So if the
devotee takes responsibility for spiritual advancement, and thinks, how can I
serve Krishna. This is what I like to do. These are my talents. These are my
interests, and this is what is required, so let me do this for Krishna. And then
present day, propose it to senior devotees, get their blessings, and do it,
because it is our inspiration, because it is our interest, because it is our
inclination, we will be able to do it enthusiastically.

And this is the practical way we can apply varnashram in today's society.
Because there has been so much cross-marriages between various castes, and
because today's varnashram system is mostly defunct. So, just by the birth, we
do not know what is our nature, what is our inclination, and because we do not
know, so that is why we often find a lot of time thinking: what should I do in
my life? So we take up the responsibility finding out what is our way of serving
Krishna, and then we serve Him accordingly.

Ultimately, we have to remember that, my spiritual advancement is my
responsibility. It is not my spiritual master's responsibility. It is not
Krishna's responsibility. It is my responsibility. This does not mean that I can
become spiritually advanced without the mercy of the spiritual master, without
the mercy of the vaishnavas, without the mercy of Krishna. No, responsibility
means we have an important part to play in it.

Just like in our material career, you know if I am having my own business, I
will think: how can I expand my business? Expanding my business will not be
somebody else's responsibility. I may have some guide, some mentor, some
well-wisher, and that person may give periodic inputs, but ultimately, expanding
my business will be my responsibility.

Similarly, making spiritual advancement, developing my relationship with
Krishna, growing closer to Krishna is my responsibility. The spiritual master
will be there to guide me if I go wrong, spiritual master will correct me,
spiritual master will to some extent show me the way. But it is for me to move,
forward, along that way and to find out what are the ways in which I become
inspired, I become motivated, it is my responsibility.

So when we understand this point, that Krishna has given me some energy, and
this energy, this talent, this initiative is meant to be used to glorify
Krishna. So I discover myself. So discover myself has two phases. Discover
myself has a spiritual phase, where I understand that I am not the body, I am
the soul. It is important. But discover myself also has a second phase. Second
phase is that I understand what is my psychophysical nature, what are my
talents, what are my weaknesses, what are my interests, what are my skills, what
are my inspirations, and then I use them in Krishna's service.

So this second phase of discover yourself is also important because that will
enable us to serve Krishna enthusiastically life long. So Srila Prabhupada is
saying over here that we have to play the part which has been assigned for us.
Now how do we know which part has been assigned for us? Krishna is not going to
come in someone's dream and tell us, you know, I want you to build a temple over
here for me. No.

For some exceptional devotees, Krishna may do something like that, but more
importantly, it is through a process of introspection and examination, and look
within, and look around, and try to understand how best I can serve Krishna. So
in this way, we move forward and we make spiritual advancement ourselves.

So in one lecture, Srila Prabhupada says: what is Krishna Consciousness? He says
that when we go in the temple, and we stand in front of the deities, if you feel
that Krishna is asking us, what are you doing for me? If Krishna is asking us,
what are you doing for me? Then, we are Krishna Conscious, Prabhupada says. So
Srila Prabhupada uses such an eminently practical understanding of Krishna
Consciousness.

Krishna Consciousnes is not, Prabhupada would say, when we go in front of the
deities, we see deities, we start thinking of Vrindavan lila, waiting for what
Lord Krishna is doing, and the forests of Vrindavan, and the gopis. That is not
Krishna Consciousness. That is Krishna Consciousness at a very advanced level,
but for us to just dwell on that will be mostly hypothetical. It will be
sentimental. It will not be substantial. For us, the substantial way of conserve
is by practically engaging in devotional service.

So when we go in front of Krishna, Krishna is asking us, what are you doing for
me? This is not just in terms of quantity. It is not that, I, Krishna, have
distributed so many books for you. Krishna, I have raised so much funds for you.
This quantity is also a way in which we can express our devotion, but the
important point is we have a relationship with Krishna.

And in a relationship, there is reciprocation. And reciprocation is through
various ways, it is through emotion, it is through action, it is through
intention, so when we go in front of Krishna, the reciprocation happens. What
are the pratical services we are doing for him? That is action. What are the
emotions we are bringing in front of Krishna? You know, are we becoming more
pure, are becoming more attracted to Krishna? And what is our intention? So
reciprocation happens through action, emotion, and intentions.

So we focus on reciprocating with Krishna and taking responsibility for our
spiritual advancement, for developing our relationship with Krishna. Now, when
we forward in our spiritual life in this way, the more we offer ourselves to
Krishna, the more Krishna offers himself. That means the more Krishna reveals
himself.

        mam prapadyante
        tams tathaiva bhajamy aham
        ...
        (BG 4.11)

He says, all people as they surrender unto me, I reward them accordingly.

So what is the reward? So Krishna is Krishna's greatest blessing. What is
Krishna's greatest blessing? It is Krishna himself. Ability, fame, wealth, all
these can be blessings of Krishna. But Krishna's greatest blessing is Krishna
himself. When Krishna reveals his beauty in our heart, when Krishna reveals His
glory in our heart, when Krishna reveals His love in our heart, and then through
these revelations of glory, beauty and love, He attracts us to Him. Then that is
Krishna's greatest blessing because if we are attracted to Krishna, then we will
not be attracted to things of this world. And if we are not attracted to things
of this world, then we are on the path of liberation.

If we are attracted to Krishna, we are on the path back to Krishna directly. So
when the more we offer ourselves to Krishna, the more Krishna offers himself to
us. And when Krishna offers Himself, that is Krishna's greatest blessing.

So Srila Prabhupada writes over here that when we want to understand Krishna, it
is not just a hypothetical exercise. Yes, we study scripture, but also we want
to be a part. Krishna has a role for us. Krishna wants the service to be done.
And when we do the services for Krishna, then gradually we make spiritual
advancement. And our relationship with Him unfolds. And the more our
relationship unfolds, the more clearer our understanding of Krishna becomes. The
clearer understanding of Krishna becomes, the more we feel attracted to him. And
the more we feel attracted to him, the more we become liberated from material
existence.

So in this way, devotional service is very dynamic and ecstatic; dynamic because
this constant reciprocation within ourserlves with Krishna. We offer ourselves,
Krishna offers himself. That inspires us more, we offer ourselves more, and
Krishna reveals himself more. And it is ecstatic because the more Krishna
reveals himself, the more there is joy in the heart. Because Krishna is like an
ocean of happiness.

        sabha sukha sagara
        sabha guna agara
        rupa ujagara
        Sri Krishna

So it is said in the Vraja song that Krishna is "sabha sukha sagara", he is the
ocean of all happiness, "sabha guna agara", he is the abode of all qualities. So
when we become attracted to Krishna, he has all the qualities in unlimited
quantity. So we can complete fall in love with him. And he is the reservoir of
all happiness. The more we connect with him, the more happy we will become.

Just like if I put my hands in electric socket, then I will get electrified. The
electricity will flow through me. Similarly, when I connect myself with Krishna,
then a surcharge, a current of happiness passes through. The connection with
Krishna is not physical, it is not that I go and touch the deities, and a
current of happiness will passes through. It is not physical. It is devotional.
It is when we connect ourselves to Krishna by offering our heart to him, by that
connection, Krishna permeates us with happiness.

And that is life's ultimate success. So here Srila Prabhupada is explaining that
we all have to do our part in our service to Krishna. And he says: "All power is
obtained from the Lord; therefore each particular power must be utilized to
execute the will of the Lord and not otherwise.", and then he says: "The Lord
can be known by one who has adopted such a submissive service attitude.", so
service attitude is that we want to serve Krishna, submissive means Krishna, you
reveal to me how I can serve you, and I serve Him accordingly, and in this way
we understand Krishna more and more, and we fall in love with Him more and more.

So I will summarize, we started by talking about the second section. Second
section talks about how the Ishvara can be understood through spiritual vision.
And the first verse in that talks about how the Ishvara has paradoxical
attributes, attributes that seem contradictory.

So how He is at one place, but He moves faster than the wind, faster than the
great devatas, and He, from that one place, He controls those who control things
that is spread all over the place.

So, then we discussed how the Absolute Truth cannot be understood by
speculation. It is understood by revelation.

And we discussed about understanding the Lord and his energies, they are
different, yet non-different. We discussed synthetic and analytic understandings
within that with respect to the example of machine, language, and devotional
culture.

And then we discussed elaborately what the concept of dovetailing our
individuality in devotional service. So our talents, if we use them at a
material level, they will cause us and others bondage. If we reject our talents
with the impersonalists' idea, then there will be no joy at all, because
everything will become dry. But when we utilise our talents to serve Krishna,
then there is joyful engagement for us, which is also purifying, which takes us
closer to Krishna, which glorifies Krishna, and brings others also closer to
Krishna, thereby benefiting them also.

So in this way, bhakti enables us to utilise the material in the service of the
spiritual, and thereby attain the spiritual, use our material talents to glorify
Krishna, and attain Krishna thereof.

We discussed how Krishna is Krishna's greatest blessing, and we get that,
supreme blessing, to the extent we offer ourselves to Him through our individual
surrender.

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande hari haribol.

