Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mGRNC4vMLMc
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_010_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_08_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=mGRNC4vMLMc&redir_token=ztn3DboNiuOkG887IwV2zCVfcNZ8MTU0MDEwMjM0NUAxNTQwMDE1OTQ1&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

So, now we start with the eighth verse of the Isopanisad. This is the last verse
in the second section. And in this second section, we are understanding how to
understand the Ishvara who p..., possesses inconceivable attributes. So, let us
look at the section overview quickly. So, four to eight section was understand
Ishvara with spiritual vision. The first part of that, that was, four to five,
how Ishvara has inconceivable attributes. Six to seven was first develop
spiritual vision towards worldly objects, things, events, and then direct that
spiritual vision towards the Supreme Lord, towards that Absolute Truth and
understand Him. This vision developed further and directed to the Ishavara helps
us to understand Him.

So, this is actually not a translation. This is a summary which gives a
inclining of the flow which gives an overall understanding of the flow. So, let
us look at the verse now. Let us see what the mantra actually says.

        sa paryagāc chukram akāyam avraṇam
        asnāviram śuddham apāpa-viddham
        kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr
        yāthātathyato 'rthān vyadadhāc chāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ

So, "sa paryagāc chukram", so "sa" refers to that person. Who is that person?
The seeker. So that person was referred to in the previous two verses that such
a person sees equally, "ātmaivābhūd vijānataḥ", such a person who sees everybody
as spiritual, as soul, as parts of God, now, how does that person see God? "sa
paryagāc", such a person should be able to see like this. "chukram", is
omnipotent, extremely powerful. "akāyam", "akāyam", Prabhupada translates as
unembodied. Let us see what this means. "avraṇam", and who is, cannot, who is
not reproached.

"asnāviram śuddham apāpa-viddham", he has no veins. He is pure. He is not
contaminated by sin. "kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr", so such a person is
"kavir", that means a wise person. "manīṣī" is philosopher. "paribhūḥ" is the
greatest of all. "svayambhūr", self-sufficient.

"yāthātathyato 'rthān vyadadhāc", that means just in pursuance of, just in
proportion to us, which a person offers. "'rthān vyadadhāc", the desirables,
"'rthān", gives, "vyadadhāc", awards. "chāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ", "chāśvatī"
means eternal, forever. So, from time immemorial, where, this person has been
doing this. "samā" is hindi. "samābhyaḥ" is sanskrit time. So, this person
has understood thus having all these properties. These are characteristics of
the Absolute Truth, there are described in this verse as mahabhagavata
understands the Absolute Truth.

"Such a person must factually know", "sa paryagāc", "the", "the greatest of
all", "sa paryagāc chukram", "akāyam avraṇam", so the Personality of Godhead.
Srila Prabhupada makes it clear in his translation itself that what the verse is
talking about is not an impersonal Absolute. It is the Personality of Godhead,
who is unembodied, "akāyam". "avraṇam asnāviram", he, so, so "avraṇam" is beyond
reproach, "asnāviram", without waves. "asnāviram śuddham apāpa-viddham",
"asnāviram" is without waves, pure and uncontaminated. "śuddham apāpa-viddham".
Then "kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr", so "kavir manīṣī" is philosopher,
self-sufficient is "svayambhūr", and then "yāthātathyato 'rthān vya", so
"paribhūḥ", the greatest of all. Srila Prabhupada has put first and foremost in
the translation, such a person must factually know the greatest of all. So,
"paryagāc chukram", and "paribhūḥ", Prabhupada has put both of them together
here, "the self-sufficient philosopher who has been fulfilling everyone's desire
since time immemorial.", "vyadadhāc chāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ".

So, let us look at the overview of the, we will see that, so, "akāyam" is
unembodied, and "asnāviram" is without veins. So, what does it mean? That we
will look at the significance of these two verse in combination later. Then,
"chukram", so the first two paragraphs talk about the Absolute Truth is
unembodied and without veins, and omnipotent, "shukram", that is described in
paragraph two to four. So, when a paragraph comes in both, that means in the
middle of the paragraph, that point changes. And the next point starts being
developed. And the fulfiller of desires, that is five to six paragraphs.
Paribhuh is Supreme described in seventh paragraph. Svayambhuh is described in
the eighth paragraph. And Shuddham Apapa Vidham, antiseptic and prophylactic is
described in the eighth paragraph.

So, let us look at all this one by one. So, now, this seems to be the most clear
point that the Absolute Truth is impersonal. How can one infer that? One word
that might lead to the inferences, "akāyam". "akāyam". Now, "kāyam" means body.
"akāyam" means without body. So does "akāyam" actually mean this or does it have
some other meaning? Let us look at it now. So, there is a famous verse in the
Svetasvatra Upanishad, which also comes in the part of the vedas. So, "na tasya
pratima asti". So, many people who want to try to prove that Absolute Truth has
no form. They start to quote this verse and they say that Absolute Truth has no,
not a separate "pratima asti", no representation of that Absolute Truth. So,
actually speaking, if we look at the full context of the U..., Svetasvatra
Upanishad where this comes, "No one can grasp Him above, across, or in the
middle. There is no likeness of Him. His name is Great Glory.".

So, actually what is said over here is not that he does not have a form. There
is no likeness of Him. And Baladeva Vidhyabhusan gives the translation, you
know, in a more explicit way. He says "na tasya pratima asti" means nothing can
compare with the transcendental form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So,
the Lord's form is so great, "pratima", He is so great that nothing can compare
with it. So, now, sometimes, the Lord's form is compared for giving us an idea
of what it means. So, for example, sometimes, it may be said that the Lord's
eyes are like lotus. His face, His lips are like bimba fruit. Now, these are
just given as indications for us to get some idea. But in the Lalita-Madhava,
which is written by Rupa Goswami, a devotee king is glorifying the Supreme Lord.
He said my dear Lord, in the past, I thought that I was glorifying you with
choice poetry, but now of that I have actually beheld your beautiful form, now I
understand that what I spoke earlier was not actually glorification. That was
actually an insult. Because it is like glorifying the emperor of the world to be
the landlord of the village. So, actually, you are so much greater than any
glorification that we can offer. That the glorification we offer becomes like an
insult for you. Because the glorification becomes like a minimisation.

So, in this way, the great devotees, when they get experience of the Lord's
beauty and they understand it is so great that nothing compares with it, "na
tasya pratima asti". So, this sort of negative descriptions that are there,
which sometimes seem to say that the Absolute Truth does not have a form,
have to be understood properly their full context. And they have to be
understood from the acharyas.

So, "akāyam", let us see what it means. So, it will be a major part of the
discussion. So, in general, there has to be a hermeneutic, hermeneutic means a
method of understanding. So, for example, one of the methods of understanding is
"arthapatti". "Arthapatti" means postulation. So, for example, there are two
contradictory statements. If they have to be resolved, one has to think of a
third statement which resolves that. So, if somebody says Ravi does not eat food
throughout the day. And then we find Ravi's weight is increasing. So, these two
statements are contradictory. If the weight, if person is not eating, then how
can the weight increase? Then, we need a third statement, which reconciles the
two. What is that? Ravi eats secretly at night. So, when Ravi eats secretly at
night. Then, both statements are true. Ravi does not eat throughout the day.
Ravi's weight is increasing. So, of course, this is a humorous example. But the
point here is serious that when two statements seem to be contradictory and when
both statements are known to be true. Then, we have to understand that there has
to be a third statement, which reconciles both the statements. And only then can
the truth of both the statements be maintained while resolving the contradiction
between them. So, how does this apply to scriptural study? So, we discussed
earlier about Gajendra's prayers where it, Gajendra is saying:

        arupayoru-rupaya
        nama ascarya-karmane

So, he says that Lord has no form, "arupayo". And he says also it, He has many
forms "u-rupaya". So, how do we understand that both these two can be
reconciled? So, the point is, the, God has no material form. But He has many
spiritual forms. So, the "arthapatti" is, the no form refers to material form.
Many form refers to spiritual form. So, the "arthapatti" is very important
because it is understood in the Vedic hermeneutics. As I mentioned earlier,
hermeneutics is the art of studying and understanding scripture that in herm...,
Vedic hermeneutics, it is understood that the Vedas give us the Absolute Truth.
So, if some statements seems to be contradictory, that is because our
understanding of those statements is incomplete. When we gain a complete
understanding, then those statements will no longer be troublesome for us. We
will be able to see and reconcile them properly. So, how do we do "arthapatti"?
For that, we need guru, sadhu, sastra. Now, if we may say, isn't this just what
we are imposing on scripture? Is this actually the truth of the scripture? Yes,
it is. Let us see how.

So, there is this verse in the Shvetashvatara Upanishad, which actually gives
this directly again. So, earlier was from the Bhagavata Purana. Now, it is from
the Shvetashvatara Upanishad:

        apāṇipādo javano grahītā paśyaty acakṣuḥ sa śṛṇoty akarṇaḥ

So, he has no eyes, but he sees. How? So, "paśyaty acakṣuḥ", "paśyaty", he sees,
but "acakṣuḥ", he has no eyes. How is it possible? That "arthapatti", he has
spiritual eyes. He does not see with material eyes. He sees with spiritual eyes.
So, in the Caitanya Caritamrta also, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu does a similar
"arthapatti" in his discussions with both Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya as well as
Prakarshana Sarasvati. There, the Lord makes the point that it is told in the
Vedas that "saha eksatah", that that Absolute Truth glanced, "saha eksatah saha
asrujata", that Absolute truth glanced, and that is, Absolute Truth created. So,
now, only after all the whole creation began, that in a later stage all the
senses come about. When all the senses come later. That means all the eyes will
also come later. So, if all the eyes have come later in the creation, then what
were those eyes which glanced? That started off the creation? So, if all wi...,
eyes are material and all eyes come at a later stage in the unfolding of
creation, then when we say that, the glance, some glance of some eyes started
the creation. What were those eyes? So, those eyes could not have been material
because at that time nothing material was manifest. The mattato was there, only
in an unagitated, unactivated form. So, that means those eyes are
transcendental. So, in this way, we reconcile scripture by postulation.

So, now, Srila Prabhupada, as I said, here, different, "akāyam", he
differentiates the word from unembodied. Srila Prabhupada uses a very specific
translation. He does not use unembodied. He uses, he uses unembodied, not
disembodied. What is the difference between unembodied and disembodied? Body is
the physical body that we, embody means to give a body. So, when the soul is
given a body, the soul becomes embodied. Now, when the soul's body is taken
away, then the soul is said to be disembodied. So, for example, ghosts, ghosts
are disembodied living beings. Disembodied means that they had gross body, but
they beca..., they came, s..., committed suicide, or because of some si...,
similar incident, they lo..., they lost the body. And now, they have not got a
new body. So, the gross body was here. Subtle body and the soul have come out.
And the subtle body and the soul now have no gross body. So, they are called as
disembodied. Disembodied, so what, dis is a negative describer, which says that
something was there, but was taken away. Dispossess, that means somebody had
for some..., possession for something, it was pos..., taken away. So,
disembodied means that which somebody had, but that, what was taken away from
that person.

So, Srila Prabhupada is translating "akāyam" not as bodiless, not even as
disembodied. But he is translating it as unembodied. Unembodied means that the
soul was never, that, that the Absolute Truth rather here, not the soul, the
Absolute Truth was never made embodied. The Absolute Truth eternally has a body.
The soul is here. The body is here. And at the time of conception onwards, the
soul becomes embodied. The soul, to embody means to give a body. To disembody
means to take away the body. But, that is, for the Lord, there is no embodiment.
There is no disembodiment. Why? Because that Lord's body is trancendental. It is
eternally with Him. So, Srila Prabhupada is very meticulously translating
"akāyam" as unembodied. That means there is no conception of the Lord getting
embodied at all. The Lord is eternal, transcendental, and He always His own
transcendental form.

So, then, if that is the case, then why it is the word "akāyam" has to be used
at all to describe the Absolute Truth? So, the reason for that is that the word
"kāya" has many connotations. Connotations means implied meanings. There, there
is a denotation is the direct meaning. Connotation is the implied meaning. So,
many words acquire connotations based on their context. So, for example, the
word "gay", maybe fifty years ago, the word "gay" just meant cheerful. So, if
somebody said, I went to a, I went to a gay party, what it would mean is I just
went to a cheerful party. But now, today, because of the changes in the cultural
demographics, the word "gay" has an entirely meaning. So, if somebody says I
went to a gay party, it has an entirely different connotation. So, the word
"gay" in a dictionary, it has both meanings. There is cheerful. It also has
the meaning of somebody who is homosexual. But the words have acquired certain
connotations. For example, Srila Prabhupada used the word ass. Ass basically
means a donkey. But nowadays, the way, vocabulary changed, the word ass brings
in mind, actually that is often used to refer to a particular part of the bodily
anatomy. So, words have meanings and they have connotations. And the
connotations depend on that past person's culture. So, somebody, who had always
seen the word, ass used to refer to a donkey, then that person considers modern
usage and finds the word ass, and he is, people look too strange, they were not 
using the word ass. So, people here will not understand. But the word has some
connotations. So, the connotations develop based on the hearer's past
conceptions. So, like that, the word "kāya" brings certain conceptions in the
mind. So, those are the connotations that come. And those do not apply to the
Supreme Lard. And that is why the Upanishads use the word "akāyam". So, what are
the connotations that do not apply to the form of the Supreme Lord. Let us look
at them.

So, normally, the "kāya", the body is s..., separate from the real person, the
soul. My "kāya" is different from me, the soul. Your "kāya", your body, is
different from you, the soul. But that is not the case with the Supreme Lord.
Similarly, my "kāya" is not only separate from me in its nature. But it really
separated from me even physically. Right now, I am inside the body. But in the
distant future, when d..., death comes, my "kāya", my body will be separated
from me. Now, this does not happen with the Supreme Lord's "kāya". His form is
eternal. And it is there in the spiritual world. That is the miya avatar. That
which is there in the spiritual world descends here. Then, the "kāya" also tends
to degrade the soul by stimulating material, de..., bodily desires. So, when we
have a body, then bodily desires come up. Not just the needs of the body, but
even the desires which come up. For example, sexual desires come up when a
person becomes of the time of pube..., puberty. So, these degraded the soul. So,
the word "kāya" has a connotation which does not apply to the Lord's body.
Because the Lord's body being transcendental is not affected by any material
desires. And lastly, the "kāya", the body is a product of the soul's past karma.
So, some people have a good-looking body. Others, peop..., other people do not
have such a good-looking body. Why is this difference there? Because those
people, means those souls have different, different kinds of karma. And as per
their karmas, a point person has been given a good-looking body. Another person
has been given not such a good-looking body.

So, this difference is inevitably there i..., i..., with respect to various
bodily attributes. And this is because of the person's bad karma, or karma,
whichever it means, past karma, good or bad. So, this does not apply to the
Lord. It is not at the karma of the Lord has led to a particular body coming up.
No, the Lord's body is eternally with Him. And He Himself is entirely beyond
karma. So, actually speaking, the word "akāyam" has a very profound meaning.
Now, somebody may say, actually speaking, this is just your interpretation.
Actually, you are just, you, because you are personalists and you want to
believe that God has a form, so the Upanishad is saying that, the Lord is
"akāyam", it does not have form, and still you are saying that you are implying
that is His form, that is why you are giving all this interpretation. Yes, that
may be possible, but we have to look at the full verse to see what is it saying.
The mantra is saying immediately after that, "asnāviram". So, now, he has no
veins. Now, if somebody does not have any body, what is the point in saying that
the person does not have any veins? You know, if you want to say that that
person has no clothes? If I say the person has no clothes, then there is no
point in saying that person does not have any tie. The person does not have any
clothes, so he does not have anything at all. Because that person does not have
a house, then it is implied that person does not have a hall, or a bedroom, or
whatever.

So, if there is easy, a bigger set, that is "kāya", and "asnāviram", veins are a
small set, so veins are a part of the body. So, once we have said that there is
no body, then there is no need to say there are no veins, vein after that. So,
what is the need for saying that there are no veins after it has been said that
there is no body? That is actually indicative that the word "akāyam" cannot be
simplistically translated as having no body. Actually, "akāyam", Prabhupada
precisely translates as unembodied. That means the soul is not given a body,
the, the, the Supreme Lord is not given a body, like the soul is given. Also,
the Supreme Lord is entirely transcendental. And being transcendental, the
Supreme Lord is eternal. And His form is also eternal. It is eternally with Him.
And then "akāyam", when it is understood in this way that the Lord is
unembodied. Then, we understand "asnāviram" to mean, He has a special kind of
body, which does not have veins. So, He has a body, no doubt. But His body does
not have veins. So:

        sa paryagāc chukram akāyam avraṇam
        asnāviram

So, He is unembodied. Now, ok, so let us move forward. Now, there are several
words talked about.  

        sa paryagāc chukram akāyam avraṇam
        asnāviram śuddham apāpa-viddham
        kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr
        yāthātathyato 'rthān vyadadhāc chāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ

So, Srila Prabhupada now talks elaborately about this "yāthātathyato 'rthān
vyadadhāc chāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ". Let us look at that before we go back to the
earlier points. So, Prabhupada here mentions the point that when somebody is to
get something, the person has to acquire the qualification, but along with that,
the authority has to reward, only then the person gets the result. So, there is
qualification, plus bestowal. Only then the result comes out. So, for example,
Prabhupada uses the example that when a person becomes qualified in terms of
passing the exams to become a judge. After that, there is another step that the
government awards the position of the judge to that person. So, there is the
qualifi..., acqui..., acquisition of the qualification, but along with that,
there is the bestowal of the result or the reward of the post, whatever it may
be. So, like that, Prabhupada says that it is not that just by our acquiring
qualification, we will get the result. We have to acquire qualification, but
along with that, the Lord has to bestow His grace, only then the result comes
out. So, Prahlada Maharaja gives this example in his prayers, where he says
that:

        balasya neha saranam pitarau nrsimha
        nartasya cagadam udanvati majjato nauh
        taptasya tat-pratividhir ya ihanjasestas
        tavad vibho tanu-bhrtam tvad-upeksitanam

So, he says over there that the apparent protector is not the actual protector.
He says, apparent protector is not the actual protector. So, he used the
examples "balasya neha saranam pitarau nrsimha", my dear Lord, Nrsimha, when the
child is in trouble, the child will naturally take sh..., shelter of the parent,
of the father. But, he says, the father cannot always protect the child.
Sometimes, the child may still get sick, and the child may get kidnapped.
Something, many things can happen by which, the fa..., father even despite all
desires and intentions, may not be able to protect the child. And similarly, he
says that, "nartasya", "udanvati majjato nauh", so he says that for example when
a person is sick, the doctor uses medicine, but sometimes, their medicine works,
sometimes, the medicine does not work. So, medicine alone is not enough to cure.
The doctor alone is not enough to cure. Sometimes, amid the best doctor, most
competent to cure a disease of a patient, and still, the patient goes sicker and
sicker, and dies. There may be a person in a, drowning in an ocean, the person
sees the boat, but sometimes, the person may not be able to reach the boat. The
person may be in a boat, and the boat may capsize, and the person may die. Or
there was titanic, considered to be a boat that no one could sink, ship that no
one could sink, and sank in its first voyage. So, what was the point over here?

The point is that, the Lord is saying it is just, this big ship, saying that
just our acquisition of the ne.., ma..., necessary material arrangements is not
enough to get the necessary result. So, just the child having a father is not
enough for the protection. The patient going to the doctor enough, is not enough
for the protection. The person in an ocean seeing a ship, seeing a boat is not
enough to be protected. There has to be the higher arrangement, sanction of the
Lord. Then, and then alone, we get the results.

        yāthātathyato 'rthān

Now, how does a Lord give the result? He is reciprocal. Reciprocal means
depending on how the person actually is qualified, the Lord gives the results.
The Lord does not give results arbitrarily. He gives based on how a person has
done karma in the past, and how the person is endeavored in the present. So
k..., now, let us look at these two ideas, "karmavada" and "daivavada". So,
actually speaking, how do we get results? "Karma" and "daiva", when both come
together, that leads to "phala". Let us understand this here. So, this is as we
know a traditional symbol of justice or karma. So, karmavada is the idea that
everything is in my hand. Person thinks, ok, I will study and I will become the
topper. I will play well and I will win the championship. I will do my business
so surely that I will become the wealthiest pe..., business person in the
country. This is karmavada. Everything is in my hands. So, karma, that is the
idea. Karma is a secret of success. That is what people feel.

Now, the opposite of that is daivavada. Daivavada is, the idea is that nothing
is in my hands. I am simply misfort..., unfortunate, sorry. I am simply
unfortunate because some people say that, my faith is only rotten. What can I
do? Nothing works for me. So, such a person now becomes fatalistic. Fatalistic
means, here we see, that person thinks that, my faith is only broken, that
person does not study only, that person is not working, is sleeping. Or that
person is morrows. So, the point is, how do things work? Is, is everything in my
hands, or is nothing in my hands? Actually, neither are true. Both are required.
My endeavor is required. And a higher arrangement also is required. So, karma
and daiva, when both come together, then there is phala.

When a farmer wants to get good crops. The farmer has to sow the seeds and
plough the land. That is the karma. Then after that, the farmer has to ensure
that the r..., fa..., after he has made the arrangements, he has to just wait.
This is what he can ensure. But beyond that, he has to wait for the rains to
come. The rains coming in as daiva. When rains come in time and proper quantity,
then karma and daiva, when they come together, that leads to the phala, that is
the crops coming. So, Srila Prabhupada is emphasizing the point over here that
without the daiva, we cannot get the results. So, when he is saying, what is
that daiva? That daiva is ultimately the Supreme Lord. That is He who is the
provider of the results. So, in the Mahabharat war, for the first ten days, the
commander was Dronachar..., sorry Bhisma. Then, when Bhisma fell, Dronacharya
became the commander. Actually, Dronacharya was expecting that Duryodhana will
make Karana the commander because Duryodhana loved Karana. And actually,
Duryodhana went to Karana. But then, Karana said Drona is my senior, you should
make him the commander. So, when Drona saw, was approached by Duryodhana to
please be my commander, Drona felt honored. Because he expec..., expecting that
he will have to obey a suta putrana. He considered Dr..., Karana to be a
low-born person, a charitous son. And he suddenly was honored. So, he said, what
can I do for you? I am pleased with your offering me this honor. And Duryodhana
said that, please arrange for Yudisthir be captured and brought alive in front
of me. So, at that time, Duryodhana's eyes went o..., Dronacharya's eyes opened
wide, oh, he said, Yudisthir is such a jata satro, that even you do not want him
dead. You want him captured alive. So, Dronacharya, Duryodhana smiled
sardonically. And he said, if we kill Yudisthir, Bhima and Arjuna will go mad,
and they will wreak ho..., havoc on my troops. My plan is if you can get
Yudishtir captured alive, then I will challenge him for another gambling match.
And he will get defeated by Sakuni, and then we will send him off to the forest
on exile again. So, Dronacharya, Sakuna said, Duryodhana will never learn. So,
for two full days, vigorously, Dronacharya tried to capture Yudishtir.
Dronacharya had asked Yudishtir that Arjuna is in every way my equal, so as long
as Arjuna is there, I will not be able to capture Yudishtir. You ensure that
Arjuna goes elsewhere, and then I will capture him. So, he tried his best, and
nothing happened. He was not able to capture.

So, at that time, Arjuna, he decided the, what to do. So, finally, Dronacharya
was approached by Duryodhana. And Duryodhana said that you have promised that
you will capture Yudishtir. Why are you not able to capture? He said,
Dronacharya said that, you know, you have seen that I have exerted myself to my
fullest capacity. I have endeavored the fullest. But even after endeavoring the
fullest, ultimately, only endeavor is in our hand. Results are determined by
destiny. And the Lord of destiny is sitting on the chariot of Arjuna. So, what
can we do? So, Dronacharya said, can I exert, Krishna is the Lord of destiny,
and fighting against Him was ultimately not going to be successful. So, the same
point Srila Prabhupada is making over here that ultimately the results are
determined by the grace of the Supreme Lord, by the arrangement of the Supreme
Lord. We can only endeavor. And after our endeavor, whether the results come or
not, they are bestowed by the Supreme Lord. This, of course, does not mean that
nothing is in our hands. That everything is written by the Lord? No. The Lord
wants us to endeavor. If we do not endeavor, the results will not come. The
opposite is illustrated also in the Mahabharat, when Vidura is trying to stop
Dhritarashtra from join..., fighting the fratricidal war. He wants to stop
Dhritarashtra. He wants to get Dhritarashtra to stop Duryodhana from fighting
the fratricidal war against the Pandavas. And despite the protestations and
remonstrations of Vidura, Dhritarashtra remains weak-hearted and does not stop
his son. So f..., finally, when Vidura insists and begs, and tries to convince
in every possible way, at that time, Dhritarashtra finally says, in front of the
will of destiny, that I, that our dynasty will be destroyed that this war take
place, then the will of the almighty destiny, who am I, a tiny mortal to do
anything about it?

So, at that time, Dhrita..., Vidura asks back, cuts through his illusions and he
says that destiny determines the consequences of our actions, not our actions
themselves. Your actions, oh king, are in your hands. So, we have the c...,
control over our actions. So, whether a student studies for the exam or not,
that is in student's hands. But whether he gets through, and gets the marks or
not, that is not in the student's hands. So, both the factors have to be
recognised. Karma is the studies. Daiva is the eventual result that comes out.
So, karma contributes to daiva, karma contributes to the phala, but karma alone
does not determine the phala. The daiva factor is very important. When we
understand the daiva factor, then we can accept things calmly. That even if
some things do not work out well, I understand that the Absolute Truth, the
Supreme Lord is arranging something. And His arrangement will be for my good.
Srila Prabhupada writes in the First Canto that when things go wrong beyond
human control, then there is nothing to regret. That means we try to do the
best, but despite our best effort, things went wrong, then there is nothing to
regret. That means, there was, the Lord's plan was something that this should
not happen or this should happen this way. And that is how it has happened.

So, now let us look at the remaining points here. "śuddham apāpa-viddham". This
is something which is very important for us to understand. The Absolute Truth is
"śuddham". The Absolute Truth is all pure. So, now, how is the Absolute Truth
all pure? Srila Prabhupada talks about Krishna performing his various pastimes.
And he talks especially about Krishna performing rasa-lila. And he, he also
quotes this later with "avraṇam". "avraṇam" is beyond reproach. So, if the Lord
is beyond reproach, that means nobody can correct Him, chastise Him, for what He
does. So, He actually called the gopis were playing the flute and He danced with
them. So, He was not reproached and He is, further said, He is "apāpa-viddham",
He was not contaminated. And He is, "śuddham", He is pure. He is not only pure,
but He is purifying. So, Prabhupada translated this "śuddham" and
"apāpa-viddham" as prophylactic and antiseptic, these are very interesting
translations.

So, antiseptic means what? If I have got some cut and the i..., infection is
likely to be there, and infection is likely to spread. So then, at time, that
time, I, anti, apply some antiseptic, oi..., ointment or antiseptic liquid, with
which I wash the wound. So, by that, whatever infection is there, that goes
away. So, when infection is there, that which takes away the infection is called
as antiseptic. And prophylactic means that when an expe..., infection is
expected to come, preventive medicine is given so that no infenction comes. So,
for example, if there is fear that a malaria epidemic is going to break out,
then the doctors may give some medicines. Take this medicine. Take this
medicine. And by this, you can prevent the infenction. So, prophylactic and
antiseptic. So, like that, the Lord is both. That means we could say, in simple
words, pure..., pu..., preventive and curative. Prophylactic is preventive. And
antiseptic is curative. So, the Lord is both preventive and curative. Now, when
we talk about prevention and cure, the cons..., question that comes up. What is
the disease? That we have been saved from. With that through prevention or
through cure. That disease actually is material contamination. It is material
attachment. It is called in the Vedic parlance as bhava-roga. Bhava-roga, the
attachment of the soul to the body and to bodily enjoyment. That is the cause of
s..., bondage and suffering. That is the cause of the repetition cycle of birth
and death. And just as any other disease is, causes suffering, this bhava-roga
also causes suffering. So, the bhava-roga has to be cured. And the way to cure
it is by taking shelter of the Lord. So, now, when we take shelter of the Lord,
two things happen. So, whatever contaminations we may have had from the past.

We had lust... we had lust, anger, greed, envy, pride, illusion, so, these have
been there in our pa..., in our consciousness because of our past indulgences.
These will go away by the potency of the Lord. So, whatever contaminations that
are present, they will go away. The existing infection will get cured. And along
with that, if we are doing strict sadhana, cultivating remembrance of Krishna,
then that will also have a prophylactic or preventive effect. That means if we
do our morning programme properly, we do, morning sadhana, we do well, and then
we go out in the day, even if we come across situations that are tempting, even
if we are tempted by lust, anger, greed, still, we will be able to resist those
temptations because we will have a higher taste. Which has been cultivated.
Which has been cherished. Which has been relished by our morning sadhana. So,
the, what is happening in the morning sadhana is not just a mechanistic
utterance of some words, or performance of some rituals that will bring about
protection. What brings about protection is the connection with Krishna. So,
sadhana is meant to act as a means f..., to connect with Krishna. So, when we
connect with Krishna through chanting, through hearing, by that connection, we
become purified. We become purified of past infections, and whatever future
infections may come, we will stay purified of them also. And this way, Krishna
is prophylactic and antiseptic. Now, this is with respect to his effect on us.
Now, the Bhagavatam also uses this logic to talk about the same point in a
different way. You know, the Bhagavatam says that actually by chanting the names
of Krishna, and remembering Krishna, the great sages become purified of lust.
And they will, some of them will even become free from lust. So, if the Lord can
purify and free people from lust, then how is it possible that actually that
Lord can come under the contamination of lust? That is not at all possible.
And some logic, called Bhagavatam.

So, now, let us look further. So, now, we have talked about Krishna being pure
from his affe..., from the perspective of His affect on us. That He will purify
us. But now, let us look at how Krishna is pure in His own glory. That Krishna
is never contaminated, no matter what he does. So, in that connection is the
rasa-lila pastime. So, in the rasa-lila pastime, the last verse, at the end of
Thirty-Third Chapter, the end of the Rasa Panchadhyayi is:

        vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ
        śraddhānvito 'nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ
        bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ
        hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ

So, he is praying here that my dear Lord, actually, this is a, not exactly a
prayer. This is a phala shruti. This is a glorification. But that glorification
is done in such a way that a prayerful mood is included in that. What is the
glorification here? That "vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ", when one
understands the "vikrīḍitaṁ", the "krīḍi", the play of the Lord,
"vraja-vadhūbhir", with is, "vraja-vadhū"s, that means with the devotees of
Vrindavan, especially gopis. "idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ", with Lord Vishnu. So, instead of
using the word Krishna, the word Vishnu is used to indicate, to remind us that
do not think of this Krishna to be an ordinary materialistic person. He is
Himself the Supreme Lord.

"śraddhānvito 'nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ", so if somebody hears and speaks
about them with faith, "'nuśṛṇuyād", like we had anupasyati, "'nuśṛṇuyād",
systematically, based on guru sadhu sastra. So, then, what will happen?

"bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati...", "bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ", so one will get
bhakti to the Supreme Lord. And what is the result of that bhakti? "bhaktiṁ
parāṁ bhagavati", one will get transcendental bhakti, and by the result of that
transcendental bhakti, once we get the "pratilabhya", "kāmaṁ hṛd-rogam āśv
apahinoty", that "kāmaṁ", lust, which is the disease of the heart, "hṛd-rogam
āśv apahinoty", one, they will, will be quickly and thoroughly destroyed, and
"acireṇa dhīraḥ", "acireṇa", not after a long time, soon it will be destroyed.
This is what is talked about in this verse.

Now, this raises a question, the rasa-lila, and the whole Rasa Panchadhyayi is
actually the description of very intimate pastimes of the Lord, so with His
gopis. Normally, if we hear about a man and a woman doing some things together,
privately at night, naturally that raises a suspicious enter in our mind. And we
think, that does not invoke any holy thoughts within us. And especially, if
somebody is, reads a novel, or sees a movie, where there is male-female
interaction in an intimate way. Thne that actually contaminates us with lust.
So, how is it that the Bhagavatam is saying that, how that lust will go away by
hearing rasa-lila? This indicates something special is going on over here. This
cannot be an ordinary description. And beyond that, the next point which Srila
Prabhupada would often make is why do the sannyasis glorify it? Why do the great
sages who have renounced everything, Prabhupada uses the example of, of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu in his purport. He says that Lord Caitanya was such a strict
sannyasi, but still, he glorified the pastimes of the gopis, and especially
their exalted level of the devotion of the gopis. So, why would he do that? That
is, indicates that there is some, some, this is not ordinary, something special
is happening over here. So, what is that special that is happening here? That
special is which, which keeps the Lord "śuddham" is that, there is material
contamination. Then, there is neutrality. There is impersonalism. There is
transcendental reality.

So, the sannyasis understand that everything of this world is a reflection.
It is a false. It is not ultimately real. It may be real temporarily, but will
soon be destroyed. So, they are not attracted to any of these things. But they
understand that in the realm of transcendence, there is a higher reality. There
is personal reality. And actually, once they understand that personal reality
clearly, they, each, they cannot be fallen in love with that reality. So, the
point is made over here the sannyasis, they give up the reflection, but they do
not give up the reality. The activities of this world are the reflection. The
activities of Krishna with His devotees are the reality. So, the sannyasis, when
they see this rasa-lila, they do not think of that reflection whicha most people
think of. They think of the reality. How Krishna is performing wonderful
intimate pastimes with the gopis. And that remembrance frees them from the
material entanglement, the material anxieties, the material attachments, and
inspires them to, enables them to actually become enlivened in meditating on
rasa-lila, and inspire others to get a proper understanding also. So, in this
way, the "śuddham" part is illustrated. Let us look at the purport once again.

"sa paryagāc chukram", so first as I said, Srila Prabhupada talks about how the
Lord is not formless. The Lord is, "The anatomy of a material body must have a
mechanical construction like with veins and so forth, but the transcendental
body of the Supreme Lord has nothing like veins". So, "asnāviram", and then it
is described the deity form of the Lord. So, now, Srila Prabhupada gives
explanation that what is this in the fourth line of it, "clearly states that the
Lord's transcendental body is completely different from ours; thus He is
sometimes described as formless.". "na tasya pratima asti", this is how we
understand it. And Prabhupada quotes "achakso visnavati". Now:

"Foolish people who have no knowledge of Sri Isopanisad or any of the other
sruti-mantras consider the arca-vigraha, which is worshiped by pure devotees, to
be made of material elements.".

So, we discussed this elaborately. People mistake the deity to be made of
matter. Now, that is their error. Their blender, that happens because they are
using material vision to see a spiritual object, instead of seeing spiritual
vision to see the spiritual object. So, these kanistha adikaris cannot
understand the reality, but now, Srila Prabhupada is using a very interesting
word over.

"In the Bhagavad Gita (9.11-12), the Lord regrets the fallen condition of men
with little knowledge who deride Him because He descends like a man into this
world."

So, the verse actually here is:

        avajananti mam mudha
        manusim tanum asritam
        param bhavam ajananto

So, here it is:

        avajananti mam mudha

The "mudha"s do not understand me.

        manusim tanum asritam

When the thing that, I have taken shelter of what, human like form, and I have
come in that, but actually my reality is transcendental. So, here Prabhupada is
quoting that to demonstrate the point that the Lord ultimately is
transcendental. But Prabhupada is saying the Lord regrets the fallen condition.
Regrets the fallen condition means when Krishna is chastising also, Lord Krishna
delights in chastising. Oh, these persons are so foolish, "avajananti mam
mudha". They are foolish that they do not understand me. No, the Lord regrets.
The Lord does not want anyone to suffer. And the greatest suffering is caused by
the misconceptions that we carry in our mind. Those misconceptions alianate us
from Krish..., us from Krishna, and thereby keep us trapped in unhappiness. But
when we c..., connect with Krishna, then the unhappiness goes away. So, the Lord
regrets those under misconception who have turned away from Him. And He wants to
get all of them back towards Krishna, towards Himself. So, "The fallen
condition of living entities is due entirely to forgetfulness of their
relationship with God.". So why are we all suffering? We are suffering in
material existence because we have forgotten Krishna. And to the extent we can
remember Him, to the extent we can become free from suffering. The Lord wants us
to become free from suffering. Lord does not want us to suffer in material
existence. And that is why He manifests as the deity, as the holy name, and so
many other facilities.

And then Prabhupada talks about "yāthātathyato 'rthān vyadadhāc chāśvatībhyaḥ
samābhyaḥ". And then, he concludes by saying that, Srila Prabhupada quotes
"vyavasayatmika buddhir" over here, in 2.41, so the point which Prabhupada
making over here is that:

"Unfortunately, living beings under the influence of material nature ask for
many things..."

but

"Spiritual intelligence is one"

So, that means, instead of trying to ask the Lord, please give me this, please
give me that, we focus on one thing that, my dear Lord, please allow me to serve
you. So, actually, as souls, we have two options. We can have either infinite
longings, or we can have longing for the inifinite. We can have infinite
longings. Infinite longing means, oh, I want this dress, I want this car, I
want this house, I want this spouse, I want this, I want that, and this will
just go on, and on, and on, by get one dress, I will be happy for a few days,
then after that, I want another dress, another dress, another dress, and there
is no end to this. So, this is infinite longings. So, the only way we can become
free from these infinite longings. Now, what are these infinite longings?
Actually, we are working, working, through get it, and we are also begging to
the Lord, please give it to me. But instead of the infinite longings, we have
another alternative is, longing for the infinite. That means we direct our power
of desiring away from the things of this world, and concentrate on Krishna.
Krishna, you are my only ultimate desirable object, and I do not desire anything
apart from you. So, when we think like this, then that desire for Krishna frees
us and purifies us of other desires. So, as long as the intelligence is played,
or distributed, is not "vyavasayatmika", it is not one-pointed, then that person
just wanders here and there, maybe asking for this from that, this person, then
asking from that from that devata, hoping to get this or that. But once a person
becomes fixed in the service of Krishna and starts longing for the infinite,
then the infinite longings go away, and this person becomes free to focus on the
Lord, become more energised in the devotion of the Lord. Otherwise, it is like
chewing the chewed. Now, Srila Prabhupada makes an interesting point.

"If a living being wants to go to hell, the Lord allows him to do so without
interference".

Now, we may say, who wants to go to hell? Nobody wants to go to hell because
people, either people do not believe in hell, or if they believe in hell, they,
they know that hell is a place of suffering. So, they want, do not want to go
there. So, who would want to go to hell? So, actually, Prabhupada makes a deeper
point over here. Our wanting is not just necessarily our conscious desire.
Wa..., our wanting is also spoken much louder through our actions. So, if
through our actions, we are showing the Lord that I want to enjoy this, I want
to enjoy that, then what happens is, the karmic reactions are going to come. And
we will have to suffer those karmic reactions. So, if a living entity wants to
go hell means, a living entity wants to enable hellish enjoyment, then the Lord
allows him to do that without interference. The Lord says, ok, I will not
intervene. But if he wants to go back home back to Godhead, the Lord helps him.
Why? Because that is what the Lord also wants. Because the Lord wants that, then
He will help the living entity in doing that. Now, ins..., interesting over here
that Srila Prabhupada uses the word Lord repeatedly. He does not use the word
Krishna so much. Why? Because he, as I said, the Isopanisad is written to
attract people who with impersonalist inclination, and those impersonalist
inclinations, people should not feel right from the beginning that we, people
are biased against Krishna. So, Prabhupada is taking care of that. And he is
using the word Lord repeatedly, instead of using the word Krishna. Now,
Prabhupada makes another memorable statement in the purport.

"Real liberation means going back to Godhead."

        bhakti hitvanyata rupam svarupena vyavastitih

That is good enough. That bhakti means to be situated in our eternal position,
original position, internal position. But then, Prabhupada makes a heavy
statement:

"Liberation as conceived of by an impersonalist is a myth".

How can impersonalism be a myth? We know brahmayoti is a part of the Absolute
Truth. But Srila Prabhupada is careful to qualify his statement impersonalism
as conceived by an impersonalist. So, what is the conception of an impersonalist
about impersonalism? Conception is that actually I will become God. One day, I
will merge into God and I will become God. That is a myth. And begging for sense
gratification has to continue eternally.

        bhakti mukti sadi kami saka leya santha

Desires will never go away. One will just be trapped in infinite longings. So,
now, the verse goes on to talk about the gopis, and how the Lord is, is pure and
antiseptic. So, then finally, Prabhupada concludes by saying that, actually, we
now understand all these words, then we can gain clearer understanding of the
Lord's properties. This is how the s..., the seeker becomes the seer. The seeker
who wants to harmonise the, with the Lord, gains spiritual vision towards the
things of this world, and then eventually directs the spiritual vision towards
the Lord, and then he sees contradictions, but when he sees contradictions, he
understands that beyond those contradictions, there is some invisible reality,
which will, which when postulate it, we will be able to give a conclusive
understanding to this. And overall, the mahabhagavat understand the Lord to be
the greatest. And he understand Him to the greatest, when he actually falls
wholeheartedly in love with Him. So, in the next sections, once one had
understood how to understand the Lord, that is by, it, this is the conclusion
that we should come to. Now, what is the process that we should follow? For
that, vidya will be described, avidya will be described, and then the comparison
between vidya and avidya will be done. That is the next section. We continue
that in our next class.

Thank you very much. Srila Pra..., Isopanisad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki
jaya. Gaura bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande hari haribol. Thank
you.
