Vdideo: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tDqStDJW15k
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_020_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_16_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=VI06kVb5148mz5A0-78W5fCVWy58MTU0MDEwMjY4M0AxNTQwMDE2Mjgz&event=video_description&v=tDqStDJW15k

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the last section of the Isopanisad course. Today, we will be
studying mantra sixteen. This is a part of the last section of the Isopanisad
wherein prayers are being offered. So, the f..., fifteenth mantra had the
prayer, please remove your blazing effulgence so that I can see your, behold
your face.

        satyasyāpihitaṁ mukham

Now, the same prayer is continued with a devotional element being added to it,
in terms of see..., beseeching the mercy of the Lord further. And we will see
that more and more in the last two mantras. So, let us look at mantra sixteen.

    pūṣann ekarṣe yama sūrya prājāpatya
    vyūha raśmīn samūha
    tejo yat te rūpaṁ kalyāṇa-tamaṁ
    tat te paśyāmi yo 'sāv asau puruṣaḥ so 'ham asmi

So, "pūṣann", the word "pūṣann" had come in the previous mantra also. "pūṣann"
is maintainer. "ekarṣe". So, "ṛṣe" is philosopher, thinker. "ekarṣe", that the
Lord is the original thinker. "yama", "yama" and "miyama" are the starting of
the yoga process. "yama" means rules, regu..., regulative principles. So,
"Yamaraja" is one who regulates. So, He, ultimately, the Lord is the supreme
"yama". "sūrya". "sūrya" can mean Sun. But it, "sūrya" al..., can also mean
the s..., the destination of the suras. "prājāpatya", so He is the well-wisher.
He is the protector. He is the maintainer of the "prājāpatyas". "vyūha raśmīn
samūha". "vyūha" is kindly remove. "raśmīn", the rays. The same prayers
continuing. There is glorification of the Lord, how great that Absolute Truth
is. And then there is a beseechment, beseeching to the Lord, please remove.
"samūha", kindly withdraw. So, "vyūha" and "samūha", please remove.

"tejo yat te rūpaṁ", so now, right in the Isopanisad, we will see, there is the
word "rūpaṁ". So, some people say that Upanishads talk about impersonalism. They
do talk about impersonalism, but there is personalism also. And if you look at
the flow of thought, in, as it is moving towards its close, it is actually
moving towards personal understanding. "tejo yat te rūpaṁ kalyāṇa-tamaṁ". And
what is the nature of that form? "kalyāṇa" is auspiciousness. "kalyāṇa-tamaṁ" is
most auspicious, good, better, best. So, there is, there are degrees and
superlatives. Similarly, "kalyāṇa", "kalyāṇa-tara", and "kalyāṇa-tamaṁ", so it
is supremely auspicious. "tat te paśyāmi", so if there is any doubt. Whether
this might, the "rūpaṁ" might just be metaphorical reference. No, it is "tat te
paśyāmi". I want to see that form. So, there is a real form. And that form is
supremely auspicious. And the sage is desiring to see that form.

And then, "yo 'sāv asau puruṣaḥ so 'ham asmi". "yo 'sāv asau", as that person
is, so am I. So, "'sāv", as the S..., Sun is, like the Sun. "asau puruṣaḥ so
'ham asmi", so, that person is effulgent, supremely effulgent, and similarly, I
am. So, this mantra is an excellent example of "Achintya Bheda Abheda" in
action. The impersonalists will take only the "so 'ham asmi". "'ham" is I. "so"
is that. "so 'ham asmi", that means I am that. So, this, they use to try to
prove that actually the Absolute Truth is non-personal, and I and the Absolute
Truth are ultimately the same. So, that is one aspect of the teaching of the
Upanishads. But there is another aspect which is personalist. And that is very
clearly stated through "rūpaṁ kalyāṇa-tamaṁ paśyāmi". So, if we have to honestly
represent the teachings of the Upanishads, then we have to see everything that
they are seeing. Not just the part that agrees with our philosophy, or with
one's own philosophy. So, the impersonalists, they just take the part which
agrees with their philosophy, and neglect the other part or subordinate the
other part by saying that it is Vyavaharika. And ours is Paramarthika. This
actually rips apart the shastra. And this is, this is not actually understanding
shastra. It is imposing one's own philosophy on shastra. So, the, is, is, so,
here, "rūpaṁ kalyāṇa-tamaṁ" is there. And "so 'ham asmi" is also there. So, how
can the two be reconciled? That is through Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's teachings
of qualitative oneness, and quantitative difference. Let us look at Srila
Prabhupada's translation.

"O my Lord, O primeval philosopher, maintainer of the universe, O regulating
principle, destination of the pure devotees, well-wisher of the progenitors of
mankind, please remove the effulgence of Your transcendental rays so that I can
see Your form of bliss. You are the eternal Supreme Personality of Godhead, like
unto the sun, as am I."

So, here, Srila Prabhupada's translation makes it clear that what is being
referred to is the qualitative oneness. So, now, let us look at the purport. So,
"Vyuha rashmin". Prabhupada talks about please remove. Please remove the
effulgence. So, he explains that beyond the Brahman, is Bhagavan. And then,
Prabhupada emphasizes the point "kalyāṇa-tamaṁ", the most auspicious. Then, he
says how Bhagavan is the the most auspicious realisation. There are levels of
auspiciousness. But Bhagavan is the most auspicious realisation. Then, "pūṣann",
mantainer. The, how the Lord especially maintains the devotees, and in general,
maintains everyone and everything else. So, "so 'ham asmi", how the living
entity is one, yet different from the Lord. We will discuss Jnana a little bit
on this, in, in, while analysing this. And the favor of the Lord sought by this
prayer is fulfilled in pure devotional service. Prabhupada makes this profound
point in the conclusion of this purport. So, let us look at these points one by
one.

"Vyuha rashmin", beyond Brahman is Bhagavan. So, the fundamental difference
between impersonalism and personalism is that both consider their, their, both
consider that their own conception is the absolute, is the highest reality. So,
impersonalists consider Brahman to be the highest reality. And they say when
form is imposed on Brahman, or form is accepted by Brahman, then Bhagavan
appears. So, their idea is Brahman is higher. And Bhagavan is lower. Because
something is added to Brahman, Brahman and then Bhagavan comes. But what is
added is illusory. What is added is temporary. Whereas the Vaishnava
understanding is that Bhagavan is the highest route and when some aspect of the
Absolute Truth is not understood, so "sat-cit-ananda", when "cit" and "ananda"
aspects of the Absolute Truth are not co..., properly comprehended. They do not,
practically, do not, "sat" aspect is comprehended, at that time, one sees the
Brahman. So, if we look at scriptures, s..., they do talk about Brahman. And
they do talk about Bhagavan also. But prominently, whether it is the Upanishads,
or whether it is the Puranas, or even the original Vedas, there are lots and
lots of prayers. And those prayers indicate that there is a higher reality to
whom one is praying. And sim..., people say yes that, this is true. But
ultimately, one has to go beyond that conception of higher reality to merge into
that. You know, that, whatever conception of Absolute Truth they are cherishing.
But this notion is not really subordina..., s..., substantiated by scripture. It
has to be extrapolated from scripture. So, we discussed there several verses.

        brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham

I am the supporter of Brahman. And so, so, I am the foundation and some...
something which is a rest on me. That is Brahman. So, in that sense, Bhagavan is
higher. Brahman is something which is, which is resting on Him. So, if you
con..., consider these two conceptions, that means something is imposed on
Brahman, then Bhagavan comes. Or something is supported by Bragavan, that is
what Brahman is. So, something that is dependent on Brahman. That is a partial
manifestation of Bhagavan. That is Brahman. So, Bhagavad Gita supports this
conception. 14.27 says:

        brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham

That actually, I am the form of the isano Brahman. So, the Bhagavan is the
higher reality. And if we compare the two, the conception of impersonalism seems
to be intellectually appealing. Because in there, no forms. There is no
personality. There is just oneness. However, it strips the Absolute Truth off
one of the attributes. That is the Absolute Truth which has form. So, the,
actually, it is, from the intellectual point of view also. The conception of
Brahman is the Absolute Truth may have its appeal. But it is not complete.
Something is, the, Absolute Truth has something missing. And beyond that, the
Absolute Truth loses all emotional appeal. Because He is, Absolute Truth is just
a dry abstract conception basically, just consciousness with no reciprocation,
no activities. Then, it has very little appeal for the heart. And that is why
even within impersonalism, many impersonalists encourage bhakti as a lower level
path of realisation for less evolved people. But that is not what the Bha...,
scriptures teach. Scriptures teach that bhakti is to be continued until the end.

        ovyayam 

Krishna says in 9.2 in the Bhagavad Gita:

        rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ
        pavitram idam uttamam
        pratyakṣāvagamaṁ dharmyaṁ
        su-sukhaṁ kartum avyayam

"su-sukhaṁ kartum avyayam", it is imperishable.

So, now, let us try to understand how Bhagavan is the most auspicious
realisation. So, Bhagavan is the highest and the best destination. He is
"kalyāṇa-tamaṁ". He is most auspicious. Because He is highest. He is higher than
Brahman. He is higher than Paramatma. He is the supreme realisation. So, He is
the glo..., most glorious destination. Those who go to Brahman, they cannot
actually be eternally satisfied in Brahman. Because there is no reciprocation.
There is no real satisfaction for the heart over there. But beyond Brahman is
Bhagavan. And in Bhagavan, one becomes completely satisfied. So, He is the
highest and the best destination. So, He, He is the highest because Bhagavan is
beyond Brahman and Paramatma. He is the best because there the heart's longing
for love is c..., eternally and completely satisfied. So, that is why the:

        yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama paramam mama

Krishna repeatedly assures that when we return back to his abode, then we will
not come back again here. Because that is the eternal destination. And then,
another reason why He is "kalyāṇa-tamaṁ" is that actually He helps devotees by
bestowing His grace. By bestowing His grace, He enables us devotees to rise to a
higher level of understanding, to make s..., rapid spiritual advancement, and to
return back to Him. So, if all of us envision ourselves as having fallen inside
a dwell, so, now, if I have to come out of the dwell, I need a way out. So, if a
rope is extended down to me, I hold onto the rope. And somebody pulls me out.
Then, I can come out quite easily. If I have just to find some footholds and
handholds of, in the roles on the w.., w..., sidewall of the dwell, and pull
myself out, then going to be extremely difficult. So, that, putting my hands and
legs on the wall, and trying to find my way out, that is like making spiritual
advancement by own, one's own mental concoctions, by one's own concocted
methods. One can climb, but extremely difficult and there is a very large
poss..., possibility that one will fall back. Now, practicing spiritual life
according to the method given in the scriptures is like giving a rope. But even
the rope can be used in two ways. One is the bhaktas, they hold onto the rope,
and they beg to the person outside, please pull me out. That means the devotees
practice the process of devotional service, but they beg to the Lord. Please
t..., help me advance. Please enable me to advance. The Jnanis and the Yogis,
because for them Bhagavan is not the ultimate reality. They want to go to the
reality beyond Bhagavan. So, they often do not pray to Bhagavan. So, they hold
onto the rope. But instead of asking the person the, to pull out, they try to
climb up the rope. So, the effort is much more laborious. So, the rope
represents a scriptural process. So, trying to climb without the rope is trying
to rise spiritually without any authorised process. Trying to climb the rope,
but not asking the Lord f..., not asking the person out for help is like
following a process other than bhakti. So, it is more complex. It is possible.
But it is difficult.

So, again and again, the scriptures say that bhakti is easy. The other processes
are difficult. In the whole Bhagavad Gita, there is only one verse where Krishna
says that this process is easy. And He says that, clearly with respect to
bhakti, with respect to fixing the mind on Him and serving here. In 8.14, He
says:

        tasyāhaṁ su-labhaḥ pārtha
        nitya-yuktasya yoginaḥ

So, He says "tasyāhaṁ", unto that person. "su-labhaḥ pārtha", I am easily
obtained. "labhaḥ" is to gain, "su-labhaḥ" is easily gain. Yet, a, Krishna also
say that the person who attains Him, who comes to Him is, in the same, listen
in, the previous chapter, in the nineteenth verse, Krishna has, says such a
person is "durlabhaḥ". So, He says:

        mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha
        daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ
        bhajanty ananya-manaso
        jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

This is a word by Krishna, he used the word "mahātmā". Here, it is very clearly
understood that Krishna is referring to devotee. One who worships Him without
considering any other supreme goal. But Krishna uses this word "mahātmā". And He
describes the characteristics of that "mahātmā" earlier. This is 9.13. Before
that, in 7.19, Krishna says that:

    bahūnāṁ janmanām ante
    jñānavān māṁ prapadyate
    vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti
    sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ

So, one who understands Vasudeva to be everything, one who understands that
"bhajanty", one who does "bhajanty ananya-manaso", one-pointedly worship
Vasudeva, which is "durlabhaḥ". So, Krishna says that one who knows Him as
"durlabhaḥ", but on the other hand, He says to know Him is "sulabhaḥ". So, how
is it that actually the process by which He is "sulabhaḥ", those who attain Him
are still "durlabhaḥ". Because of the misconceptions of those, of people on the
spiritual path. Because of the preconceptions and misconceptions of people,
although bhakti can enable people to rise to the highest destination. Many
people minimise bhakti to be something simplistic. So, that is why they do not
follow it. But the Lord personally helps His devotees. And that is why they can
make rapid advancement.

So, now, how does the mercy of the Lord come about? Actually, you know, in the
spiritual path, when we practice bhakti. There is knowledge. There is taste. And
there is grace. So, let us understand these things. Knowledge. So, we get s...,
full of, spiritual knowledge. I am not the body. I am the soul. Therefore, I
should not get into material enjoyment. Material enjoyment is temporary. And it
will increase my bodily consciousness and enga..., entangle me in this material
existence. So, just knowledge itself is revolutionary for many people. Because
there are many people who say in their childhood, they never knew that they were
not the body. And when they come to know, it is like thunderbolt hitting them.
It shakes up their previous world view and illuminates in them a new light, a
new hope, a new love, for a better, higher, richer life. So, knowledge itself is
powerful. But after knowledge comes taste. You know, it is one thing to know
intellectually that I am not the body. I am the soul. But still, it is not easy
to relish life at the spiritual level. Just saying that I am not the body. I am
the soul. I am not the body. I am the soul. I am not the body. I am the soul.
Will that make a person really satisfied? It is difficult. You can certainly
calm the mind down. And it can bring a sense of detachment. But actually, as far
as satisfaction is concerned, one needs to act at the spiritual level. It is
like, the example is given that, suppose somebody is a billionaire. Now, that
person just thinks, I am a bi..., says. I am a billionaire. I am a billionare.
I am a billionaire. I am a billionaire. Will that make, make that person happy?
Well, maybe for some time. He may think, oh, I am a billionaire. I was a pop,
poor. I have become a billionaire. But actually, if that person wants to be
happy, that person has to act at the platform of being a believer. He can
travel here. He can go there. He can do that. And we are talking now from the
point of view of material enjoyment. But even from material enjoyment, one has
to act on the platform to be able to enjoy. So, the ultimate point of view of
course, material enjoyment is false. It is temporary. Prabhupada writes that
service to the senses is misleading and degrading. It is misleading. It promises
happiness, but does not lead to happiness. And not only that. It is degrading
because it drags us down to lower modes, and lower consciousness, and eventually
lower destinations.

So, just as person in material life also needs to act on the platform of wealth
to enjoy the wealth, similarly, we have to act on the spiritual platform to
actually experience the reality that we are spiritual beings. So, after that
knowledge has to come taste. The taste comes when we practice devotional
service. Because we are acting on the platform of the soul. When we act on the
platform of the soul and serve Krishna, because serving Krishna is the eternal
nature of the soul:

        mamaivamso jiva-loke

Gita 15.7 says, then that gives us a taste. And beyond taste. So, there is
knowledge. I am not the body. I am soul. There are taste, which comes by engaging
in devotional activities at the spiritual level. And beyond that, there is
mercy, or grace. So, when we are practicing devotional service, just engagement
in devotional service itself gives some kind of taste. Prabhupada writes that
even the mechanical chanting of the holy names, if done diligently, can lead to
the subsiding of the miseries of material existence. Then, mechanical chanting,
if chant indeterminately, can calm down the moods of passion, ignorance. It
may not grant us love of God. But even if, if, if I am feeling agitated by lust,
or greed, or anger, if I just start chanting, start remembering Krishna, then
that will bring my mind to goodness at the very least. It can take me to
transcendence also. But it can bring at least, m..., me to at least goodness if
I just keep doing it. So, even the mechanical chanting brings one benefit. So,
one comes to the mode of goodness where one feels sukha. Because sukha is the
characteristic of the mode of goodness. And then as one moves to transcendence,
ones experience even greater sukha. So, the Lord helps devotees by bestowing His
mercy. Mercy means when we are practicing devotional service, there are times
when:

        svayam ava spuratyada

We suddenly get moments of realisation, illumination, ecstasy, deep fulfillment.
Those are the grace of, those are one aspect of the grace of the Lord. So, in this
way, by this triple impetus, through knowledge, through taste, and through
grace. Through knowledge that I am not the body. Through taste that, oh, if I
serve Krishna, there is so much happiness, and, and mercy. On some moments,
actually, I just feel overflooded with happiness. So, the, all this comes when
we, we devote ourselves to Bhagavan. We do not get all this if we devote
ourselves to Paramatma or Brahman. That is another way of looking how Bhagavan
is "kalyāṇa-tamaṁ". Now, Srila Prabhupada takes Jiva Goswami's commentary and
elaborately explains the word Bhagavan, what does it mean, and how does it come
into the picture here. So, he explains what Bha-ga-van means. So, here:

"... first syllable of the word bhagavān (bha) has two meanings: the first is
'one who fully maintains,' and the second is 'guardian.'"

So, "bha" is "bharta". Bharta can be maintainer. Bhartha can be guardian. That
is the root. Then "ga":

"The second syllable (ga) means 'guide,' 'leader' or 'creator.'

So, that is "ga", "gamyate". One who takes to a particular destination.

"The syllable vān indicates that every being lives in Him and that He also lives
in every being."

So, here, Jiva Goswami is giving a different etymological explanation of the
word Bhagavad as compared to the standard one. The standard explanation is
"Bhaga" and "vana". "Bhaga", "Bhaga" is opulences. And "vana" is one who is
possesser of opulences. So, here, he, Pra..., here, he takes it, "Bha" refers to
maintainer. "ga" refers to leader or guide, and one who maintains and guides.
And "van" actually refers to how he, that person maintains and guides. So, "van"
here is taken not as a possessor, "va...", "van" is related with the word "vas",
to reside. So, "van" means one who resides in. So, the Su..., Supreme Lord is so
won..., wonderful that He, everything resides in Him. And He resides in
everything. Everything resides in Him means that ultimately all of existence is
sheltered within His energy. Everything resides in Him, at the same time, He
also resides in everything. How is that possible? Because He enters everything
as the Supersoul.

        andarasta parama ucaya tarantastam

He is inside everything. So, in this way, He is inside everything. Everything is
inside Him. The sort of play of words is called in English as chiasmus. Chiasmus
means the two parts of the sentence are, are done in such a way that they
interplay. So, like earlier, I was giving the example, a devotee ho..., nothing
holds a devotee back. A devotee holds nothing back. So, that indicates that the
devotee serves Krishna wholeheartedly without any internal or external
limitations. Similarly, the Lord resides in everything. And He, everything
resides in Him. This is a chiasmus. So, let us move forward after discussing the
meaning of the word "Bhagavan". So, He helps His devotees by bestowing His grace.

Now, let us see this favorite word of the mayavadis, "so 'ham". So, actually,
one has to move forward from "so 'ham" realisation to "daso 'ham". "daso 'ham"
means I am the das. So, actually speaking, the mayavadis, so this, they
emphasize oneness in quality. That is true. The scriptures do emphasize oneness
in quality at times. But that does not deny difference in quantity. Because the
scriptures at other places do talk about how we are infinitism and the Lord is
infinite. So, by denying this, the difference in quality, we misrepresent the
scrpitures.

So, how does one move from "so 'ham" to "daso 'ham"? Actually, as long as one is
attached to one's false ego. And one wants to think that. I will be great. I
want to be great. Then, and s..., if spiritual rela..., realm becomes a means to
pursue one's own agenda of wanting to become great. Then, it is very difficult
for such a person to come to "daso 'ham". But if one practices spiritual life to
understand what is the ultimate reality actually. What is the highest truth? And
how can I achieve that highest truth? Then, such a person can rise to the
realisation of "so 'ham" to "daso 'ham". So, now, generally speaking, the idea
of "so 'ham". I am that. This is considered to be a jnani realisation. That
those who are jnanis, they come and they c..., they, they study the scripture,
they speculate, they, they contemplate, and then they come to idea. Oh, "so
'ham", I am that. When the jnanis feel that, when they have realised that, that
will be their eureka moment. You know, eureka moment means, eureka is a phrase,
used, which is used by Archimedes when he discovered the principle of special
gravity. It was in a tablet. Suddenly, he realised, jumped out, without any
clothes, eureka, eureka. So, since that time, eureka is the, eu..., eureka
moment means, a moment when one gets some sudden realisation, oh, such a
brilliant realisation that one forgets everything else. Some insight, s...,
tru..., spark of insight, lights within us illuminating everything at that
particular time. So, the impersonalists, the mayavadis think that their eureka
moment will be when they can say with realisation, "so 'ham". So, that may be a
brilliant moment for them. But actually, that is an incomplete realisation. And
the complete realisation is, yes, I am like that Absolute Truth. But the
devotee's eureka moment is when the devotee actually internally accepts. So,
"daso 'ham", I am the servant of the Lord. And let me serve Him by serving His
servants.

So, let us look at the jnana which is anikul to bhakti, and jnana which is
pratikul to bhakti. So, this is based on the Jiva Goswami's writing in Durgama
Sangamani Tika as well as other books. So, "tika" means a commentary or
sometimes it refers to a commentary on a commentary. So, Rupa Goswami has
written Bhakti-Rasamrta-Sindhu. And Ji..., Jiva Goswami has commented on it,
called as "Durgam Sangamani Tika". And Bhanu Maharaja has translated that into
English. So, there, he describes jnana can refer to three things. Atma-Jnana,
Ishvara-Jnana and Aiktava-Jnana. So, essentially, jnana refers to spiritual
reality. So, in the spiritual reality, there is the soul. And there is the
Absolute Truth. There is Ishvara. So, Atma-Jnana, Ishvara-Jnana. Both are
important for the devotees. But the devotees reject Aiktava-Jnana. So, after
I understand the a..., I am the atma. After I understand there is God. To think
that the way to offers are one. That is something which is, according to
Vaishnavas, is a disastrous misunderstanding. So, Vaishnavas reject
the Aikatva-Jnana. And they focus on the Jnana that will bring the atma closer
to Ishvar..., Ishvara. So, how will that happen?

So, why is Jnana pratikul to bhakti? Three reasons. Constitution, application,
and destination. So, what is the aspect of Jnana? That is, that makes pratikul,
pratikul means unfavorable to bhakti? So, ins consitution, the, in constitution
means what it is made up of. Oneness denies eternality of bhakti. Because in
bhakta and Bhagavan, are ultimately going to become one. Then, what is the goal?
What is the point ultimately in devoting myself, when calling out selflessly, my
dear Lord, please serve you? Please allow me to serve you. Please have mercy on
me. So, it all becomes unnecessary. So, it denies the eternality of bhakti. So,
that is why, there are many prayers in the Bhagavatam, where it says, devotees,
says that my dear Lord, I would prefer going to hell if I got the opportunity to
chant your glories than to go to heaven or a better destination if I was deprived
of your assoc..., association of devotees, and the opportunity to render
devotional service. Why? Because a devotee relishes bhakti. And to lose bhakti
is the greatest disaster for a devotee. In order to not face that, to not want
to go through that disaster, devotee prays I will even accept the disaster of
liberation, or accept the li..., disa..., disaster of living on material
existence. Because in that at least, I will have the opportunity to practice
devotional service, devotional service. In liberation, I do not even get that
opportunity.

In application, Jnana, what does it do? It leads to hardening of the heart.
Hardening of the heart because in one Jna..., in Jnana one is constantly trying
analyse, evaluate, and then decide. So, because of this analysis and evaluation,
in every single relationship, every single interaction, every single past
significant interactions also. So, by this, one just starts becoming too
objective, too clinical, too g..., detached, too dispossessive, and one starts
focusing at that time on I am not the body. I am the soul. That person is not
the body. That is soul. And like that, one becomes very, one, one's sentiments
dry up. For example, for devotee is sick. And, and that devotee needs some
water, and needs some medicine, needs some special food. And you say, Prabhu,
you are not your body. Why are you putting so much attention of the body? That
is maya. So, actually, our speaking like this is maya. That person is not, may
or may not be in maya. But to think that philosophy has to be ap..., applied in
such an insensitive and course way, that is a serious misunderstanding. Yes,
definitely, somebody is sick. That person should feel responsible that I do not
want the same bodily consciousness. I want to rise out of it. That is that
person's responsibility. And we should provide education by which that person
feels like that when the challenge comes in his or her life. But that does not
mean that we ha...., harden our hearts towards him. If we are trying to practice
bhakti, we have to have soft hearts. And to have soft hearts towards Krishna, we
have to have soft hearts, at least towards His devotees. If not all, at least
some devotees. So, because in application, one has to be utterly unsentimental.
So, the path of jnana is, leads to hardening of the heart. And it leads, and it
is unpratikul to bhakti.

And in destination, it is merging. So, now, merging means end of bhakti. That is
a devotee gives up the urge to merge. A devotee says, I have no urge to merge,
my dear Lord. I simply want to serve you.

        mama janmani janmanishvare
        bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki twayi

"bhavatad bhaktir", my Lord, I want you, but I want your bhakti again and again,
no matter how many times I have to come to material existence. I want your
bhakti.

So, now, this is the jnana that is pratikul in constitution, in application and
in destination. But Jiva Goswami also explains that all Jnana does not have to
be like that. There can be jnana that is anikul to bhakti also. And that can
also, that anikulta is based on whether that jnana enhances one's bhakti, that
jnana enables one to come closer to Krishna. So, there is a different kind of
jnana, that does help one to do that. That is, it is constitutional,
application, and destination as shown over here. So, in constitution, the
subordination of the soul is emphasized. At the same time, it is explained that
the soul is a part of Krishna, is a part of Krishna and when the const..., when
the soul is accepted as a part of Krishna and that, and knowledge emphasized,
oh, I am a part, and He is the whole. And without Him, I cannot be happy. Then
that encourages bhakti. That inspires a person to start practicing spiritual
life. And then application, now, this is a problem that Jnana, if I
understand, oh, everybody is a soul. Everybody is already liberated. then I do
not have to do anything to try to deliver people now. Of course, some jnanis may
still do that. But actually, a jnani considers that the present existence is
illusory. And, and just by catering those illusory ende..., ex..., existence,
one will not be able to make spiritual advancement. Which is true in one sense.
But in another sense, for a devotee at least, the, this distance is not just
simply mundane. It is being used in Krishna's service. So, by serving the
devotees, by serving Krishna, one can go beyond material existence. So,
application of bhakti stabilises the mind's restlestness.

And then lastly is the aspect of destination. So, in application, bhakti
stabilises, because one understands. One gets an intellectual understanding of
the various devo..., devotional practices. And that is why one becomes more
inspired to stay subordinate. And then lastly, we have in the bhakti, in the, in
this comparison between jnana and bhakti, what is destination? Or what is the
goal ultimately of jnana in the path of bhakti? It is enhanced appreciation of
the Lord's glories. One understands that the Lord is so great. Let me devote
our..., myself to Him. So, here, glories are not just in terms of greatness.
They are also in terms of sweetness. That Krishna is such a wonderful person. I
want to love Him. So, in this way, in constitution, in application, and in
destination, all three, jnana can be made anukul to bhakti.

So, Srila Prabhupada did emphasize philosophical knowledge. When he started his
preaching, now, although he started his preaching by chanting Hare Krishna, and
giving people ecstasy through his chanting. He also talked about the bodily
conception. And how it was misleading. You know, how one has to rise beyond the
bodily conception. So, by understanding this, one can move forward in one's
spiritual life. So, "so 'ham" is an incomplete realisation. "daso 'ham" is a
complete realisation. And bhakti is so inclusive that we do not have to reject
our attraction towards jnana. But we can harmonise that attraction if we have
towards intellectualism, towards study, serious study of philosophy a lot. And
trying to understand things. We can use it all to come towards to Krishna,
through the process of bhakti. So, now, if you move forward. The favor of the
Lord sought by this prayer is fulfilled in pure devotional service. What does
this mean? It is an interesting statement. What Srila Prabhupada is saying is
that actually when one practices devotional service, then only, so as was, I was
saying over here:

"... the Lord can known only by those whom He favors, and not by anyone else."

And whom does He favor? The Lord is not absolutely, not partial, or
discriminately. The, whoever tries to serve the Lord, tries to please the Lord,
the Lord favors that person.

"Such special favors are bestowed upon His pure devotees only."

Why? Because the pure devotees alone accept that the Lord is the ultimate
person. But Jnanis, the Yogis, they consider Lord to be transitional person.
That means they consider Brahman is the highest reality. And the Lord is, is a
temporary reality. That is why we cannot beseech wholeheartedly from the Lord,
even when the Lord appears. But Sri Isopanisad thus points to the favor of the
Lord, which is the beyond the purview of the brahmajyoti. So, beyond the purview
of brahmajyoti means, the brahmajyoti cannot bless anyone. Srila Prabhupada
gives the example that the sky is very big. But if someone says, oh, sky, I love
you. What do you do with the sky? The sky is so vast. It is everywhere. How does
one love the sky practically speaking? Similarly, Prabhupada says Brahman is
everywhere. Now, beholding the sky may give me peace. Similarly, contemplating
on the Brahman might give some peace. But what we want is not just peace. We
want love. So, we get that love by the practice of bhakti. Or at least by the
grace of devotees. So, whatever is poin..., the favor that is pointed to in the,
in this verse or which is begged for in this verse, that is beyond the
brahmajyoti. That means the brahmajyoti cannot gives blessing. Only that, which
is brahma, beyond brahmajyoti will give us blessing. And that is the Supreme
Lord and His pure devoees.

Now, in this verse, we conclude by discussing one more important point. Here, we
will focus on discussing the point of how bhakti is the best process. So, on one
side, we pray to the Lord. So, when we pray to him, we ask Him for some mercy,
some benefits. So, how do we get those benefits? Actually, chanting of the holy
name is simultaneously a prayer and a fulfillment of the prayer. How is that? It
is a prayer because we are asking the Lord, please engage me in your service.
Please, oh Lord, engage me in your service. Please, oh Lord, engage me in your
service. Bhaktivinoda Thakur has explained that this is the mood in which we
chant. Now, while saying, please engage me in your service, the, it is also
being said that my dear Lord, please, it is also being said that please purify
me. Please help me to return back to you where I can serve you eternally. But
while that is going to happen eventually, Krishna manifests Himself as the holy
name. So, when Krishna manifests Himself as the holy name, at that time, we want
to serve Krishna. Krishna has manifested as the holy name. And by reciting the
name respectfully, by chanting it clearly, by hearing it attentively, we
actually respect and worship Krishna, and serve Him. So, in this way, chanting
is both a prayer and a fulfillment of the prayer. It is prayer. Please engage me
in your service. And because Krishna manifests Himself as the holy name, and He
comes on our tongue. Prabhupada says cha..., Krishna dances on our tongue when
we chant the holy names. So that means that He is giving us the opportunity to
serve Him. So, chanting is both a prayer and a fulfillment of a prayer. So,
often, we may think of the fulfillment of a prayer as something miraculous. You
know, what is success of my chanting? Oh, I will see some mystical white light
in my head.

So, once some young mata, young girl in America, she said, Swamiji, when I chant
this Hare Krishna, I can see a light in my head. Prabhupada said keep chanting,
the light will go away. So, she was shocked. She thought, oh, if, so, Swamiji
will say, oh, I am a great mystics here. I am seeing the light in my head.
Prabhupada said, just, just do not bother about this thing. Chant Hare Krishna.
Light will go away. Why? Because the ultimate goal is not to just see some white
light. It is to behold the beautiful form of Krishna. And that requires
purification. So, when we practice devotional service. We are not only praying
to the Lord. But we are also receiving the response to our prayer. The Lord's
response is not necessarily by doing some miracles, giving us some mystical
visions. You know if miracles become the criteria, then circus will become the
testing ground. Because a circus is a place where different people come and do
all sorts of things, which stuns, which others cannot do. So, if miracles are
the criteria, you know, during kirtan, who is dancing more than others. Whose
tears are more than others'. Who has the most extraordinary miraculous
paranormal visions? You know, who can manifest in the four-handed form? So,
these are not the criteria for spiritual advancement. These are actually, if
they happen, they had happened to few people. But even if it they do not happen,
that person is devoted and committed to Krishna, that person will make spiritual
advancement. So, where miracles are the criteria, then circus becomes the
testing ground. And that is not the, devotional service is definitely not a
circus. It is actually a serious arena for purification. And that is why when
pray to the Lord, please have mercy on me. What does the mercy mean? Prabhupada
explains that the mercy is engagement in devotional service. Because how are we
protected from maya? How are we lifted up? Is it by some miraculous intervention
of Krishna? That may happen on a few occasions. But generally, it happens
through Krishna's grace coming through His extending us the process of
devotional service. Just like, when a person has fallen down dwell. It is not
that somebody will jump into the dwell. Pick up that person. And putting the
palki and then breaking out. No. All that person will do is, even the fact that a
person gets a rope, you know, all this person has to do hold onto the rope. And
that person will be pulled out. That itself is a miracle. So, we do not have to
expect supernatural events around us to give us faith that Krishna is there, and
Krishna performs miracles. What we need is a simple understanding. That God
exists. God is my well-wisher. And if I surrender myself to God, God will guide
me to the right place in the right way forward. So, if I have that faith that
Krishna is my well-wisher and Krishna's will manifests through His devotees,
then I can go on in devotional service lifelong. So, devotional service is
itself the answer to our prayer. The prayer is for the Lord's favor. And how
the Lord's favor comes? It comes in the form of devotional service. So, when we
render devotional service to Krishna, we are accepting the favor of the Lord.
And by accepting the favor of the Lord, we make spiritual advancement.

So, to summarise, we discussed first about how Brahman is lower and Bhagavan is
the highest reality. Although they are both manifestations of same Absolute
Truth, Bhagavan manifests that Absolute Truth most fully. Then, we discussed
"kalyāṇa-tamaṁ". How? The perception of the Lord is the most auspicious, far
more auspicious than the ideas of God that are there in various traditions. And
the whole conceptions of the Absolute Truth that are there within the Vedic
tradition also. And then "Pūṣann", we discussed how "Bha" refers to
philosoph..., "Bha" refers to maintainer, sustainer. "ga" refers to guide. And
"van" refers to possessor. So, the Lord maintains everyone. "Pūṣann", we
discussed. And then "so 'ham" to "daso 'ham", that is important part of the
class that instead of thinking that ev..., taking a scripture and only that
section which supports one own's ideas, one takes the full section, takes
personalist and impersonalist statements, and reconciles them in a higher
reality. That is "Achintya Bheda Abheda". And then lastly, we discussed, how
chanting is itself not a prayer, not just a prayer, but also, it is a res..., it
is also responsive to a prayer. It is the answer to a prayer, and says the whole
process of devotional service. When we ask for Krishna for mercy, He gives
devotional service. And devotional keeps us so busy that we stay protected from
Maya. And that is the ultimate goal of life.

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande.

