Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4XxKNnn_Qlo
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=5RYH7HhfW-izBVFuk-IAgEdjeZt8MTU0MDEwMjI2OUAxNTQwMDE1ODY5&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_008_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_06_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=4XxKNnn_Qlo&event=video_description

Isopanisad section two, verse six we will take today.

So here is the overview, in the second section, the main topic is how to
understand the Ishvara by cultivating spiritual vision.

So the first two verses which comprimise the first subsection of the second
section, whereabout how the Ishvara possesses inconceivable attributes.

Now, to understand that Ishvara possesses inconceivable attributes, we need to
develop spiritual vision. So spiritual vision cannot be developed suddenly about
God because God is not in our perception. So first, spiritual vision is
developed by seeing worldly things, events and people with equanimity. With an
equal vision towards the things of this world may begin. So that is the theme of
verses six and seven.

So let us look at verse, mantra six:

        yas tu sarvāṇi bhūtāny
        ātmany evānupaśyati
        sarva-bhūteṣu cātmānaṁ
        tato na vijugupsate

So, "yas tu sarvāṇi bhūtāny" that person who sees all living beings, "ātmany
evānupaśyati", sees them at the spiritual level, sees them as atma.
"sarva-bhūteṣu cātmānaṁ", and that person sees all living beings residing in
spiritual reality. Srila Prabhupada translates this as: One who sees
systematically everything in relation to the Supreme Lord, who sees all living
entities as His parts and parcels, and who sees the Supreme Lord within
everything.

"yas tu sarvāṇi bhūtāny ātmany evānupaśyati", so the atma is a part and parcel
of Krishna, "mamaivamso jiva-loke", Krishna describes in 15.7 in the Gita. So
the atma, one who sees as a part and parcel of Krishna, and sees all souls like
that, that is the first part, then "sarva-bhūteṣu cātmānaṁ", and one who sees
that the Supersoul is within everything. So, there are two aspects to this, one
is he sees within every living being there is a soul, and he does not see those
living beings, he sees them as souls, who are parts of Krishna, and then
amazingly he sees that Supreme Being, of whom everyone is a part, that Supreme
Being is also present inside all living beings. "sarva-bhūteṣu cātmānaṁ", that
means that Lord is situated as a Supersoul in the heart of all living beings,
and in fact, not just all living beings, the Supersoul is situated in all living
things.

        aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham-

Brahma samhita describes that he is situated even in the atoms. So in this way,
one who sees spiritually everything in relationship with the Supreme Lord,
seeing everyone as a part of Him, and seeing him as present in everything. Such
a person, "tato na vijugupsate", such a person does not hate anyone or anything.
What does not hate anyone mean? It means that the person is able to stay
equipoised, stay undisturbed, and in this way, basically, this verse indicates
that the person has transcended material duality because in the material world,
there is something which we like, something we dislike, and based on that,
duality is created. So, "tato na vijugupsate", now Srila Prabhupada in this
purport, correlates this with the verse from the eleventh Canto of Srimad
Bhagavatam which we will discuss, and it talks about the three adikaris.

So let us look over the purport once. So first, Srila Prabhupada talks about the
kanistha adikari in the first paragraph, then the madhyama adikari in the second
paragraph, the uttama adikari in the third paragraph, and actually the uttama
adikari has equal vision, has the vision of oneness. And, so Prabhupada
describes that vision of oneness, and contrasts that with the false conceptions
of oneness that other people have. So this way, Srila Prabhupada not only tells
us what this vision of oneness is, but also outlines the stages by which one can
come to that level of oneness, and the possible misconception that one can have
while moving towards that stage of oneness.

So, now, let us look at the Bhagavatam, wherein this Bhagavatottamaha, this
person who is having this vision is talked about. So this is the verse which
Srila Prabhupada quotes, right in the beginning of his purport, not directly,
but indirectly Prabhupada is paraphrasing it. This is the description of the
Bhagavata, so:

        śrī-havir uvāca
        sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed
        bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥ
        bhūtāni bhagavaty ātmany
        eṣa bhāgavatottamaḥ

So this is describing 11.2.45, in the eleventh Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, so
the Namyoga Indras are speaking to Maharaja Nimi, and Sri Hari, he is one of the
namyoga indras, he is describing that "sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed", same point,
"bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥ", one who sees that all living beings are spiritual,
they are parts of Bhagavat Bhavam. They are situated in spiritual reality,
"bhūtāni bhagavaty ātmany", and he sees that in all living beings, the Lord is
situated. So, he sees systematically everything in relation to the Supreme Lord
and understands that everything that exists is eternally situated within the
Supreme Lord. So in this way, he sees within everything, the soul of all souls,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So, this is the bhagavatam uttama, this is
the pure devotee, who sees everything spiritual, it is a very advanced vision,
and before we can go to that vision, there is a preliminary stage.

So that is described in the next two verses. The first stage is the madyam
adikari stage... sorry, that is the kanistha adikari, the second is madyam
adikari. So let us start with the kanistha adikari and then we will move upwards
to madyam and uttama.

So kanistha adikari, Srila Prabhupada has not commented on these purports, these
are his disciples who have commented, but we will look at the verses, and we
will see how it correlates with the point which Srila Prabhupada is making in
the Isopanisad purport. So essentially, Srila Prabhupada is describing that our
consciusness has to expand to perceive God's presence everywhere. So, the
kanistha, kanistha means junior, beginner:

        arcāyām eva haraye
        pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate
        na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu
        sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ

So, "arcāyām eva haraye", such a person worships Hari. "pūjāṁ yaḥ
śraddhayehate", with, he does puja with sraddha. So, the word "arcāyām"
especially refers to temple worship, but "na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu sa bhaktaḥ
prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ", such a person is a prakrtah bhakta, is a beginning devotee.
What is his qualification? That he worships Lord Hari. But what is his
limitation? He does not respect devotees. "na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu", that means
such a person's God consciousness is limited only to the deity.

People often come to the temple and they take darshan of the deities, they look
around, and they go away. They do not associate with devotees. They do not try
to learn about God from devotees. They do not learn about how to practice God
Consciousness from devotees. So they think God is there, I am here, and I have
direct relationship with God. That is actually the sign of a kanistha devotee.
And such a person, because that person does not respect devotees, such a person
cannot make spiritual advancement.

        bhakti sanjaya te bhakti

Bhakti is developed in the association of devotees. So, when the person does not
have bhakti, at that time, the person cannot directly, very deeply be attracted
to the Lord. One may have some attraction to the Lord, but bhakti at a deep
level develops by the association of other devotees. When there is no
association, there is no development of bhakti. So "sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ
smṛtaḥ", such a bhakti is a prakrtah. The word prakrtah comes from the word
prakrti. Prakrti, as we know, means nature, material nature, especially, that is
the way it is used. Purusa and prakrti, means sankjadi, these two terms are used.

And prakrti, from that, the adjective comes prakrtah. That means such a person
is a materialistic devotee. That means the person's spiritual vision has not yet
developed. So, the prakrtah bhakta is not able to see God's presence and God's
connection with the things in people of the world.

And because of this, spiritual advancement remains limited. Srila Prabhupada
writes in the purport that such a prakrtah bhakta often quarrels also. Because
he thinks that this religious system is better than that religious system, my
guru is better than your guru, my temple is better than your temple, I am better
than you. And these conceptions keep the person in a quarrelsome mood.

Now, let us look at this from a broader perspective before we go into the
technicalities. Basically, we can categorise people into these four broad
categories. So, who is that person on the left? On the, one extreme is
described. The Materialist, the Mayavadi, Sahajiya and the Devotee, and their
relationship with matter and Krishna.

So the materialist is attached to matter and detached from Krishna. Detached
from Krishna means, the person does not care for Krishna. Whether Krishna
exists, whether Krishna is pleased, nothing matters to that person, all that
matters is my enjoyment.

Now, the mayavadi is detached from matter, but is detached from Krishna also.
Mayavadi thinks I will not enjoy the material world, but the mayavadi, but does
not care for pleasing Krishna also. And because of this, there is dryness. There
is no material pleasure the mayavadi can indulge in because the mayavadi has
considered material pleasure false, but then they cannot release spiritual
pleasures also because they are not having any devotional reciprocations. They
have detached themselves from Krishna who is source of all happiness.

Now the sahajiyas, Sahajiyas correlate with these prakrtah bhaktas in many ways,
what we are talking about is kanistha adikaris. They are attached to matter and
they are attached to Krishna. Because they are attached to matter, their
attachment to Krishna cannot be very deep because their attachment to matter
keeps dragging them back again and again to lower consciousness. But still they
are attached to Krishna to some extent, in the sense that they want to practice
bhakti. And they are doing some of the rituals of bhakti quite diligently.

So the serious devotees, that means the pure devotees definitely, and those who
are aspiring for pure devotion, they also, what is their state? They are
detached from matter and they are attached to Krishna. So devotees do not
necessarily have to renounce everything material, but they can engage material
things in Krishna's service only when they are detached from those material
things. If they are attached to those material things, then they will not be
engaging those things in Krishna's service, they will be engaging them in their
own gratification.

So, that which is the ideal situation for a devotee is, the devotee's heart is
attached to Krishna, and in this world, the body, the talents, the resources are
all used for the service of Krishna without any attachment. This is essentially
the principle of yuktave ragya. So this is the stage which will come later on,
initially, when we all start off in bhakti, we have some attraction to Krishna,
but on the other hand, we are attached to maya also, so in a sense, all of us
are the prakrtah bhaktas, but Srila Prabhupada presented Krishna Consciousness
in a such that he emphasized the association of devotees constantly. That is how
he gets devotees by his emphasize to one's at least the madhyam level.

So what is the madhyam level? Let us look at that. So madhyam level basically is
characterised by recognising that God's presence is not limited to the deity,
but extends beyond the deity also. So:

        īsvare tad-adhīneṣu
        bāliśeṣu dviṣatsu ca
        prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā
        yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ

So "īsvare tad-adhīneṣu", so there are four different categories of people and
there are relationships with them appropriately. So the four categories are
"īsvare", that is the Supreme Lord "tad-adhīneṣu", that is the devotees, then
"bāliśeṣu", that is the innocent people, "bala" is child, so "balisesu" is the
innocent, child like people, and "dviṣatsu", that is the envious.


So in English sometimes, two lists are given, and the first list gives a list of
names, and second list may give a list of relationships, and it is said
respectively. This correlates with this. So like that there is respectively.
There is no express of word respectively, but that is indicated. So the "prema"
is for isvare. That means that madhyam adikari, "yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ",
madhyam adikari understands that the Isvara, the Supreme Lord should be the
object my prema. And then "tad-adhīneṣu", those who are attached to Him, those
who are His servants, His devotees, what should be my relationship with them?
"maitrī", I should be friendly to them. Then, "kṛpo", is for the third category,
that is "bāliśeṣu", those who do not know Lord Krishna, one should give them
knowledge about Krishna. That is the way one extends Krishna's mercy to them, so
"kṛpo". And "dviṣatsu", those who are envious, what does the madhyam adikari do
towards them? "opekṣā", neglects them. Why neglect? Because they are envious of
Krishna, and the more they hear about Krishna's glories, their envy becomes more
and more. So that is why it is better for them that they do not come in contact
with Krishna right now.

And by doing "opekṣā", the madhyam adikari protects them from committing further
aparadhas against the Lord because they hear Krishna's glory and they blaspheme
Him more, and they commit more aparadhas. And also, by hearing the blaspheme
statements, one can oneself become contaminated also. So the madhyama is the
well-wisher of everyone, but the way the madhyam adikari, the intermediate level
devotee can serve the "dviṣatsu" is by praying for them from a distance. So this
is the madhyam adikari. And Srila Prabhupada describes that a devotee should at
least come to the level of madhyam adikari. And the basic difference between the
kanistha adikari and madhyam adikari is that the madhyam adikari has understood
my relationship with Krishna does not depend on my relationship with Krishna
alone. That means that my relationship with Krishna depends on my relationship
with everything else because Krishna is related with everything else.

For example, you know, if a person wants to please a friend, then he has to
behave nicely only with, not only with that friend, but maybe that friend's
friend, maybe that friend's parent, maybe that friend's spouse, maybe that
friend's children. So, my relationship with my friend depends not only on my
relationship with my friend, but also with those are related with him, and how
they are related with him. So similarly, when the kanistha understands that the
Lord is a person who has feelings, and His presence pervades everywhere and
everyone has a relationship with Him, then my relationship with Him will depend
not only on how I relate with Him, but also on how I related with everyone else.

This leads to the expansion of God consciousness, and then the kanistha comes to
the madhyama platform, third level, the second level. So as devotees, we also
should be able to discriminate. If someone is blaspheming the Lord, we cannot
just be silent. We can go away from that place and at least avoid the
blaspheming, hearing the blaspheming, so "opekṣā", so this is the characteristic
of madhyama. Now what is the connection of all this with the Isopanisad verse we
are discussing? Actually, we have been building up to how one can come to the
level of seeing God everywhere, seeing the spiritual reality everywhere. That is
what this verse was talking about.

So first stage is that at least see the spiritual reality in the temple, in the
deity. And second stage is see that in relationship with everyone, see Lord, and
see his relationship with everyone. Now an even higher level is actually, one
does not see people materially at all, one sees them spiritually entirely, one
sees that actually everybody is a devotee of Krishna.

Srila Prabhupada writes in Krishna book, in the rasa lila pastime that everybody
is dancing Krishna's rasa dance, but some people know it, some people do not
know it, some people are dancing directly to Krishna's rasa lila, some people
are dancing indirectly through maha maya. So, everybody is actually dancing to
Krishna's tune. So, the uttama adikari can see this way, where everybody is seen
not based on their material coverings, but as their spiritual essence. Now
generally, the preacher comes down from the madhyam, kanistha, uttama level to
the madhyama level for the sake of preaching because at the uttama level, one
sees everyone as a devotee, so one cannot preach. But at the madhyama level, one
sees ok this person is unaware of Krishna's glories, let me share these glories
with him, and that way, I can bring this person closer to Krishna.

So, now, you know, after giving this background, now Srila Prabhupada moves
forward, and talks about another important thing in the purport. So we discussed
about kanistha, madhyama, uttama, then we come to the point of oneness, false
and real. So, bodily oneness is false. The idea that everything and everyone is
equal at the bodily level does not work. Different people are talented
differently. Different people's looks are different. Their speeches are
different. Their physical abilities are different. Their intellectual abilities
are different. So, actually speaking to assume that everybody is equal just does
not work.

So, at the same time, we want to recognise that everybody is equal ultimately.
Everybody is human being. We are all a part of the same human family. This is
the humanitarian idea. So all of us are equal. But still, that alone, that
humanism alone is not enough because we cannot deny the fact that people are
different. In a classroom, even the teacher is equal to everyone, still not
everybody performs equally well because the students are on different
intellectual calibers. Students have different talents, different abilities and
they perform differently. So we cannot artificially bring about oneness, imagine
oneness at the material level. There is diversity at the material level.

So, what is the process? We accept bodily diversity and we realise spiritual
unity. We accept bodily diversity means, yes, I am different from you. In the
Vedic culture, there is varnashram dharma. And varnashram dharma began by
accepting bodily diversity, ok, I have the propensity of vaisya, that person has
the propensity of brahmana. So let me serve in a particular way, and let that
person serve in a different way, and in this way, one can move forward, and
eventually everybody makes spiritual advancement, and everybody comes to the
level of realisation of the soul.

So, the basic principle underlying varnashram is, spiritually everyone is equal,
materially everyone is different. So as souls, all of us are equal, all of us
are parts of Krishna, all of us are endowed with wonderful precious qualities,
but materially everyone is different. So the idea that everyone is one does not
work materially. Now, Prabhupada gives the example that if I see a tiger as one
with a human being, I may embrace human being, but if I try to embrace the
tiger, afterwards, I will not be there to embrace anyone, I will be inside the
belly of the tiger, and maybe my relatives will come and embrace my skeleton at
that time, whatever is left after the tiger has consumed me, so it does not
work that way.

So now, Srila Prabhupada explains in this last section that anupashyati. So
oneness, how do we understand it? We have to see according to sastra. We cannot
imagine oneness artificially. How exactly everyone is one? There is a sastra.

Another level of oneness Srila Prabhupada talks about is that the scripture has
one message. Scriptures do not teach different things which are contradictory to
each other. They are complimentary. They raise one to a higher level of
understanding and consciousness gradually. And then, Prabhupada says liberated
person's vision is actually truly beneficial. A person who is not liberated, a
person who artificially imagines equality, that person's vision is not actually
beneficial. So let us look at these points.

Anupashyati, anupashyati means, pashyati is to see, anu is to see
systematically or see with knowledge. Now actually, we all see with knowledge,
we do not see with our eyes. Now, for example, if we see a graph on a computer,
and we see a downward curve in the graph. Now, if wee see the downward curve
based on our knowledge of economics, we understand oh, there is a recession in
there, the country, and the economy is going down. Now, actually, all that is
there on the screen is just one line. How am I able to make out that there is
a recession? That is jnani-jaksah, with eyes of knowledge. Similarly, when
astrophysicist studies the distant regions of the Universe, and then they look
at the way light is passing through certain area, and then the light instead of
moving straight like this, if the light moves a little bit like this and comes
back like this, that means the light gets pulled this way. Now, they do not see
any object over there, but when the light is pulled that way, they understand
oh, there is an object with a very strong gravity pool over here, and that is
why the light ray's path has become treated in that direction.

And they infer that, here a blackhole is present, the light that goes over...
the light rays that go over there, they get completely absorbed in the
blackhole, but other rays, they often get shifted. The point which I am making
over here is even scientists have to see with jnana chaksur, with just seeing
with the eyes, we do not understand anything, much. So, actually, if you do not
see with the eyes of knowledge, if we just see with our eyes, gross eyes, seeing
is believing, when atheists, can you show me God? But actually, seeing is
believing is permanent progress stopper. It is a progress stopper. Why? Because
if one just simply believes what one sees, one does not think about the unseen
beyond the seen, then one makes advancement in knowledge.

For example, Newton solved the fruit falling. That is true. The fruit did fall.
But thousands of people have seen the fruit before Newton. And thousands have
seen after it. But what happened? Newton solved the fruit falling. Most people
thought, the fruit has fallen, let me pick up and eat it, and enjoy. But Newton
thought, why did it fall? And then he considered. Ok, it fell because there is
gravity. So he inferred an invisible principle from an observation that was
visible. So if we just stick to seeing is believing, intellectually, we can make
no advancement, and behaviorally also, seeing is believing is a progress
stopper.

When a camel, when an animal is going through a desert, the animal sees a
mirage. Now, the mirage, it appears as if there is water over there, although
actually, there is no water. So now, if the animal believes what it sees, it
will chase after the mirage, and just get burning sand in its mouth, and then
again, the, see another mirage, keep chasing, keep chasing. So, the animal will
never get to the water. So seeing is believing is not actually advanced level of
intelligence. It is a preliminary level animalistic level of intelligence and it
is a progress stopper.

So this applies all the most to the spiritual realm. When we want to understand
spiritual truth, it is anupashyati, see with knowledge, see with scriptural
knowledge, see with systematic understanding based on scriptural knowledge, then
there will be understanding of oneness, what actually oneness is and how real
oneness is to be achieved.

So let us look at the point of this oneness which Srila Prabhupada says, one
part of oneness is, sastra has one message, Prabhupada says. So "Veda eka
vakyata". This is the Madhavacharya says in his Vishnu Tattva Vinirnaya that
Vedas have one message. Vishnu Tattva Vinirnaya is one of the most important
books that Sripad Madhavacharya has written, and one of the fundamental tenets
that he emphasizes over there is, although the Vedas may seem to say many
things, but ultimately their conclusive message, the essential message is one.
Veda ea vakyata, their one message is what? Ultimately, Vishnu is Supreme.
Vishnu is the Supreme Person and He used to be glorified.

So how is this Veda eka vakyata to be understood? Scripture is omniform.
Omniform means that, you have, we have uniform, uniform means all the students
come to the school in one dress. So that means that everybody has one form of
dress. Multiform means many forms are there. Omniform means all forms are there.
So in some ways, the scripture is omniform in the sense that the scripture gives
instructions for people at different, different, different, different levels,
and when the scripture gives instruction for people at different, different,
different levels, then the instructions are customised for people at that level,
and when instructions are customised for people at a specific level, they may
not be relevant for people at another level.

So, for example, if a person is having acute diabetes, the doctor may say that
do not take sugar, and take this medicine. The patient says no, I cannot live
without sugar. I must have sugar. Then, the doctor may say, ok, take sugar, but
only once a week, take very regulated, not more than necessary, not more than
this, or the allowed. On the other hand, there is another patient, who is ready
to forgo sugar, then their doctor may say, you can forgo sugar, that is very
good, no need to take sugar, sugar is actually harmful. Give sugar up.

Now, if these two patients meet, and he says, you know, doctor allowed me to
take sugar. Oh really? Hey, the doctor is partial to you. Why is the doctor
giving contradictory instructions? He did not allow me sugar, he is allowing you
sugar. This doctor is useless. Doctor is using contradictory instructions. One
may start blaming the doctor like that, but actually for who one can live
without sugar, sugar is not really recommended. Therefore, for one who cannot,
it is given regulated way.

So like that, the scriptures for example tell us, the Bhagavatam says these four
regulated principles: no meat eating, no gambling, no intoxication, no illicit
sex. These create a foundation by which one can practice spiritual life in a
steady way. Now, some people quote some verses, says the Mahabharata says that
somebody ate meat, or this is verse from Rigveda which says that people used to eat
meat at that time. Yes, the Vedas do talk about people eating meat, but if you
look at that context, it is always a concession. It is not an instruction. But
the doctor tells the diabetes patient that you can eat sugar, once a week, that
is not what the doctor wants the patient to do. That is what the doctor allows
the patient to do because that is what the patient wants. So, it is a
concession, not an instruction. Concession means what I want to do and I am
allowed to do it. Instruction means what my authority wants me to do, what my
well-wisher wants me to do, and I agree to do it.

So meat eating is not an instruction. It is a concession. That is given for some
people. So like that, because scripture is omniform, the multilevel message
seems contradictory to the uninformed. To contradictory to the uniformed means,
those people who are ignorant, are not knowing very well, they feel that oh why?
There, the scriptures are saying do not eat meat, here, they are saying that
eat meat. What is this? It seems to be contradictory to uniformed. But it is
seen complimentary by the well-informed. Complementary means it completes, it is
actually for people at different levels, different messages are given.

So, this way, it is seen as complementary and "Veda eka vakyata", Srila... so
this is oneness which one can only see through anupashyati, when one studies the
scripture under the guidance of a proper authority, then one understands what is
the actual truth of the scripture, and then one moves forward in one's
understanding progressively, progressively, progressively.

So, now, Srila Prabhupada also talks about the Veda eka vakyata in various other
ways. He says the conclusive message of the Vedas is to know Krishna, "veda
ishva sarvaye ameva vedyo". That is what Krishna says in the Bhagavad Gita. So,
what exactly is the idea of oneness? The idea of oneness is that all souls are
ultimately spiritual. And all have the opportunity to practice spiritual life.
So this oneness is not artificial in terms of saying that all parts are equal.
Why? Because all parts are not necessarily equal. Different parts can lead to
different results. It depends on what a person is following.

So, when the scriptures talk about oneness, Srila Prabhupada was once in India
and some people came to meet him. At that time, Swamiji, you know, actually the
saintly people have equal vision, "pandita sama darshana", saintly people should
see equally. Why don't you see equally? You actually discriminate. You say, this
teacher is not teaching this properly, this teacher is not teaching this
properly.  This is good. This is not good. Why do you criticise like this? You
should be able to see everything equally. So, then, for this person was
criticising Srila Prabhupada, and Prabhupada said, ok, if you are at that level,
then the Bhagavad Gita says that we should sue:

        suhrn-mitrary-udasina-
        madhyastha-dvesya-bandhusu
        sadhusv api ca papesu
        sama-buddhir visisyate

In the sixth chapter, Krishna says that one should see all living beings. In
6.9, He says that "sadhusv api ca papesu", one who is a saintly person, a pious
virtuous person, and "papesu", one who is a sinful person, both should be seen
equally. So now how is it possible that we can see both equally? Is that
possible that a person who is a criminal, who has committed many crimes and is
in jail, and a person who is a virtuous person, who is getting a Bharat Ratna
award, can we see both of them equally? So this person became a little sceptical
and he said, you know, the scriptures were written long ago, and probably those
who wrote the scriptures have committed many mistakes. So, Srila Prabhupada
said, just see, first you are finding faults with me, now you are finding faults
with Vyasadeva. What is your qualification for judging what is the content of
the scriptures? There is a profundity to the scripture that has to be
understood. So what is the profound point over here? That at the spiritual level,
when a person is a yogi, renouncing the world, the qualification for being able
to renounce the world, in the path of yoga is that, one should be able to see
everything materially equal. That means one sees beyond the body to the soul.

Prabhupada says, are you at that level? Can you function at that level? That is
a reality at a particular level of consciousness, but that is not the reality at
which we can function. Srila Prabhupada said, what is your equality? You said
that, actually, everybody is equal. And in the name of everybody being equal,
what happens is everybody does whatever they want to do. They live all sorts of
Godless sinful ways of living and by that they all suffer and they continue on
living lifestyle that will eventually take them to hellish suffering.

So, this artificial equality that every paths, all paths are equal, that
whatever everybody teaching, is teaching, that is alright, all that, that sort
of equality, artificial oneness, leads that everybody suffers. So, sometimes
people say all paths lead to the same goal. We will discuss it elaborately in a
future class, but yes, in Kali yuga, we can say that all paths lead to one goal,
they all lead to hell, the way, materialistic people are living, not all paths,
but most paths, you know, people are living ways which are Godless, which are
sinful, which is going to lead to a lot of suffering. So we cannot say that
whatever way a person is living, it is all the same. That kind of oneness is
false. So oneness is from the point of view of the potential of the students,
spiritually. Oneness is not from the point of view of the capability of the
teachers. Let me explain this. It is a classroom, now if a student wants to
study, the study cannot say that everybody is one. If the study wants to study
engineering, and if the student goes to a cobbler on the street, please teach me
engineering, I see all living beings equally, so I see the professor in the
College who has a doctorate engineering and I see you equally. Please teach me
engineering.

So with respect to learning, there cannot be equality in terms of who is the
qualified to be a teacher. One has to find the right teacher. So, there has to
be intelligent discernment. Discernment means distinguishing based on, to find
out, who is actually spiritually realised and who can make me spiritually
realised. So this is that the madhyama level, one differentiates, this person is
at this level. Now, from the student, from the student to teacher point of view,
the student should be intelligent to check whether the teacher is qualified or
not. From the teacher to student point of view, the teacher may check at a
material level, ok, how, which student has much qualification, what talents they
have, but the teacher does not discriminate. Teacher wants to give knowledge to
everyone. Knowledge may be customised according to student's nature and level,
but the teacher wants to give knowledge to everyone. So from the teacher's point
of view, there is an equal vision in the sense that, everybody, all the
students, the teacher is ... (?, 37:34) their well-being, their academic growth,
their educational upliftment.

So like that, Prabhupada said, what is my equal vision? My equal vision is that,
everybody in all parts of the world, has a right to become spiritually advanced,
has a right to go back to Godhead, to love Krishna, and return to Krishna for a
life of eternal happiness, and with this equal vision, Prabhupada said, I have
gone to America, I have gone to Africa, I have gone to Russia, I have
gone to Australia, all the inhabit continents of the world, Srila Prabhupada
went and shared Krishna Consciousness. For what purpose? Because he saw everyone
as spiritual. He saw everyone as souls, who were ultimately having the
capability for practicing spiritual life. And this was his equal vision. So, His
Holiness Bhakti Tirtha Maharaja would often tell an anecdote that when he joined
ISKCON, that was the time when the civil rights movement in America had
eventually grown and it had become that the blacks and the whites, the blacks
were demanding rights, although they had been liberated from slavery over a
hundred years ago, but still they were discriminated against. They were saying
that this discrimination should end.

So when Bhakti Tirtha Maharaja heard about the spiritual philosophy you are not
the body, you are the soul, he was very delighted, and he got introduced,
started coming and staying in ISKCON, and he found that even among ISKCON
devotees, there, because he was, he was from a colored background, he was
African-American, so some people were discriminating against him, even within
the devotee community. And he became a little concerned, and he went to Srila
Prabhupada, and then Srila Prabhupada did not deny it, that reality, but enabled
him to see beyond that reality. Srila Prabhupada told him that if they think
that you are black, and if you think you are black, then what is the difference
between you and them? Now, they are acting in an ignorant bodily conception, if
you respond by being in that same ignorant bodily conception, by identifying
with the body, what is the difference? So, through this answer, Bhakti Tirtha
Maharaja understood that Srila Prabhupada accepted him. Srila Prabhupada did not
see any material discrimination in terms of spiritual potentiality, and Srila
Prabhupada was encouraging him not to try to fight this at a material level,
but to raise to a higher level of consciousness, and when he rose to a higher
level of consciousness, others would see that. And others would also become
similarly inspired, and they will also raise to a higher level of consciousness.

So rather than reinforcing the identity of what colors one's skin is, he started
enthusiastically praciticing and sharing Krishna Consciousness, distributing
books, and eventually became a leader in the devote community with the fearless
and brilliant ways in which he distributed books.

So, Srila Prabhupada's equal vision was that everybody should have an
opportunity to practice Krishna Consciousness, everybody, whatever be the
external appearance and this is actually equal vision. So this verse talks about
"tato na vijugupsate", one should not hate anyone. So, a real serious devotee
does not hate anyone. Serious devotee sees everyone as a potential devotee and
tries to share Krishna Consciousness with others. When Srila Prabhupada was in
Africa, at that time, he noticed that the devotees whom he had sent to share
Krishna Consciousness in Austral... Africa, they were going mostly to the
Indians. And they were sharing Krishna Consciousness with Indians. Prabhupada
said that, no, this land, Africa belongs to the Africans. Indians are
immigrants. He says you can preach to the Indians also, but focus on Africans.
So, at that time in Africa, there were practically three levels. There were the
whites, there were the blacks and there were the Indians. So there were the
African-Americans. And then, African-Americans were considered even lower than
the Indians, because that was the way segregation was there. Indians were
considered lower than the whites. So actually, the devotees were going straight
to the Indians, especially the hindu Indians, and they were sharing Krishna
Consciousness with them, and they were taking it up, not very seriously, mostly
ritualistically, but they were taking it up. When they had built their own
temples, and the blacks would never come to the temples.

So Srila Prabhupada restored the devotees, Brahmanand Prabhu was the leader of
it, hold harinaam sankirtan and keep the temples open. When the singing is
there, the dancing is there, people who are passing by, they will see and they
will want to come in. So at that time, the hindu organisers of the temple, they
were apprehensive, these African-Americans come to our temple, what will happen?
But when they saw that devotees were dancing and singing, they started coming
in, and the devotees invited them to dance and sing, they also started dancing
and singing, and their clapping, dancing, their face became jubilant, and then
as everybody was dancing and singing, the Indians were there, the Africans were
there, that all dancing in one circle, then actually, they really understood
that they are all souls. They can all get Krishna's mercy and become happy in
serving Krishna. Even the hindu managers of the temple, who were initially
apprehensive, what will happen if our temple is open to these African-Americans?
They were happy to see them also dancing and singing.

And then Srila Prabhupada gave very well-received classes over there. Srila
Prabhupada told us African-Americans, native Ame..., the natives of the African
countries, he told them in various these classes that, you know, you all want
to develop, but do not develop in the materialistic way alone in which the
western has developed. Because I have been to America, and there all that has
happened is there people are becoming hippies. They have prosperity, but they do
not have any happiness. Develop in a holistic way, develop spiritual way. We
have come to give the universal spiritual message.

So, Srila Prabhupada saw all living beings as potential devotees and he tried to
give Krishna Consciousness to everyone. When Srila Prabhupada went to Australia,
a reporter asked, Swamiji, what is your message for Australia? So Prabhupada
replied, my message for Australia is the same as my message everywhere else. It
is the message that all of you have forgotten God, and by loving God, you will
become happy. So, this is real oneness, to give everyone the opportunity to
practice spiritual life, and thereby, become advanced.

So let us look at the purport a little bit more in detail. So here, Srila
Prabhupada in the first purport talks about kanistha adikari, then he talks
about the madhyam adikari, then he talks about uttama adikari, and then he talks
about "Those who imitate an uttama-adikari by flaunting a sense of oneness or
fellowship but who behave on the bodily platform are actually false
philanthropists.". So, those who say that, oh, all of us are equal at the
material level, they do, cannot do good to anyone, because different people are
of different levels. We will discuss about philanthropy more in a later class,
but here, the important point is, we cannot do good to everyone by adopting
similar measures. Different people are of different levels, and accordingly,
they have to be benefited.

So if a person who is a vaisya nature has given books in charity, that person,
what will that person say? Why are you burdening with me books, with me,
burdening me with the books? And a person who is of brahminical nature, that
person is given tools for doing menial limb (?, 45:33). What are you doing? So
we cannot give, we cannot benefit everyone in the same way. So artificially,
oneness does not work, then Srila Prabhupada explains that anupashyati: Anu
means "to follow", and pasyati means "to observe". So anupasyati means one
should not see things as he does with the naked eye, but should follow the
previous acaryas. That is how we learn to see.

And lastly, Srila Prabhupada talks about how that at the time of independence
and post-independence, there are many politicians who pretended to be spiritual,
they carried a Bhagavad Gita, or they quoted some verses from the Gita, and they
were talking about oneness. But Prabhupada says this uttama-adikari vision of
oneness cannot be had by politicians who are always after some material gain. So
because they want material gain, they do not have equal vision. They think this
is good, this is bad. So this can, they cannot have the equal vision. So "One who
imitates the symptoms of uttama-adikari may serve another's outward body for the
purpose for the purpose of fame or material reward, but he does not serve the
spirit soul.". So actually when we talk about welfare, there is the body, and
there is the soul, and taking care of the body is important, but that is not
spiritual. 

So if somebody in the name of spirituality takes care of the other body, others'
body and considers that spiritual, then that such a person is not actually doing
true good. That person is not doing good at the spiritual level and by making
people think that the material good is spiritual good is confusing people. So,
the uttama-adikari sees the spirit soul within the material body and serves him
as spirit, thus the material aspect is automatically served. That means when we
take care of the body, you know, of the person, it is not that we separate the
body and the soul, and we say, I will take care only of the soul, I will not
take care of the body, no, we take care of the complete being, but the focus is
on the soul, then the person's soul is taken care of, the person is internally
satisfied, then the bodily needs are also regulated and taken care of. So we
will discuss about social service a little bit later.

Let us summarise what we discussed today.

We started by talking about the expansion in one's God consciousness. So this
verse describes one who sees God everywhere and sees everything, in, in
everything God's presence. So how is that possible? First, we begin by seeing
God as the deity. That is the kanistha platform, prakrtah bhakta. Then, we start
seeing God's relationship with everyone, that is madhyam platform. And the
uttama platform is one sees everyone beyond all their material differences as
just souls who are serving Krishna.

So, all this can be seen anupasyati, through scriptural knowledge, jnana
chaksur, and we discussed about how a graph, or a path of light ray, all that,
the meaning can be understood through knowledge.

Seeing is believing is a permanent progress stopper, intellectually and
behaviorally.

And then what is real oneness and what is false oneness? We discussed that false
oneness is to equate everyone at the material level, when people are different.
And false oneness is to think that actually everybody can be brought equal at a
material level. So we discussed oneness with respect to seeing everyones as
potentially capable of making spiritual advancement. So, spiritually, everyone
is equal, and seeing that spiritual potentiality of everyone is through
equality. But equating everyones as equally qualified spiritual teachers is
wrong. It is like equating a cobbler and a engineering professor. So, there has
to be differentiation based on intelligence.

And lastly, we discussed about how by this vision of real oneness, "Veda eka
vakyata", scriptures are not multilevel, not contradictory, they are
complementary at multiple levels. So by understanding how scriptures give one
message we develop the true oneness towards all living beings, and with that
oneness we can work through elevate everyone.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
