Hare Krishna.

So, we continue with our discussion on the Isopanisad. We have discussed three
classes until now, first the introduction, then the invocation, which discussed
how the material world is also perfect for its purpose, and then we discussed
about the isavasya principle in the earlier class, that was in mantra one. Now
we discuss mantra two.

So before we go to mantra two, let us have a quick overview of this first
section of the Isopanisad. The first section is basically talking about the
isavasya principle and learn to live in harmony with the Ishvara. So what is the
isavasya principle? Everything is perfect, that is talked in the invocation, and
everything belongs to the Ishvara is talked in the first verse.

Now, in the second mantra, it is said that how living in harmony with it, with
that isavasya principle, with the Ishvara will benefit us.

And in the next verse, it will be talked how living in disharmony with Ishvara
will lead to suffering.

So let us discuss this sutra about, how living in harmony with the Ishavara will
benefit us. So:

        kurvann eveha karmāṇi
        jijīviṣec chataṁ samāḥ
        evaṁ tvayi nānyatheto ‘sti
        na karma lipyate nare

Kurvan means to do, eveha certainly in this way, karmani, doing working in this
way. Now what is this way? So this is the continuation of the previous verse.
The previous verse is that do not enroach on others' property. Accept what is
your quota. So "kurvann eveha karmāṇi" means that accepting your quota, not
enroaching on others' quota. When one lives like that. One can live or one can
desire to live... transformation of sata, sata means century, hundred. One can
desire to live for hundreds of years, samah, period.

Apart from this, there is no alternative. That because when one works like this
one will not become bound. So what is the essential meaning of this verse?
Working in this way, one can desire to live for hundreds of years, and there is
no alternative to man, human beings, because otherwise one will become bound by
karma, and working in this way, one will not become bound by karma.

So, now, we would say everybody wants to live for hundreds of years, so if
everybody wants to live for hundreds of years, then what is the point in saying
that, if you live in this way, then you should desire to live for hundreds of
years. Actually, if people are living ignorantly, if people are living sinfully,
then the longer they live sinfully, the more karmic bondage they are creating.

And the more they will have to suffer as a consequence of their bad karma. So if
a person is acting sinfully, for that person to live longer will mean prolonging
the miseries of material existence for much longer time in future lives. On the
other hand, if the person lives harmoniously, then the person is not creating
any bad future for oneself, and along with that, that person is also
contributing to the good of society. And because the person is in this way doing
good for oneself as well as others, for such a person to live for a long time is
a blessing, is something which is desirable for that person, and other people
also desire. Let this person live for a long time.

So when the verses, that there is no other way to live. Now, we know that people
are living in other ways, there are people who live Godlessly, so what does it
mean? There is no other way to live. What it means is there are no other
intelligent way to live. If somebody is at the twentieth store of the building,
and the only way to come down is by staircase. Now somebody does that there is
no other way to come down from the building. Now, there is another way also. You
can just jump down from the terrace of the twentith storey, it will come down
and will never come again, will die.

So, that means if one chooses some other way to come down from the twentieth
storey of the building, that is fraught with designer and even bound to
disaster. So similarly, what is being said over here, if we do not live
harmoniously, there is no other way to live. Because the other way is the way to
disaster. And this is the way by which there is no karmic bondage.

Srila Prabhupada's translate is: one may aspire to live for hundreds of years if
he continuously goes on working in that way, for that sort of work will not bind
him to the law of karma. There is no alternative to this way for man.

Now, so, let us look at what Srila Prabhupada is saying in the purport. So the
purport can be divided into five sections again.

So the first paragraph in the purport talks about how karma-bandhana causes the
death. So the connection is people want to live for hundreds of years. Nobody
wants to die. So but why there is death? That is what is the connection between
this point in the purport and the verse, mantra.

Now human life offers liberation through akarma. So, the second paragraph talks
about, ok, nobody wants to die, nobody wants to be bound by birth and death. So
how does one come out of it? By akarma.

So now the question may come up how will we learn about akarma? Then, the Vedas
teach that. The Vedas lead ultimately to akarma. The Vedas teach many things,
but their conclusive teaching is akarma. Now people cannot, what akarma is we
will discuss in details, but essentially it is pure devotional service.  So
people cannot start practicing akarma immediately.

So therefore, it says, first begin by bringing God into sense-gratificatory
life. That means ok when we want sense gratification, fine, but when we want
sense gratification, do not do it in a irreligious way, do it in a God conscious
way. So that is the first stage of spiritual life.

Now if one does not practice this first stage of spiritual life also, then
everything that one does is in vain. So if one does not have God, then whatever
one does becomes in vain.

And therefore Prabhupada finally concludes by saying: make all atruisms into
karma-yoga. Atruisms means different kinds of benefactory activities which we
want to do for others, make them, bring God into them, and then they will become
spiritualised. Then, they will give lasting benefit. Otherwise, the benefit from
that will be sceaflety (?, 07:48).

So the whole theme of the purport is to acknowledge Ishvara, live according the
isavasya principle. So let us look at each of these points one by one now.

So Srila Prabhupada starts the purport by saying no one wants to die. So now,
how karma bandhana causes death. The soul is eternal, so the soul is say here,
and the body is in front. So the Bhagavad Gita gives the example that just as
the sunlight illuminates the whole universe, the soul illuminates the body.

        yathā prakāśayaty ekaḥ
        kṛtsnaḿ lokam imaḿ raviḥ
        kṣetraḿ kṣetrī tathā kṛtsnaḿ
        prakāśayati bhārata

So in the 13 chapter 34th verse, Krishna uses this and the other example of
ether, pervading nature. For these two examples, it uses how the soul interacts
with the matters. So it says, the Sun illuminates and activates the whole
Universe, the soul illuminates and activates the body with consciousness. The
soul is eternal, the body is temporary. Now, the soul does not have to die
because the soul is "sat", however the soul experiences death, the misery of
death, because of attachment to the body.

Just like when a person is watching a movie, and in that movie, there is a hero,
and hero is so heroic that the audience gets attracted to the hero, and then
suddenly in the middle of the hero, in the middle of the movie, the fight going
on, and suddenly the willan (?, 09:38) hits a big blondy head of the hero, and
the head just both (?) apart, and the hero dies.

Then everybody in the audience will get shocked. How the hero die. So what
happened over there? Because the audience was emotionally attached to the hero,
so what happened on the screen, which actually had nothing to do with them,
nothing has happened to them when they are sitting on the chairs in the theater,
but because they are emotionally attached to the hero, when something happens to
the hero, they feel affected by that.  Similarly, the soul is like the audience,
and the body is like the character in the movie theater. So because the soul is
attached to the body, so when the body undergoes an injury, the body undergoes
distraction, the soul gets traumatised.

So who is it that suffers, say, when we are, say when we die? Is it the body or
is it the soul? Actually, the body is dead, the body cannot suffer. The soul is
ananda, sat-cit-ananda, the soul cannot offer, and then who suffers? Actually,
the soul who identifies with the body, and mistakes the events happening to the
body to be happening to itself is who suffers. So we suffer because of
misidentification. So first point that Srila Prabhupada makes is that to the
extent, we desire to enjoy material things, we become bound by karma to that
extent. It is because a person desires to watch the movie, and hope that through
watching the movie, I will get happiness. So the person starts watching the
movie and if the movie turns out to be a horror movie, where the hero suffers
terribly and eventually is killed, then the person gets traumatised.

The spectator feels suffering, although that person does not suffer (?). So like
that the soul comes into material existence. The soul desires to watch the
movie. Watch the movie means the soul desires to do materialiastic activities,
desires to do karma, to get material enjoyment, and when the soul does not get
material enjoyment, the soul suffers. And the material life is like a horror
movie. We undergo so much suffering here and to the extent we identify with the
body, to the extent our suffering increases, ultimate suffering is death.

And the body is destroyed, the soul feels traumatised. So the immortal soul
suffers the pain of mortality because of the desire for enjoying matter. And the
desire for enjoying matter is the cause of karma and karma-bandhana. So that is
what binds the soul to material existence. So now, when the soul is bound to
material existence, no living being wants to die, and yet all living beings have
to die. Although all living beings die, still what do we do?

Human life offers liberation through akarma. We, when we come to the human form
of life, then we can perceive a higher reality, we can perceive the eternal
beyond the temporary. We can perceive the spiritual beyond the material. And we
can realise that by doing akarma. So, now, let us look at this word. There are
three types of activities, three types of karma. So now, the word karma can have
four different meanings, and this itself, you will see, the karma is used in two
different senses, so for example karma can mean action of any kind, where any
action can be called karma.

Sometimes, when we are suffering, oh, I am suffering because of my karma. There
what we are referring to is not karma, but the reaction of karma. So the word
karma can refer to our actions, the word karma can refer to our reactions, or we
say that the law of karma is inescapeable. Here we are referring to the system
of action and reaction. That can also be called as karma, and beyond that the
fourth meaning of the word karma is what is given over here.

So within the generic word karma, there are three kinds of activities, one of
them is also called as karma, so this can also be called sukarma, good karma.
Prabhupada explains in the purport as actions which are performed in terms of
one's prescribed duties as mentioned in the revealed scriptures. So, we get
good, we do good karma when we act according to scripture. We act morally,
responsibly, good activities. That is karma. That is sukarma or good action.

Then the opposite of that is vikarma. Vikarma is bad action. Actions which are
performed by the misuse of one's freedom, which direct one to the lower life
forms. So when people say eat abominable food stuffs, eat meat, then nature may
give them the body of a lion or a tiger because that is more suited for eating
meat. So that is vikarma.

Now, akarma does not mean inaction. It means action which brings no reaction. So
the 'a' prefix is not directly modifying karma in the first sense of action, it
is modifying karma in the sense of reaction. So akarma means action that
produces no reaction. So actions, as Prabhupada says, which free one from the
cycle of birth and death. So how does that happen? That we will discuss later,
but essentially, akarma means when we act for the pleasure of Krishna, then we
do not have to suffer any reactions, because Krishna is working for our
purification and elevation. He is staying in our heart and he wants to liberate
us.

So when we start working for him, it is like the patient cooperating with the
doctor. When the patient starts cooperating with the doctor, naturally the
patient's recovery is smoother, quicker and better. So like that, when we start
cooperating with Krishna, by doing akarma, then we can be liberated from the
material existence. So going back earlier to the movie example, akarma means the
person decides, no I do not want to watch the movie anymore. So, I just want to
come out of the theater. Then, whatever suffering is going in the movie, that
will not affect the person. Because that person understood now that I do not
want to watch the movie, I am not interested in whether it is good or bad on it.
It is illusion, let me get out. So akarma is that kind of activity.

So let us move back now and we will see that, human life offers liberation
through akarma. So how exactly do we perform akarma? Srila Prabhupada explains
that akarma essentially means doing activities on behalf of God. So for example,
if I am working in the army, and while working in the army, I shoot an enemy
soldier. At that time, because I am working on the behalf of the army, I am not
held responsible. In fact, if I shoot many enemy soldiers, I may even get a mild
honor from the government because I have served the government in a very
important way in a particular battle. So on the other hand, if I come back and I
shoot a neighbour over an argument, then I will be punished because I am doing
that on my account. So when we act on our own account, we become bound, when we
act on behalf of Krishna, we become unbound, we become liberated.

So the whole purpose of the Vedic literature is ultimately to teach akarma. So
akarma refers to those activities which bring liberation. Now Srila Prabhupada
writes that such a liberating work is described here in the pages of Sri
Isopanisad. And Prabhupada immediately correlates with Bhagavad Gita. Srila
Prabhupada will do this repeatedly in his Isopanisad purports that he will again
and again refer to the Bhagavad Gita to elaborate the concepts which are talked
about over here.

So now Srila Prabhupada makes a significant statement: Factually, no one has to
do anything more than render devotional service to the Lord. However, in the
lower stages of life one cannot immediately adopt the activities of devotional
service, nor can one completely stop fruitive work.

So what does this mean? Often, people ask, you know, is spiritual life
supplement for material life or a complement for material life? Supplement means
something which is addition, like dietary supplement, normal dietary is there,
take something extra. So is spiritual life a supplement or is it a complement?
Complement means that which completes. So for example, if I am eating and there
are some essential dietary elements that are missing in my diet, then whatever I
add, it makes the diet complete.  So that is a complement. So is spiritual life
a supplement something which is additional or is spiritual life a complement?
That means something which is essential which completes our material life.

So what is the answer? Is it a supplement or a complement? Actually, it is
neither. Spiritual life is a replacement for material life. Ultimately, we as
souls are spiritual and material life is artificial for us. It is unnatural for
us. And in our pure eternal stage, we are meant to be liberated from material
existence and return back to the spiritual world to live entirely spiritually.
So the ultimate goal of spiritual life is that spiritual life should act as a
replacement for material life.We become liberated from material existence and we
return back to the spiritual realm. But before we come to that, initially we may
think of spiritual life as a supplement, ok, you like to practice spirituality,
fine, I do not like to practice spirituality, I will not practice. So we think
it is an optional additional activity that some people may do, some people may
not do.

So that is an initial and ignorant vision. But actually, it is even in the
material level of existence, spiritual life is a complement to material life. It
is essential that we bring God into our lives. Otherwise our lives remain
incomplete.

And Srila Prabhupada makes the next point: the Vedas lead ultimately to akarma.
The Vedas talk about religion at multiple levels. So Srila Prabhupada says that
these isms, this is a very interesting statement by Srila Prabhupada, these isms
refer to altruism, socialism, communism, nationalism, humanitarianism. So these
isms are certainly very attractive forms of karma-bandhana. This is like a "I am
feast in a well-dwelled glow", I am feast in a well-dwelled glow means that
something which seems very soft, but there is, it is very hard hitting.

So, now, normally people think of altruism, humanitarianism as very good things,
nationalism is also good, but Srila Prabhupada says they are very attractive
forms of karma-bandhana. They are also forms of bondage. Why? Because if I am
attracted to my nation, then all that will happen is I will not get liberated. I
will become reborn in the country again as some other specy depending on the
kind of karma I have done, or if I have not done too much bad karma, I may be
born as a human being, but still, I continue on material existence. Even
nationalism is a form of karma-bandhana. It does not lead to liberation. And
that is why we have to add God to whatever we do. So without adding God, without
acting according to the isavasya principle, one will not be able to stay on
without karmic bondage.

So, let us look at how this is done in the Bhagavad Gita. So Srila Prabhupada
explains now that spiritualise all isms. So sense gratification plus God will be
karma kanda. That means, ok, I want a good spouse, I want a lot of wealth, I
want power, that is what materialistic people want. But then, scriptures, ok,
that is what you want, we will provide you that. You do these rituals. You
worship this devata. You do this yagna and you will get these things. So here
what is happening, we can visualise one circle, this is circle of sense
gratification, and then there is another circle of dharma. So dharma is
religion, sense gratification another circle. Now the area where these two
circles will intersect, that is karma kanda.

That means dharma is one circle, sense gratification another circle, the area
where the two intersect, that is which, the intersection area will be dharmic
sense gratification, religious materialism. That is the beginning of most
people's spiritual life. Most people come to God, not because they love God.
Most people come to God because they love the things of this world and they are
not able to get it themselves, so think, maybe God will give this to me. So that
is the beginning. So when religion and sense gratification intersect, and the
intersection set is called as karma kanda. So Prabhupada says even if one wants
sense gratification, one must bring in God into it, otherwise the sense
gratification will be the cause of bondage.

If one does it dharmically, at least there will be some elevation that will
happen gradually, and similarly, if one wants any kind of altruism, any kind of
good work for society, for nation, then one has to keep God in the center. Now
Srila Prabhupada would encourage Indians as well as Americans, he would tell
them that all of you are Indians, and India has say, no, this Bhagavad Gita is
your own cultural legacy. People from all over the world are practicing it, not
only practicing it, they are renouncing everything materially enjoyable and they
are becoming missionaries and centering all this, sharing this message all over
the world, you Indians, why don't you do?

Share Krishna Consciousness with the world, become teachers of the Bhagavad
Gita. Understand it and teach it. So Srila Prabhupada would encourage Indians
based on their pride of Indian identity. Now, when 1970, Srila Prabhupada was
preaching at that time, there was the war for the separation of Bangladesh and
eventually, Bangladesh has become separate from Pakistan, as a separate country.
At that time, Srila Prabhupada was giving a class and he said that you people
are concerned that we lost one part of our country as Pakistan, but you see now
if you just share this Consciousness, I am an old man, lone man, and I have done
what I can to share Krishna Consciousness. So many people all over the world
have become devotees.

If all of you share Krishna Consciousness with everyone else, then the whole
world will become Hindustan. So this was Srila Prabhupada encouraging people to
take to God consciousness based on their preconceptions. So their preconception
is, ok, India is my country, it is great, fine, you think that India is great,
that is ok, but use nationalistic pride, nationalistic attraction to be within
the precincts of dharma.

Similarly, when Srila Prabhupada would have American disciples, and they were
doing this big Hare Krishna Pandal festival in Mumbai. At that time, you are
Americans, you are used to doing some wonderful things, so do something here
that people will never forget. What is the use of your being Americans, if you
do not do something wonderful. So what is Srila Prabhupada doing over here? He
is using the Americans' attraction to America to engage them in devotional
service.

Similarly, Srila Prabhupada predicted about China that Chinese people, when they
start God consciousness, they will take it up very fast. So here the same
strategy of spiritualising all isms is adopted even in the Bhagavad Gita.

So, apara dharma means lower religion, para dharma is higher religion. Higher
religion is just pure devotional service. Pure devotional service is I am the
servant of Krishna, and I do not have to do anything except serving Krishna. But
apara dharma is I have a family, I have a country, I have a race, I have a
community and I have duty towards all of them. These are important, although
they are not all important. Now these apara dharmas are spiritualised. Let us
see how it is spiritualised even in the Bhagavad Gita. So 2.13 in the Bhagavad
Gita is the famous verse, which tells you are not the body:

        dehino 'smin yatha dehe
        kaumaram yauvanam jara
        tatha dehantara-praptir
        dhiras tatra na muhyati

So, Krishna is telling that inside the body, there is soul, and the soul does
not change even if the body keeps changing. So this is solid philosophical
knowledge, which if we adjust objective analytical detached philosophically will
say, they should reject all bodily designations. But surprisingly in the very
next verse, Krishna uses two bodily designations to refer to Arjuna. So next
verse is:

        matra-sparsas tu kaunteya
        sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dah
        agamapayino 'nityas
        tams titiksasva bharata

So here Krishna is telling that just as summer and winter come and go, similarly
happiness and distress will come and go, Oh Kuntheya, Oh Bharata, tolerate it.
Now, actually, Kuntheya and Bharata are entirely bodily designations. Arjuna is
the son of Kunti, and he is the descendent of the king Bharata. So now, just
after telling Arjuna that you are not the body, why is Krishna referring to
Arjuna with a bodily designation? Is Krishna contradicting himself? No.
Actually, although we are not the body, and although all bodily designations are
ultimately illusory, still the fact is that we do identify with the body.

We cannot just wish away our bodily identity. So what the Bhagavad Gita does is
that use our bodily identity to elevate people towards God consciousness, so
that means ok, now, yes, oh Arjuna, you are the soul, but you are as a body have
been born in this family connected with Kunti, connected with Bharata, with such
great people, so therefore act in a great way. Therefore, Arjuna tolerate.

So what we do is, we should pat the false ego onwards spiritually. We do not
massage the false ego, we do not pinch the false ego. What is the false ego? The
false ego is the idea that I am the body, when the soul identifies with body,
that borned of misidentification comprises the false ego. So massaging the false
ego means what? Oh, you are an Indian, India is such a great country, India is
the greatest country in the world, India was the ruler of the whole world,
everything good that is there everywhere in the world is because of India.  And
India is so great, and you are so great.

And when you massage people's false ego like that, what happens is their simply
illusion increases. That is all that happens. So we do not want to massage
people's false ego. On the other hand, pinching the false ego means. Somebody
says that I am Indian. What Indians? Indians are sold their souls. Indias are
simply imitating the West. India is useless, India is so dirty, there is much
traffic, there is so much pollution, there is so much mismanagement, how the
poor people are starving, so much corruption, everything is disgusting in India,
so, and you think you are Indian, you are ignorant, you are a soul, you have
nothing to do with India.

And, when you start, when we start condemning people's bodily identification,
that becomes grating and denigrating. Grating means, sometimes when we hear a
harsh sound, that is grating, somebody has a bitter voice, that is grating to
the ears, it is jarring to the ear. And it appears like grating and denigrating.
Denigrating means that it appears insulting. Now, most people, whatever we say,
they do emotionally identify with their social circles. It may be country, it
may be community, it may be race, it may be dynasty, whatever, so when they
identify with that, suddenly telling them it is all false, that can be quite
jolting to them.

So, this is pinching the false ego. So the Bhagavad Gita neither massages the
false ego, nor pinches the false ego. What does the Bhagavad Gita do? Pats it
onwards. Pats it onwards means what? That, oh yes, you are so great, you are
born Indian, therefore learn Bhagavad Gita and teach Bhagavad Gita. You are a
born American, Americans are used to do extraordinary things, please do
something extraordinary in the glorification of Krishna. So similarly, Krishna
is using this strategy over here, oh you are a son of the great Kunti, you are
the descendent of the great Bharata, therefore act in great way. What is the way
to act in great way? Do not get caught in bodily misidentification. Understand
and act according to the glory of your personal soul.

So here, the whole strategy, the whole principle is, somehow or the other, get
people to practice dharma. So, rather than rejecting people's material identity,
use their material identity, use the emotional affection, use the pride of that
material identity to get people to act in responsible, respectable, spiritually
elevating ways. So as devotees, Srila Prabhupada is setting an example for us
about how we should also share Krishna Consciousness with others.

You know whatever isms people are doing, we can encourage them to spiritualise
those isms, the extent they spiritualise those isms, to the extent they will
have transcendental value. For example, once Srila Prabhupada went to an Akhara.
Akhara is a place where people do body building, traditional body building, and
they become wrestlers and strong men like that. So, now, somebody may say what
is this big body building? It is just useless. You are not the body. But did
Srila Prabhupada do? When Srila Prabhupada went, there is a hindi lecture, so
Srila Prabhupada saying oh, so all of you are doing body building, very good, in
society, Ksatriyas are required, all of you become trained Ksatriyas, very good,
so he said that we are training people to become brahmanas, and you are training
people to become Ksatriyas.

So brahmanas and ksatriyas, when they come together, society can be administered
very well. And then he said, oh, so your ideal is Hanuman. So, you see Hanuman,
they had a small image of Hanuman over there, and Hanuman did superhuman skills
of huge strength in the service of Lord Rama, so Prabhupada told them, just see
the isle of Hanuman, what is he doing? He is always chanting the name of Rama.
So whenever you are doing exercises, you are doing the push-ups, chant Ram, Ram,
Ram, Ram, Ram, so remember Lord Rama, chant Lord Rama, and do your push-ups, do
your exercises, do your sit-ups, whatever you are doing, physical exercises,
remember Rama and do it.

So what is Srila Prabhupada doing over here? Srila Prabhupada is using people's
material identification to get them to practice dharma. That means they identify
themselves with the body, they think we have to have a strong body, the strong
body we can serve the country, we can serve the society, fine, but spiritualise
their urge for having a strong body. How? Tell them that, Hanumanji, you also
should chant the name of Rama. So, we do not have to be dismissive about
material endeavours if they can be spiritualised.

So if somebody is wanting to distribute food free, so what should we tell them?
What is the use of distributing food free? You give food to them, and after six
hours, that food will pass off the stool, and the person will still continue on
material ignorance. Now, that would be very dismissive way, and the person may
have come with a tender heart thinking I want to give charity, so many people
are starving, I want to give them food, and if you speak like this, the person
will be shocked and the person may just go away.

So on the other hand, yes, you want to give food, very good, you know anyadhana
is very much glorified in the Vedic literature and it is described that the best
kind  of anyadhana that we do is not just the dhana for the body, it is also
dhana for the mind and the soul. And how can anya be of help to the mind and
soul also? If it is made into prasad. So if the food is offered to God, and then
the prasad is offered to people, then that prasad not only nourishes their body,
it purifies their mind and it awakens their soul.

So, oh really. Why not? Yes. Offer the food to God and distribute prasadam. So,
the person is little religiously minded, will agree. And that way, that
charitable activity can be spiritualised. So, we cannot expect people to come
from the kindergarden of religious life suddently to the doctorate level. The
doctorate level of spiritual life is what? It is pure devotional service... Just
practice devotional service, there is nothing else to do.  The kindergarden of
spiritual life is, actually, there is God, there is a life after this, and we
are accountable for our activities, and we should act in such a way that we can
return backk to God. This is the beginning stage of spiritual life. So from
people who do not even believe in God, suddenly if you tell them, ok, give up
everything for the sake of God, they will give up God only at that time. They
will say how can I do that?

So the Vedic scriptures offer multi-level spirituality. Multi-level spirituality
that slowly takes people step-by-step-by-step upwards. So the first step is, ok,
you want material things, fine, you want material things, religion will provide
you material things. And by that, you will get elevated. Similarly, we can want
people also at this level, now, if you do not bring religion into your material
life, and the material life is going to be doomed. Srila Prabhupada, we know,
gives the good example of so many zeroes. If there is no one in front of the
zero, even if we have hundred zeroes in a sequence, still it all remains zero.

It is only when we bring the one, then the zeroes acquire value. Similarly, it
is only when we bring God into our religious life, into our material life, does
material life acquire value. So Srila Prabhupada writes over here: There is no
harm in becoming a family man, or an altruist, a socialist, a communist, a
nationalist, or a humanitarian, provided that one executes his activities in
relation with isavasya, the God-centered conception.

So here, Srila Prabhupada is setting an example of how we can encourage people
to begin their spiritual lives. So, to get Godless people upwards, we have to
ask them to bring God into their lives. So, we do not have to speak against for
example grihasta ashram. Now, if somebody is inclined towards grihasta ashram,
and we tell that person about how negative things about grihasta, that person
will simply have negative conception of Krishna Consciousness and go away. So,
there is no harm in becoming a family man. Keep God in the center.

So actually how the things progress, first a person just thinks my home is
everything, there is no God, I do not care for God, whether God exists or not, I
do not care. But if we say oh God is there, there is a temple of God, I should
go to the temple. So then one understands ok, God should not just be in the
temple, God should be in my house also. So then God comes in the house, there is
altar. Then, God comes in the center of the house. And then slowly from there,
one does not think that there is the temple, my house is also a temple. And then
after that, the next step is, not only my house is a temple, my heart should be
a temple. And then that person becomes surrendered devotee. So it is a
progression.

A person who has never come to the temple, tell them that, oh, God should be the
master of your life, and you give up everything for the sake of God. That person
does not make sense. So first of all, come to the temple, and tell them bring
the temple to your home, and then bring the temple to your heart. So like that,
there is progression in elevation.

Now, in the next paragraph, Srila Prabhupada explains that without God
everything is vain. So with God, we flourish. Without God, we perish. With God,
we flourish. Whatever we do, it will stay with us for a long long period of
time. In 2.40, Krishna describes as Srila Prabhupada quotes in this purport:

        nehābhikrama-nāśo ‘sti
        pratyavāyo na vidyate
        sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya
        trāyate mahato bhayāt

So Krishna describes that on this path, this is the path of spiritual
advancement, this path, there is no loss or diminution. And even the smallest
progress can save one from the greatest danger. So actually speaking, in
spiritual life, whatever little we do, it can give us eternal benefits. We see
ajama court, he gave his son the name Narayana, and chanted the name Narayana at
the moment of death, and he was saved from trayate mahatobaya, he was saved from
the danger of going to hell, because the vishnutas intervened over there.

So similarly, with God, we flourish in whatever we do. Without God, we perish.
So Srila Prabhupada explains without God, everything is in vain. So how is that?
Srila Prabhupada here gives a memorable statement, last sentence of this
paragraph: A humble God-centered life is more valuable than a colossal hoax of a
life dedicated to godless altruism or socialism.

A humble God-centered life... a person may not be very famous, may not be very
well known, but a person is devoted to God, and is chanting the names of God,
serving God, that person will attain an eternal destination. On the other hand,
a person may be big social worker, but that person does not care for God, at
material level, social work may be some use, but at spiritual level, it is not
going to help. A person will go on cycle of birth and death.

We will discuss about social service in detail in one of our future classes in
Isopanisad itself, but here the point is, if God is not there, then whatever we
do is not good enough. It may good, but it is not good enough; not good enough
to get us out of karmic bondage. I may serve my family, I may serve my country,
I may serve my society, but if I do not bring God in, I am still going to stay
within the zone of material things, and I have to go on cycle of birth and
death.

So a colossal hoax of life dedicated to godless altruism or socialism... that,
Prabhupada does not recommend that, and before that, Srila Prabhupada quotes a
Bhagavatam verse. Now:

...

This is a verse at the start of Second Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, and
Prabhupada is paraphrasing it... Trees used for hundreds and hundreds of years,
but Prabhupada says, but there is no point in living long time like trees. Now,
this is correlated with ... a point is made here that a person may want to live
for hundreds of years, a person is living like a vegetable, not really doing
anything for one's spiritual advancement, then what is the use of such a long
life? There is no point in living long like that. So:

...

What makes a life valuable is not its length, but its content. What makes a life
valuable is not its length, but its content. So it does not matter how long a
person lives, it is how a person lives. Srila Prabhupada would quote how
Caitanya Mahaprabhu lived for only 48 years, Jesus Christ lived for 33 years,
Sankaracarya lived for 32 years, but the contributions they have made to the
world is unparalleled. So the content of their lives was precious. So the length
is precious when the content is good. If the content is good and then the person
lives for a long time also, that is even more glorious. Ramanuja acarya decided
to live for more than hundred years, now he was a vaishnava, and he was sharing
pure God consciousness with everyone. That was glorious. But just living for a
long time is not of much use. So:

...

That is what the Bhagavatam... what is the use of such that kind of life? .. So
somebody may say that oh the trees do not breed. We human beings breed, so he
says that there are the bellows of the blacksmith, even the air comes in and out
of them, it appears as if they are breathing. They are not actually breathing,
they are not actually, but appears as if they are breathing. But what are they
doing? They are not conscious. They are not making spiritual advancement, so
what is the use of that?

Somebody may say that, no, but actually I eat, I produce children...

No but even the other animals, like the cats and dogs, they also do these
things, so what is so great about it? So living like an animal, has nothing, or
just living like a tree, is nothing glorious. So if we human beings live like
that, then we are depriving ourselves of life's higher potential. And that is
why that is not at all recomended. That is in many ways discouraged, and even
castigated. And this castigation, this condemnation, this shock treatment will
become stronger in the next verse, next mantra.

Now, here, Srila Prabhupada explains that even those God-centered activities may
be half-finished, they are still good for the executor because they will
guarantee him a human form in his next birth. In this way, one can have another
chance to improve his position on the path of liberation.

So this is talking about in the Bhagavad Gita 6.37 to 6.45 that how a yogi who
is not able to complete the spiritual journey in this life still continues on in
the next life, either in a wealthy family, a brahminical family or in a devotee
family, and in that way, person keeps making spiritual advancement.

So that means, Srila Prabhupada is giving three steps, first is, ok, whatever
you want to do, add God into it, that will be good for you. That will be
spiritualised. Then he says if you do not add God into it, everything is a
waste, everything is a waste. And then he says, if you add God into it, you
know, even if you do it partially, still there will be benefit. Still, you will
not be lost. So in this way basically, the whole focus of this verse is act with
isavasya, live in such a way that you can live in harmony with God, you can live
in harmony with dharma.

So now, we conclude, Srila Prabhupada will say over here: How one can execute
God-centered activities is elaborately explained in the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu,
by Srila Rupa Goswami. We have rendered this book into English as The Nectar of
Devotion.

Now let us understand this statement. When we read The Nectar of Devotion, we
will find that it does not talk anything about karma yoga, it actually talks
about bhakti-yoga, and even it talks about very intimate, exalted and intricate
details about bhakti-yoga. So, what is Srila Prabhupada doing here? Here, it is
talking about karma-yoga, that means in your karma, bring yoga, you are doing
your karma, bring God into it, bring connection to God into it, that is quite a
preliminary level of spirituality. But he is making the argument in such a way
that people will find it intelligent, other people have a little religious
inclination, they will say, yes, this makes sense.

I should work for eternal purposes also, not just for temporary purposes. But
once they get into it, once they understand the thread of arguments, when they
want to now more, Srila Prabhupada quoted Bhagavad Gita here, and then now he is
quoting Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. Now, if people read Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, then
they are going to get a complete understanding of bhakti. So Srila Prabhupada is
creating the foundation by which people can come to the bhakti platform. So
here, in this purport, Srila Prabhupada is not directly glorifying bhakti.

When we go into an animate territory, you know, if say, there is a war between
India and Pakistan, and India wants to attack Pakistan. Then it is not that
suddenly we go into the capital. First, we go into a small place which is weak,
and we penetrate that, we conquer that, and then we go further, and then
further, so like that.

What Srila Prabhupada is doing is over here, see, people who are very attached
to their material life, they think that my material life itself is my duty, and
this is what I should be doing, now ok, yes, your family, your dynasty, your
country, all those are important, but bring God into them.

And then yes yes, I should bring God into them. How to bring God? That is talked
about in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. So now if they read Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu,
they will understand ok what to speak of doing karma-yoga, acually karma and
jnana, everything is illusory, everything is temporary, I have to practice
bhakti, and bhakti, I have to practice kevala bhati, pure devotional service.
So, Srila Prabhupada's purport is a masterpiece of gradually elevating people
upwards, not in a dismissive rejecting sort of way, but in a gentle, prodding,
elevating sort of way.

You know interestingly, as I mentioned earlier, this Isopanisad was a book that
Srila Prabhupada wrote, not as a book, but a series of purports in his original
Back to Godhead magazine. Now when Srila Prabhupada was publishing the Back to
Godhead magazine before he started ISKCON from 1944-1955, at that time, he had
not written the NOD, so the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, with the sanskrit book, and
Srila Prabhupada has given that in English, not as a word to word translation,
say translation purport, but as a general summary study as Nectar of Devotion.

So this paragraph is not there in Srila Prabhupada's Back to Godhead magazine.
It has been added later by the editors, especially this sentence about we have
translated into English as Nectar of Devotion, and we recommend this valuable
book to all who are interested in performing their activities in the spirit of
Sri Isopanisad.

So, there is a masterpiece progression within the Vedic literature and Srila
Prabhupada is demonstrating that progression more exclusively to us through the
purports. So what is that progression? A person wants to enjoy material things,
ok, rather than telling him everything material is nonsense, tell that person,
you want to enjoy material things, you worship God, you will get that. So by
that, the person brings God into his material life.

And then gradually, the person, yes, I should bring God. How will I bring God
in? Then leave the person to books, to literature, to forums, where that person
understands how God is meant not to be a facilitator of my material life, God is
meant to be the ultimate goal of my life. See, karma-kanda, the idea is what,
God, I want to perform pastimes in this world, and you descend over here and you
perform pastimes for me. You help me in the pastime that I want to perform here.
Whereas actually pure devotional service is, Krishna in the spiritual world,
Krishna is performing pastimes there, and he is telling us I am performing
pastime, you come and join me there.

So actually speaking, this is, spiritual world is the material world, the
ultimate goal of dharma is take us from the material world to the spiritual
world. So as I said, the ultimate goal of spiritual life is to act as a
replacement for material life, but until then, people are at this level, so
bring God to this level, and tell them, you want to practice material, but add
God into it, and by that, you will become elevated.

So to summarise in this purport, what did we discuss? We first talked about how
karma-bandhana causes death, so in that we discussed how the soul is eternal,
but because of the desire to enjoy matter, the soul becomes bound in material
existence.

Then, we discussed about how akarma leads to liberation, so by understanding
that I have a life beyond material, I turn away from matter, and that is how I
become liberated.

Now, everbody cannot practice akarma immediately, so the Vedas lead people
gradually and ultimately to akarma. So the beginning of that akarma is to
practice karma-kanda. It is that within sense gratifactory life, start bringing
God in, and when we bring God in, then God slowly comes in through a crackener
life and then he expands his place in our life, and he takes over our heart, and
when he takes over our heart, that is the ultimate success of our life.

So to enable God to take over our heart, first give him a foothold, and then
tell people that if there is no God, everything will be in vain, and then,
whatever you do, even if social service, even if nationalism, it will all be of
no use, as Prabhupada says, attractive form of karma bandhana, they will be, but
bring God into your life and then God will bring you into his life, that means,
God will take us back to the spiritual world, where we will live eternally with
him.

So this is the wonderful magic of the Vedic literature. First, bring God into
your life, and then God will bring you into his life. Bring God into our life
means, I want to practice material life, I bring God in, yes, God will help me
materially, fine, he will help us, but ultimately, God will bring us in his
life, he will lift us out of this world, back to his eternal abode, where we
will have eternal love and eternal happiness.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
