Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RZ_Mk295LeI
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=9mtDKBu-ksVquNK-S9BytzBXlI58MTU0MDAyMTcxMUAxNTM5OTM1MzEx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_001_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Introduction_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=RZ_Mk295LeI&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

So welcome all of you to this online Bhakti Sastri course.

In this course, we will be discussing the four books that Srila Prabhupada has
given us as a part of Bhakti Sastri: The Isopanisad, Nectar of Instruction,
Bhagavad Gita, and Nectar of Devotion.

We will discuss these books in this sequence itself.

So roughly, it will be a 200-hour module with:

* 25 hours for Isopanisad
* 25 hours for Nectar of Instruction
* 100 hours for Bhagavad Gita
* and 50 hours for Nectar of Devotion

Before I start with the Isopanisad, I would like to talk briefly about the
importance of these four books.

As the slide's title, four books are enough.

So, what is the significance of these four books within the broad Vedic Canon?
Canon refers to the set of literature that are considered to be secret or vital
in a particular tradition.

So, in the tradition of Gaudiya Vaishnavism as Srila Prabhupada has presented it
to us, he considered the devotees who joined the movement, should have clear
understanding of these four books. So, we will try to understand the importance
of these four books within the Vedic Canon.

So, let us look at a broad overview of the various schools of thought that have
been present in India under the Vedic fold. So, there are six systems of
philosophy:

1. Nyaya propounded by Gautama Rishi
2. Vaisesika propounded by Kanada Rishi
3. Sankhya propounded by Kapila Muni that is described in the Third Canto of
Srimad Bhagavatam also, and
4. Yoga propounded by Patanjali
and there are two mimamsas
5. Purva (karma) Mimasa propounded by Jaimini - and this is what Krishna talks
about in the Tenth Canto of the Srimad Bhagavatam while pursuading Nanda
Maharaja to stop doing Indra puja, and then
6. Uttara (brahma) propounded by Vyasa - which is actually Vedanta

So among all these six systems of philsophy, uttara (brahma) mimamsa, vedanta is
the conclusion. Let us look at this diagramatically here.

So, going one step backwards from Vedic thought to overall Indian thought.
Because it is not that in India all the thought systems that have emerged are
Vedic. So the thought system can be classified as Astik and Nastik.

So, in today's terminology, often Astik is used to refer one who has faith in
God and Nastik as one who does not have faith in God. In Vedic context, Astik
refers to one who has faith in the Vedic scriptures and Nastik, one who does not
have that faith.

So, among the Nastik schools of thought, there are three prominently: Buddhism,
Janism, and Charvakism. Charvakism refers to materialism, which is prominent,
even pre-dominent school of thought today.

Now, apart from the Nastik schools of thought, there are Astik school of
thought. We just saw the list of six. So, all these six schools of thought
accept the authority of the Vedas. But they say that the Vedas due particular
teaching, which actually are accordance with their own philosophy. That means
they interpret the Vedas in a way that supports their own philosophy. So, the
Astik schools of thought are considered Vedic in the sense that they derive
their authority from the Vedas, but they are not considered Vedantic because
they do not teach the conclusion of the Vedic literature. Vedanta, anta refers
to end or conclusion. Vedanta refers to that which is the conclusion of the
Vedic thought.

So, the other five systems of philosophy, they do teach the Vedic principles,
but not completely and so not entirely correctly.

Now, in Vedanta, there have been two major schools of knowledge, schools of
thought. There is Advaita and Dvaita. So, Sankaracharya was a prominent
proponent of Advaita. Advaita is non-dualism. Non-dualism means that there is no
duality between the soul and the supreme reality that is brahman. Dvaita is the
idea that there is difference between the soul and brahman. And Dvaita's most
prominent proponent was Madhavacharya. So, Advaita and Dvaita are the two
branches of Vedanta. And reconciling these two branches is the teaching of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, which is called "acintya bheda abheda", simultaneous
inconceivable oneness and difference.

So, are the atmas same as brahma? Yes and no. So, we will discuss about acintya
bheda abheda in detail later, but right now, if you see all these names, do not
get overwhelmed by it. We will come to the Isopanisad soon. But this is just the
background to understand how the Vedantic thought, and ultimately the acintya
bheda abheda is the conclusion of the various systems of thought that have
emerged in the Vedic context.

So now in Vedanta... so now we have proceeded from Indian schools of thought to
six systems of philosophy which are Astik, then we progressed to Vedanta and now
we are focusing within Vedanta. So, in Vedanta, there are three primary sources
of authority. They are called as:

Prasthana-traya - three foundations:

1. Shruti 
2. Smriti
3. Nyaya

Shruti refers to the Vedas primarily, so the Vedas in themselves have three
parts, Samhitas, Aranyakas, and Upanishads. So Rigaveda-Samhita for example
contains verses which glorify the various devatas and seek their propitiation to
get their blessings. Now, Aranyakas are treatises, which begin philosophical
discussions. The Samhitas primarily focus of karma-kanda rituals, on performing
religion for the sake of material gratification, religious material
gratification, whereas Aranyakas start talking about renounciation. Upanishads
focus on philosophy, solid philosophy they discuss. So all these are Shruti.

Then Smriti, the word Shruti is referred to that which is heard. So, these are,
so the Vedas are considered to be sound vibration. That has been received from
God and that has been actually assimilated by the great sages who then
transmitted as it is.

Whereas the Smritis are also divine, at the same time, the Smritis are not in
the same category as the Shrutis. Shrutis are actually the elaboration on the
Shrutis, based on the way the great sages have internalised, assimilated and
elaborated the essential teachings of Shrutis. So, the Smriti word refers to
that which is remembered. Shruti refers to that which is heard.

So the sound vibration that is heard from God, that is called a Shruti, whereas
after hearing, when it is recollected, and then explained, that is called a
Smriti. This actually refers to a traditional family context, where when a child
is growing up. The child, say, has a mother who teaches things and then has a
sister, older sister, who revises those things, elaborates those things. So the
mother is compared to Shruti and the Smriti is the older sister. So, two of them
together educate the child. It is not that two of them teach separate things.
The mother teaches in brief, but the mother has many other duties to do. The
sister explains it further so that the child understands. So Shruti and Smriti
are not contradictory, they are complimentary.

And in the Smritis, there are Puranas, Itihasas, and Pancharatras. So Puranas
refers to the eighteen puranas, and there are many other puranas and of course
beyond that there are asthala puranas. So, the eighteen puranas are the primary,
then upa-puranas or minor puranas, like devi bhagavat is upa-purana, and beyond
there are the sthala puranas. Sthala Puranas means, actually the mahatmaya of
various places, for example Jaganath Puri, Tirupathi and all these. Now,
Itihasas refer to the histories. They are the Ramayana and Mahabharata. The
difference between the Itihasas and the Puranas is that the Itihasas primarily
focus on historical narration of one particular person or one particular group
of persons, one particular lineage. For example, the Mahabharat focuses
primarily on the Pandavas. The Ramayana focuses primarily on Lord Rama. The
Puranas on the other hand are also historical, but they are compilations,
anthologies, which are centered not on a particular person, but on a particular
conversation. So for example, the Srimad Bhagavatam is centered on the
conversation between Suta Goswami and Sage Visarunya. And during the
conversation, the histories of various persons who have lived at various times
and this or other universes and this or other ages is all compiled together for
a devotional exposition o eternal principles. So that is the Srimad Bhagavatam.

Now beyond that in the smriti there is also Pancharatras also. The pancharatras
primarily focus on deity worship. So, for example, Srila Prabhupada often quotes
from the Narada Pancharatra.

Now, Shruti, Smriti and then there is Nyaya. So Nyaya primarily is Vedanta
Sutra. Now the word Nyaya was used earlier also. I had not gone into the systems
of philosophy in detail, we may go into it later, but earlier the word Nyaya was
used to refer to one of the six systems of philosophy, whereas here the word
Nyaya is not referring to the six systems of philosophy. Here, it is referring
to one of the authorities within Vedanta. So, in the six systems of philosophy,
one of them is Nyaya, but within six systems of philsophy, within them, within
Vedanta, there are three primary sources of authority, and one of them is Nyaya.
So, here we see something which we will come across repeatedly during our study
of the Vedic scriptures. That is the multivalence of words.  Words have
different meanings depending on their context. So Nyaya uses the Vedanta Sutra,
which is the primary book of Nyaya, in the presthana-traya, uses the same
logical principles that are talking about in the Vedic school of thought. The
word Nyaya refers to primary logic. So the logic itself can be an independent
school of thought, or logic can be method used to establish the teachings of a
school of thought. So, in the six systems of philosophy, Nyaya or logic is an
independent school of thought, whereas within the presthana-traya, the Vedanta
Sutras is a book of Nyaya in the sense that it uses the method of logic to
establish the teachings of Vedanta.

So, now, for us, how are the four books enough? How do they relate with this
whole system of Shruti, Smriti and Nyaya?

So, Srila Prabhupada told that for the Bhakti Sastri, we study these four books,
Bhagavad Gita, Isopanisad, Nectar of Devotion, Nectar of Instruction, and
overall for life, he wanted devotees to repeatedly and deeply study the Bhagavad
Gita, the Srimad Bhagavatam, the Caitanya Caritamrta and Nectar of Devotion. So,
we will discuss the significance of these books, but primarily now, with the
background discussion of Shruti, Smriti and Nyaya, in our context, the Shruti
that we study is the Isopanisad, the Smriti that we study is the Bhagavad Gita,
and the Nyaya that we study is the Bhagavatam.

Now, as I told earlier, the Vedas have three parts, the Samhitas, there are
Aranyakas and there are Upanishads. So, among the Upanishads, very prominent
Upanishad is the Isopanisad. So, Srila Prabhupada has given us one of the
prominent Shrutis, the Isopanisad, as a part of the literary and legacy that has
given us and as a part of the Bhakti Sastri course that he wanted us to study.

Now, the Bhagavad Gita is actually not just a Smriti. It is a Shruti within a
Smriti. So as I said, Shruti refers to the direct revelation of God, whereas
Smriti refers to the recollection and elaboration of great sages. So, from a
literary point of view, Bhagavad Gita belongs to Smriti, because Bhagavad Gita
is a part of Mahabharata and the Mahabharata is a conversation. So, it is a
conversation between Vaisampaya and Janmejaya. So, because it is a conversation,
it is Smriti and because the Bhagavad Gita is placed within it, so it is Smriti.

And Baladeva Vidyabhusan, in his Vedanta Sutra, often quotes the Bhagavad Gita
as a Smriti. At the same time, because the Bhagavad Gita is a direct word of
God, and whatever the direct word of God is considered to be Shruti, so in a
sense the Bhagavad Gita is Shruti also. The Bhagavad Gita's position is very
special and we will discuss about it when we study the Bhagavad Gita.

So for this classification, we will consider to be a part of Smriti, but it is
also a Shruti. Now, from the Nyaya scriptures, the Vedanta Sutra is a very
abstruse body of thought. Abstruse means extremely difficult to understand and
that is why the Vedanta Sutra does not really explain clearly what is the
ultimate truth. Vedanta Sutra uses complex systems of logic and it is not that
it is intrinsically incomprehensible, rather, its system of logic is so
intricate that our Kali-yuga mind cannot understand it. So, the acharyas
commented on the Vedanta Sutra, so Ramanuja acharya has commented, Baladeva
Vidyabhusan has commented, but we know that originally, after Vyasadeva compiled
all literature, even after he compiled Vedanta Sutra, which gave the conclusion
of the Vedas, as the very name suggests, still he was not satisfied and that is
why he wrote the commentary on the Vedanta Sutra and that is the Srimad
Bhagavatam.

So, the Bhagavatam itself declares as well as other Puranas mention that the
Bhagavatam is a commentary on the Vedanta Sutra. So for us, we study Nyaya, not
by directly studying the Vedanta Sutra, but by studying the Srimad Bhagavatam.
So the Shruti, Smriti and Nyaya are all included within the set of books that
Srila Prabhupada has given us. Shruti is Isopanisad, Smriti is Bhagavad Gita,
and Nyaya is the Bhagavatam. Now let us look further to understand how Srila
Prabhupada's books give us the complete legacy.

So, if you see this pyramid, it is building up to the highest thoughts. So, we
discussed earlier how among the six systems of philosophy Vedanta is highest and
the conclusion of Vedanta is given in the acintya bheda abheda. So, in this
diagram, we see this in a different way, through the perspective of the books
that Srila Prabhupada has given us. So, the Bhagavad Gita is a Vedic book, in
the sense that the Gita is valued, quoted and respected by everybody within the
Vedic fold. So, it is a broad Vedic book.

Now, the Srimad Bhagavatam is a Vaishnava book in the sense that the Srimad
Bhagavatam is one of satvik puranas, although it is transcendental, being the
supreme of all the puranas, amala purana, but at the same time, in the
categorisation, given in the madhya purana, eighteen puranas, it is one of the
satvik puranas and it is considered to be a Vaishnava book and the Bhagavatam
does focus on Lord Vishnu and his various incarnations, and ultimately on
Krishna. So, now, the Vedas due teachings of worship of various demigods, but
ultimately conclude in the worship of Vishnu. And of course, Vishnu is in his
highest manifestation as Krishna.

As, at the top of the pyramid of Vedic knowledge is the Gaudiya Vaishnava
Siddhanta. And Srila Prabhupada has given us the Gaudiya Vaishnava Siddhanta
through two of his primary books, Caitanya Caritamrta and Nectar of Devotion.
So, in this way, Srila Prabhupada has given us the Gaudiya Vaishnava legacy in a
progressively ascending way.

So, Srila Prabhupada has given the Bhagavad Gita which is a broad Vedic book for
everybody within the Vedic fold and also for people in general all over the
world, because the Bhagavad Gita is widely respected by thinkers all over the
world as one of world's greatest philosophical masterpieces.

Along with that, Srila Prabhupada has given us the Srimad Bhagavatam, which is a
Vaishnava book, which builds on what Bhagavad Gita has given, and then he has
given us the Gaudiya Vaishnava Siddhanta books, namely: Caitanya Caritamrta and
Nectar of Devotion. So, in this way, there is a progression in Srila
Prabhupada's books, and as we go from Bhakti Sastri to Bhakti Vaibhava and into
higher courses, we reach deeper and deeper into our tradition and the legacy
that Srila Prabhupada has given us.

So, now, in any spiritual path, there are two primary tenets of central
importance. One is Sadhya and the other is Sadhana. So the Sadhya that is
ultimately thought by the Vedic literature is Krishna. The word Sadhya refers to
the goal, what is it that is to be achieved. So, what is to be achieved?

In 15.15 in Bhagavad Gita Lord Krishna says "By all the Vedas I am to be known"
and sadhana is the means. So, the Vedic literature talk about various means.
There is jnana yoga, ashtanga yoga, karma yoga, but beyond them, the topmost
among all sadhanas is bhakti. So, for example, if I have to travel from one
place to another, then I need to know where I want to go and I need to know how
I am going to go there. If I am going to go from Mumbai to New York, then ok,
first is to know the destination, ok I have to go to New York, second is how I
am going. Am I going by flight, am I going by ship? I have to decide that.

Similarly, we had to know sadhya and sadhana. So, in the four books that Srila
Prabhupada has given us, the sadhya and sadhana are established through Bhagavad
Gita and Isopanisad. So, the Isopanisad establishes that the Absolute Truth is a
person. The Isopanisad does not use the word Krishna directly and we will
discuss about it later, but the Isopanisad establishes that the Absolute Truth
is a person. And the Bhagavad Gita clearly establishes that the Absolute Truth
to not just be a person, but to be a person who is Krishna.

So, in this way, now Isopanisad establishes Sadhya, personality and Bhagavad
Gita establishes Sadhya's identity. Now, as far as Sadhana is concerned,
Isopanisad points towards bhakti and Bhagavad Gita establishes bhakti. So now,
after Sadhya and Sadhana is established, once we know Krishna is the goal and
bhakti is the means, but how do we practice this? How do we actually practice
bhakti and how can we come to know more about Krishna?

So Sadhya and Sadhana are explained through Nectar of Devotion and Nectar of
Instruction. So, the Nectar of Devotion, for example, gives us the 64 qualities
of Krishna. That is how we come to know about sadhya, Krishna more and more.
Then, it gives us the 64 limbs of devotional service. The many limbs of
devotional service that are talked about in Nectar of Devotion, they help us to
know how to practice bhakti better. The Nectar of Instruction similarly tells us
how to practice bhakti. So, in this way, what we need for our spiritual path, is
given to us in its foundation through the four books of Bhakti Sastri.

The sadhya and sadhana are established. That means we come to know that this is
the means and this is the goal. And then how to go along the means and what is
so attractive about the goal. That we come to know through Nectar of Devotion
and Nectar of Instruction. So, in this way, the four books that we have been
given in the Bhakti Sastri, they give us the foundational knowledge that we need
for our spiritual advancement.

And the four books that we have been given as a part of our life study, the
Bhagavad Gita, the Caitanya Caritamrta, the Srimad Bhagavatam and the Nectar of
Devotion, as we discussed earlier, they are life study for us to be able to
relish the Gaudiya Vaishnava Siddhanta and its fullness.

Now, we will start with the introduction of the Isopanisad. Now, the
introduction is actually not a part of the Isopanisad. This is a lecture that
Srila Prabhupada gave in London and that talked about the Vedas in general and
the publishers, Bhaktivedanta Book Trust used that lecture as the introduction
for the Isopanisad.

So, the way we will be studying the Isopanisad and Nectar of Instruction will be
that we will be dividing the purports into themes and then we will not read the
full purports, but we will elaborate on those themes. So, for example, if you
see in this introduction overview, here p1-5 is mentioned. That is referred to
paragraph one to five. So, the theme that is primarily covered in these
paragraphs is:

	As we have four detects, we need the Vedas.

Similarly, the next two paragraphs, six and seven as mentioned in brackets that
covers the theme.

	Vedas give universal and axiomatix wisdom.

Now, each of these sections, which I have highlighted, identified, named, they
may also cover some small other themes, but they have one thrust of thought and
we will be discussing these topics as we cover the purports. So, let us start
with the first theme now.

"As we have four detects, we need the Vedas." - so many people feel that there
is no need for us to actually refer to scripture, because scripture in and of
itself is just some body of knowledge that was written by some sages long ago
and we do not need that right now. However, the scriptures are the word of God,
and as the word of God, they are eternally relevant. Just as whether it is
modern times, ancient times, medieval times or postmodern times, we need the Sun
for illumination. Similarly, we need scripture for illumination, whatever time
we live in. So that is why the scripture gives us eternal knowledge which we
need at all times.

Now, the need for scriptures can be understood in various ways. One of the ways
is by recognising the limitation of our own sources of knowledge. So, what are
our sources of knowledge that we will try to see, how they are fraud?

So let us go back to our discussion. So, we have four defects. That is why we
cannot acquire knowledge properly. So, here, we are showing these four defects.
So, on the rightmost of the screen, on your leftmost, you see reality. So what
this means is there is external world and in that external world, we try to
perceive it with our senses. Now, there are four progressive limitations to our
knowledge, which make it more and more difficult for us to understand things.

1. The first problem is that our senses are limited. So because our senses are
limited, we cannot pursue things clearly. So to understand these four defects,
we can envision, say, four sets of doors in front of us. Now, if all four doors
are open, we can see clearly what is there. If one of the doors is closed, then
we can see less. Now, if like that, if the second is also partially closed. So,
actually, much of what is outside is obscured by partially closed first door,
and whatever is still revealed, is obscured by partially closed second door.
What is limitedly revealed beyond that, if a third door is also partially
closed, then what will we be seeing? Even lesser. And if the fourth door is also
partially closed, what will we be seeing? Even lesser.

So, like that, the four defects that we have, they progressively and
increasingly limit the knowledge that we can acquire. So, what are these four
defects? These are generally understood and accepted in the Vedic literature,
and Caitanya Caritamrta also quotes them.

1. Brahma
2. Pramad
3. Vipralipsa and
4. Karnapato

So let us look at these four, with the first is in the sequence in which we are
acquiring knowledge from outside. There is:

1. Karnapato. Karnapato is, karana is the senses, apata means defective or
limited. So limited senses. So, our senses are limited. Now, from the scientific
perspective, we can perceive with our eyes only a limited range, within the
whole electromagnetic spectrum, we can see only the visible range. So that is
limited senses. Then, within the limited things that we perceive with our
senses, the further problem is that:

2. We commit mistakes. How do we commit mistakes? We may be counting notes and
if we are counting currency notes, there will be hundred notes, but we may count
them to be 101. So, we are using our fingers and we are counting, but we do not
see properly. We do not count properly. So, we all commit mistakes in various
ways. That means, beyond the limitedness of the senses, adding to the
limitedness of the senses is that we commit mistakes. The second defect. After
that, there is a tendency to be 

3. Illusioned. That means we are unconsciously error-prone. So when we talk
mistakes, it is conscious, but illusion, the tendency to be illusioned is
actually the brahma pramad vipalipsa and karnapato. So, brahma is a tendency to
commit mistakes, pramad is tendency to be illusioned. So what is illusion? For
example, if I come from a cold room out, then suddenly, that external will seem
hotter than what it actually is. You know if I have just eaten delicious gulab
jamun, and after that I eat something which is slightly sweet, that will not
seem like sweet to me. So, although there is some sugar in it, there is some
sweetness in it, I cannot perceive it because I have tasted something much more
sweet. So, the tendency to be illusioned refers to something which happens
subconsciously, unconsciously without our realising it. Now, beyond that, is the
tendency to

4. Cheat, pipralipa, cheating propensity. So, why do we have the cheating
propensity? Because often, we want to twist reality to suit our preconceived
notion. So that means, because we want believe something, so we cheat, we doctor
the fact so that we can believe what we want to believe. So, there was an
American comedian who said that, actually, I have already made up my mind so do
not confuse me with the facts, so do not confuse me with the facts, the question
begs itself how have you made up your mind? If you do not want to know the
facts, on what basis have you made up the mind? So of course, he is in a lighter
way pointing out the hypocrisy that sometimes arouses human opinion, and he is
openly highlighting it, but many people conceal it. And they subvert, pervert,
distort facts so that they can hold onto their opinion. So cheating propensity
means so that we deny or conceal reality so that we can maintain our believes
and propagate our believes to others.

So let us look at this from another perspective, these four detects to see how
they progressively limit us and how they lead to illusions and delusions.

1. So for example, if you could say that we have limited senses. So if you want
to look at the words and say where did this come from. This whole world is so
complex, from where did it come? So with our limited senses, we cannot see the
creator, we cannot see God. So because we cannot see God, so at the first level,
with our limited senses, we say that there is no God. I cannot see him.

2. Then there is mistakes. We all commit mistakes. So then what is the mistake
that we commit? We see with our senses then we see that ok humans and monkies
look similar, so probably they are related. You know maybe one came from the
other monkies, humans came from monkies, or both came from some ancestors, so
basically we start speculating. Now, what is the mistake over here? The mistake
is based on external perceptions. Maybe, just look at the externals, and there
are similarities, but internally, anatomically there is such difference.
Intellectually, there is such difference. So, we conclude, because we do not see
any designer, there is no designer. And after concluding that there is no
designer, the next step that we do is we assume that it has come out by chance,
natural selection.

3. And what is the illusion? Illusion is, we go further and we start thinking,
ok, humans look like monkies. So, you know, monkeys scratch their head, we
humans scratch our head, monkeys wink, humans wink, monkeys make faces, we make
faces, so probably humans must have come from monkies. Monkies are walking on
all force, monkies came up, the tail disappears and homo sapiens came out. So,
this is a fairy tale. But what happens is, we are putting to illusion and we
believe the fairy tale.

4. And after that, there is cheating propensity. What is the cheating
propensity? That even when there is evidence that contradicts such fairy tales,
we deny that evidence and even when there is evidence of the antiquity of the
human race, we conceal that evidence. And that is how we maintain our faith in
our pet believes. So one of Srila Prabhupada's core disciples, Takarma Prabhu
has written about the extensive evidence that counters the theory of evolution
that has been subverted and concealed, which is so that the theory could be
believed. So, this is cheating propensity at work.

So, in this way, we see that there are these four defects, which progressively
limit our knowledge. So first of all, the totality of reality, our senses can
allow us to perceive only little of it. Then, with that little which we
perceive, within that we commit mistakes. Within that, whatever we are able to
perceive, without committing mistakes, we go into illusion, we inadvertently and
unconciously commit mistakes. And within what we are able to see, within that
also, we succumb to the cheating propensity.

Now, in his purport, Srila Prabhupada uses the example of, say, Gandhiji, he was
told not to go for a particular prayer meeting and still he went, and he was
shot over there. And Srila Prabhupada uses this as an example of committing
mistakes. Now, some people may say that this is not a mistake. Now, from the
point of view that he could have saved his life if he had just not gone for that
prayer meeting that day, it is a mistake. So the point which we look over here
is that, there are examples that are contextuals. There are principals that are
eternal. So the principle is that we all commit mistakes. Now, something is a
mistake that is very clearly understood. Now, if a student ticks a wrong
alternative exam, then that is clearly understood that that is wrong. It was a
mistake that a person committed. So, whenever we study the purports, we cannot
always stick to the literal examples. Because the examples are contextual. We
will discuss this further in the purport of Isopanisad, in the isavasya sarvam
verse.

... that Srila Prabhupada talks about the conflict between the communists and
capitalists. So, now, with more or less communism having collapsed, that
particular conflict is not relevant, that example is not relevant. So the
principles are eternal, the examples are contextual. So we need to focus on the
principles, and take the examples to the extent that they help us understand the
principle. The context may change and therefore the examples may not be so
suitable. So the important point is that everybody commits mistakes. And because
all of us have these four defects, so we by ourselves cannot acquire perfect
knowledge. We need some other source of knowledge. So what is that source of
knowledge?

1. That is the vedas. So now, Srila Prabhupada goes on and gives explanation on
what is the Vedas. So the word, the term Veda can be understood at multiple
levels. So the word Veda, Srila Prabhupada uses in his purport in the most
expansive sense. He uses it to refer to all knowledge. So, the word Veda
literally means knowledge, so in fact, all knowledge that anybody has can be
accepted as Veda. So in the expansive sense of the word, it refers to all
knowledge.

2. And in average sense of the word, we use Vedic and non-Vedic. So, for
example, we may say Islam, Christianity are non-Vedic religions because they do
not accept the authority of the Vedas. So in the average sense, we refer to the
Vedas as the Vedic literature.

3. And then there are some scholars who use the term Veda in a very restrictive
narrow sense and they say, Veda refers to only the four Vedas. So they consider
even the Smritis, the Puranas, Itihasas to be non-Vedic. So, that is the use of
the word Veda in a very restrictive sense.

So the term can be used in broad senses. In general, Srila Prabhupada uses it
Veda in the average sense to refer to the Vedic literature. Here, he uses it to
refer to the Vedic, Vedas referring to all knowledge. 

Now let us go back to the overview. So, Srila Prabhupada talks about Vedas give
universal and axiomatic wisdom. So what do we mean by universal and axiomatic?
Universal means that which is applicable at all times. There are discussed, Sun
is illuminated at all times. And axiomatic means it is implicitly true. So
because it is the word of God, it is true. Now, in some cases, we may not be
able to understand exactly how it is true with out current level of knowledge.
That is because our current level of knowledge is limited, not because that
knowledge itself is wrong. So the Vedas give universal and axiomatic wisdom.

And then after that Srila Prabhupada elaborates, Vedic knowledge is superior to
pratyaksha and anumana. So, through pratyaksha refers to direct sense
perception. So we see, look at the sky, we look at the water, we look at the
desert, and sometimes we see water in the desert. That is pratyaksha knowledge,
which is having its limitation. Anumana refers to mental speculation.
Pratyaksha is sense perception, anuman is mental inference or speculation.  So
both of these are defective. Why? Because both of them are ultimately subject to
the four defects. Pratyaksha is directly, we are limited in what we can
perceive, and the four defects are there, which limit both these systems of
knowledge. Now, this does not mean that Pratyaksha and anumana are useless. They
have their utility, but they have their limitations, which have to be
recognised.

So in western schools of thought, pratyaksha and anumana are sometimes referred
to as empirism and rationalism. So empirism refers to that which is empirically
perceived so that which is reality, which you perceive with your senses, that is
called empirical. And the school of thought which considers empirical sense
perception to be the primary if not the only source of knowledge, is called
empirism.

And rationalism refers to anumana. So rationalism means that school of
knowledge, school of thought which considers logical inference to be the primary
source of knowledge.

So, pratyaksha anumana, and Srila Prabhupada explains that both of these are
defective. So, Vedic knowledge is superior to pratyaksha anumana. Now, why is it
superior? Because both pratyaksha anumana are human intelligence based and human
intelligence itself is finite and fallible, whereas the divine intelligence, the
intelligence of God is infinite and infallible.

Because of that, the Vedic knowledge is superior to pratyaksha and anumana.

Now, Srila Prabhupada is talking about Vedic knowledge first in terms of its
inherent quality of being perfect. But now, Srila Prabhupada in the paragraph
ten to twelwe goes forward and talks another theme. That there is beyond this
world, the transcendental realm. And when we come to the transcendental realm,
the only way to know about transcendental knowledge is through scripture,
because the very word transcend means to go beyond. So Srila Prabhupada writes,
the Vedas, and ultimately Krishna, who is ultimate revelation of the Vedas, are
the only way to know about the trancendental realm, about Krishna.

So, we have knowledge that we can perceive with our senses, but the spiritual
world is something which you can never perceive with our senses directly, no
matter how sophisticated microscope we have, if you put the microscope in the
area of the heart, we will not be able to see the soul, not because the
microscope's resolution is not high enough, but because the microscope perceives
only matter and the soul is not material. So therefore, we need a different kind
of perception, spiritual perception. That spiritual perception happens through
purification and awakening of the soul's spiritual faculty, but before that it
happens through scripture. Scripture is revealed to us by God, who is perceiving
the spiritual reality and he gives that revelation and explanation to us.

So the Vedas are the only way to know about the transcendental realm.

So we can talk about the Vedic knowledge in three terms now, so there is Vedic
knowledge that

1. Agrees with pratyaksha and anumana.
2. May sometimes appear to disagree with pratyaksha and anumana.
3. Transcendental.

So, for example, we have Vedic Mathematics, which use many principles of
mathematics that give the same results as modern mathematics, but they give
faster and easier in many ways, so here there is agreement between pratyaksha
and anumana, but agreement of the Vedic knowledge is pratyasha and anumana. But
this is material knowledge.

Now, sometimes, our material knowledge may disagree with Vedas. Why is that?
Because our material knowledge is fallible, so we may pursue something in a
particular way and later on, fifty years, hundred years down the line we will
understand it oh what we pursued earlier was wrong. So either way, our focus is
not on that which agrees or that which disagrees. Our focus is on that Vedic
knowledge which trancends. This is our focus because we are interested
ultimately in going beyond the material world to the spiritual world. So, for
that transcendetal realm, which is beyond material sense perception, the only
way to acquire knowledge is through scripture.

The only way to actually know about Krishna, who lives in the transcendental
realm, is through scripture. So, it is just beyond material proof and material
disproof. That there is a spiritual world beyond the material world and in that,
there are multiple planets and that the topmost planet is Krishnaloka, in that,
God in his highest manifestation is blueish black cowherd boy exists playing a
flute and wearing a peacock feather, and herding cows and dancing with cowherd
girls. Now, this is something that is just beyond the scope of any microscope or
telescope.

So this is the knowledge that trancends. And, it can neither be proven nor
disproven by science, by pratyaksha and anuman. So our ultimate goal is to focus
on that knowledge. And how do we focus on that knowledge? By actually studying
about that knowledge through scriptures. So sometimes, the part of the scripture
that contradicts pratyaksha and anumana may make some doubts within us, so there
are ways in which by asking questions to expert devotees to get those doubts
clarified, but essentially we need to focus on scriptural knowledge that is
transcending the material source of knowledge because that is the essential
revelation of the Vedic scriptures, what ultimate goal of life is.

Srila Prabhupada makes it clear in the next paragraph that Krishna is the
ultimate goal of the Vedas. That Krishna is the person who is to be known
through all the Vedas. How is that? As we discussed earlier in this class:

	vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

That the Bhagavad Gita clearly says that "By all the Vedas am I to be known". In
fact, Krishna goes on further in the same train of thought in the fifteen
chapter. This verses was 15.15. Krishna goes forward and he says that one who
understand this truth about me, such a person knows everything. In 15.19, he
says:

	yo mam evam asammudho
	janati purusottamam
	sa sarva-vid bhajati mam
	sarva-bhavena bharata

Such a person, one who studies and understands the Vedas and knows through them
that I am all the ultimate goal, I am the supreme person, it is who I am to be
known, such a person is sarva-vid, knows everything.

So how is Krishna, the ultimate goal of the Vedas, from the external
perpsective, somebody may say that the name Krishna is not mentioned itself in
the Vedas. That is not entirely true. Actually, there is a whole Gopal Tapya
Upanishad, one of the important Upanishads which is devoted to Lord Gopal. And
there are even in the Vedas themselves, there is Devaki-Vatra-Vasudeva mentioned
there. So it is not that the Vedas do not have any reference to Krishna, but we
have to understand that each book has a particular purpose and that purpose is
served by that book's focus, so when we want to study a particular book, we have
to understand what is its focus, then we will be able toget a clear
understanding of where it stands in the Vedic context.

So there is the broad body of Vedic knowledge can be divided into three
sections:

1. Karma Kanda
2. Jnana Kanda
3. Bhakti

So Karma Kanda talks about primarily dharma, artha, kama. It hints towards
moksha, but not much about moksha. So, karma kanda, the word is karma. Karma
refers to action. Now, of course, the Vedic scriptures do talk about action in
religious context. So, the Vedas primarily talk about karma kanda. They talk
about material religiosity, which will give materially good results. That means
if a person practices religiosity, dharma, then what will that person get by
that? Artha and kama. So that is what everybody wants in life. People want
artha, people want sense gratification that is kama. Money will help get sense
gratification. So people want artha and kama. So the Vedas tell us that yes, you
want that, practice religion and by that you will get artha and kama.

So now when the four Vedas focus on this particular tripoteried goals of life,
dharma, artha and kama, then naturally the characters that they will describe
and glorify will be accordingly given. That is why the Vedas glorify Indra a
lot. Why? Because Indra is the model for those who want to do dharma, artha,
kama. The Vedas describe that Indra did a lot of yagnas when he was on Earth and
by doing all those yagnas, he became qualified to become Indra, so we will
discuss what is the purpose of karma kanda later, but the point is that every
book, even in the Vedic Canon, has a particular purpose.

So, for example, if we have a jail manual, within the Indian country. Now, the
jail manual may not mention the name of the prime minister of India. Why?
Because that is not relevant for the people who are living in the jail. And
certainly if the prime minister of India has a nickname, say he is called by his
mother or his brother as Manu, as a shortened name, that name will obviously not
be found in any official book, a book which is a literature for the prisoners,
which gives guidance for them.

Similarly, Krishna is a very intimate name of God. That is not found in the
Vedas directly, although there are hints towards it, there are good pointers
towards it, but the focus of the Vedas is karma kanda. And for that purpose,
they focus on dharma, artha, kama. Of course, Vishnu is mentioned there in the
Vedas. Why? Because Vishnu is more or less God in an official mood. Vishnu is
God administrator, Vishnu is God who accepts the sacrifices of yagna. Vishnu is
the God who is invoked by all the devatas when they are in danger. So, in this
way, the Vedas will talk about Vishnu, but ultimately, the Vedas lead towards
Krishna. How? Through this progression.

So if you imagine axes, there is X axis and there is Y axis. So now, along the Y
axis, the negative side is material things, and the positive side is spiritual
things. Sokarma-kanda is all on the negative side, moving towards upwards,
towards the positive side, that means people want to do materialistic
activities. Many people do sinful materialistic activities, but the scriptures
say, whatever material result you want, you get them by doing pious activities.
By doing activities that are meant for getting material results, but in a pious
way. So that is what is the focus of the karma kanda.

Now, after that karma kanda, there is jnana kanda. In that jnana kanda, the
Upanishads are the primary literature. And here the need of philosophy is
recognised. Ok, even if I do the jnana and go to heaven, what will I attain by
that? The heavens are also temporary. Those who are in the heaven, also die. I
have to understand my spiritual nature and that spiritual nature is talked in
jnana kanda. The Upanishads primary talk of the Absolute Truth in negative
terms. That means everything that was attractive for the karma kandis, that is
negated, rejected and subordinated in the Upanishads. That means, say, ok, you
are attracted to forms, you are attracted to names, you are attracted to people,
you are attracted to big big planets, and worlds, and kingdoms. What is the use
of all this? It is all temporary. It is all ultimately going to be lost.  The
Upanishad focuses on detachment and they slowly create the foundation by which
people can eventually understand spiritual knowledge in its positive aspect, in
its aspect of Krishna, God as a living loving person, who can see God so that he
can reciprocate love. That is the vision of God that is given in the bhakti
literature.

So the third part of course is Upasna Kanda. And Upasna kand, the ultimate is
bhakti, is pure unalloyed devotion to the Supreme Lord and that is talked about
in Srimad Bhagavatam.

So when Srila Prabhupada says all the Vedas are meant for Krishna, the Vedas may
not directly talk about Krishna, but they are progressively leading everyone
towards Krishna and that is the purpose and perfection of the Vedic literature.

So, this is the progression, first people are atheistic, they are told you want
material things, you will get them through the Vedas, do karma kanda. Then, when
they start developing faith in the Vedas, then they are introduced to the next
stage, that is the Upanishads.

What is the use of getting material things? They will all be lost. Even if you
go to heaven, that will be temporary. Inquire about spiritual things. That is
what the Upanishad leads to. Reject the material, turn towards the spiritual.

And then in Upasna kanda, culminating in bhakti, in the Srimad Bhagavatam,
spiritual things are not just the opposite of material things, they are not just
the rejection of material things, spiritual things also have variety, beauty,
their own wonderful reality, and there is reciprocity between the souls and the
all attractive Supreme Lord, and that entering into the reciprocations is the
ultimate goal of life, this is the progression.

So, in this way, the Vedas ultimately take us towards Krishna and that is what
Srila Prabhupada is saying in his purport.

And then Srila Prabhupada concludes his purport, lecture over here which is the
introduction to the Sri Isopanisad, by saying, by giving a brief overview of the
history of the Gitas, and how there is essence in the Srimad Bhagavatam, so that
is what I was talking about here that essentially when we talk about spiritual
knowledge, we are talking about knowledge that is beyond material. So the
scriptures do give us material knowledge so that we develop faith that this
works, even at the material level. So when somebody has some sickness, and the
scriptures say do this yagna, do this puja, and the person's sickness gets cured
and the person develops faith, oh, this works. So, when the person develops that
faith, the person starts inquiring further.

Now in the first Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, in chapters 4, 5, and 6, there is
one of the most foundational discussions in the Bhagavatam, that is the
discussion between Narada and Vyasa. And there, Narada chastised the disciple
Vyasa, saying that: "You have written all the Vedic literature, but you have
forgotten to give their most essential message, that is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. You just walked about material things, and now glorify the Supreme
Lord" - and that is what he does in the Srimad Bhagavatam. And then he becomes
fully satisfied.

So the Vedas are given their eternal books of knowledge, which are put in
written form by Vyasadeva, but he was not satisfied by putting all the other
literature in written form, he became satisfied only when he was able to
exclusively and purely glorify the Supreme Lord through the Srimad Bhagavatam.
That is why it is amala purana, the essence of all Vedic knowledge.

So, I will summarise what we discussed today. We started first by talking about
how the four books are enough. So we discussed the evident of Indian school of
thought, Astik and Nastik. Within the Astik, we discussed the six systems of
philosophy, within which, there is Vedanta is the highest and they have two
divisions, Advaita and Dvaita, acintya bheda abheda, the Gaudiya Vaishnava
understanding is the culmination.

Then, we discussed about how within the Vedanta, there are three primary sources
of knowledge: Shruti, Smriti, and Nyaya. So in the literatures that Srila
Prabhupada has given us, Shruti is available to us through Sri Isopanisad,
Smriti is available through Bhagavad Gita and of course the Bhagavatam, and the
Nyaya is available to us through the commentaries of the Vedanta Sutra, by the
same author, that is Bhagavatam which is written by Vyasadeva in spiritual maturity.

Then we discussed about how the four books of the Bhakti Sastri, the Sri
Isopanisad and Bhagavad Gita enables us to understand what is sadhya and what is
sadhana. Sadhya ultimately is Krishna and sadhana ultimately is bhakti.

And then, in NOD and in NOI they explain sadhya and sadhana further twice.

And then we discussed the introduction in which we discussed the four defects,
the four progressively closed doors which decrease our perception and capacity
for perception more and more.

And then we discussed how the Vedas give three kinds of knowledge, in the sense
that something which we are just agreeing with pratyaksha anuman, disagreeing
and transcending. Our focus is primarily on that knowledge that transcends and
Prabhupada says that there is no other source for this knowledge.

And then we discussed the progression within the Vedic body of knowledge, karma
kanda, jnana kanda and to ultimately bhakti, culminating Krishna.

Thank you very much. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya.
