Hare Krishna.

So, today, we begin with the second section of the Isopanisad, which talks about how we can know the Ishvara.

So before we move forward with the fourth mantra, let us look at the Isopanisad overview once again.

The first section which we completed, discussed, live in harmony with Ishvara. That was invocation through mantra three. And the last mantra was if we do not live in harmony with the Ishvara, then we will suffer in this life and the next.

So if we want to live in harmony with the Ishvara, we need to know who the Ishvara is. So how can we know about the Ishvara? That is the second section. That is four to eight is, the Ishvara can be understood by spiritual vision. So this is the section that we will discuss. I want to obey the Ishvara, live in harmony with the Ishvara. But how can I understand him so that I can feel inspired to harmonise with him? That will be through spiritual vision.

So we will discuss about spiritual vision in this section. Now, let us look at the section more closely. So, "Understand Ishvara by spiritual vision", that is the section title.

Within that, the first two mantras, four and five, talk about "Ishvara is inconceivable to our normal intelligence". So in these three (?, two?) mantras, the Ishvara's attributes will be described in terms that seem contradictory.

Then, in the next subsection within this, mantra six to seven, it is said that ok, how do I make sense of these contradictory ideas? It be... First develop spiritual vision towards material things, by seeing wordly things, events and people with equanimity. Do not get caught up with the dualities of this world.

So when we see the spiritual here in the material, then we can see the spiritual beyond the material. So that is the last section. So first we learn to see things of this world spiritually with an equal vision and then we look beyond this world, and when that vision is focused on the Ishvara, then we will be able to understand that Ishvara.

So we will begin with the fourth mantra. Let us look at the sanskrit mantra first:

        anejad ekaṁ manaso javīyo
        nainad devā āpnuvan pūrvam arṣat
        tad dhāvato 'nyān atyeti tiṣṭhat
        tasminn apo mātariśvā dadhāti

So, "anejad ekaṁ", that one Lord is situated in one place, "anejad ekaṁ", is fixed in one place, at the same time, "manaso javīyo", he moves faster than the wind. Now, actually that, what that is, there is no pronoun used in a specific sense to describe. That Absolute Truth, that whatever it is, which is a subject of the Ishvara is described, that Absolute Truth is situated in one place, and yet that Absolute Truth is swifter than the mind in terms of its movements.

"nainad devā āpnuvan pūrvam arṣat", so none of the devatas can actually approach that Lord. He is so far away that nobody can approach him.

"tad dhāvato 'nyān atyeti tiṣṭhat", that, when people try to run to catch him, he leaves all of them far behind.

"tasminn apo mātariśvā dadhāti", and that Lord is actually the master of those who provide "apo" water, and the various necessities of this world. He is the master of all of them. So, here the attributes of that Lord are described in the sense that he is fixed, but he is faster than everyone else, faster than the devatas, faster than even the mind. And he is the controller of all those who control the big big elements, like rain and wind in this world.

So let us look at Prabhupada's translation. Although fixed in His abode, the Personality of Godhead is swifter than the mind, "anejad ekaṁ manaso javīyo", although fixed in His abode, "anejad ekaṁ", the Personality of Godhead is swifter than the mind, that is "manaso javīyo", and "tad dhāvato 'nyān atyeti tiṣṭhat" can overcome all others running, "nainad devā āpnuvan pūrvam arṣat", that is, the powerful demigods cannot approach him. And although in one place, that is the beginning, "anejad ekaṁ", that is Prabhupada repeating it here, He controls those who supply the air and rain. "tasminn apo mātariśvā dadhāti", so what is the point in saying that? He is controlling those who supply the air and rain. You see, air is everywhere, rain also is spread everywhere. And the Lord is in one place, but in one place, he controls everything. So and thus, he surpasses all in excellence.

So this is the mantra which describes the Absolute Truth in terms that are mysterious. So now, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport. So the purport has six, seven paragraphs, which we can divide into five broad sections.

So AT refers to the Absolute Truth. So the first point that Srila Prabhupada makes is the Absolute Truth cannot be understood by speculation. Then, he says ok, then how do we understand the Absolute Truth? It is through revelation, not through speculation, but through revelation. That can help us understand God and his energies.

And then what is the understanding that we get? That those energies are non-different, yet different from him. And then we... how is it possible, how is it, different and non-different? That does not make sense logically, he says.

Then the point comes, as we are limited, we can understand the unlimited only through revelation. We cannot understand it through logical inference.

And then the concluding part is, ok, then how do we understand? Through revelation. But what do we have to do? You have to play your part and you will be given understanding. This is harmonising with the Absolute Truth through devotional service.

So let us look at each of these sections now.

The Absolute Truth cannot be understood by speculation. So why can the Absolute Truth not be understood by speculation? Because speculation is always uncertain. If I speculate about that which I do not know. Suppose I am sitting in this room and I hear a noise from outside. Now, how can I know what the source of the noise is? It might be somebody falling down. It might be somebody watching a movie, in which something has fallen down. It might be anything. So, speculation, because there is no certainty in it, we always stay unsure. Now, some people say that actually the Absolute Truth, there is no certain, conclusive way to know him. So the only thing we can know is that actually whatever we know is uncertain. So that is fine in principle if there were no certain way for us to know him.

But there is. So one extreme is, oh, we can never know that Absolute Truth, so whatever we know is uncertain. The other approach is the approach of some religions. In their religious traditions, there is no positive knowledge about God given. So, for example, in the Abrahamic religions, the Abrahamic religions refers to Christianity, Islam and Judaism. So all these three religions accepts Abraham as one of their prominent prophets. That is why they are called by the common reference as Abrahamic religions. Now in these Abrahamic religions, there is no positive description about God. So what does God look like? What does Jehova, or Allah, or Christ, what does he look like? There is not much described. It is indicated that he has a face, he laughts, his eyes are shining, but beyond that, not much is described.

So they say that God is so great that we cannot know God. So that idea is based on the notion that there is certain incomprehension. That what is certain is we cannot know God wholly. And people have that idea, we are finite, God is infinite, so we can never know God. But it is true that, we are finite, and God is infinite, so we cannot know God by our efforts. But by his will, we can know him. So how does it work? So, if God is truly infinite, if God is truly omnipotent, then he can do anything. And doing anything includes giving the finite the ability to understand the infinite.

So the finite cannot understand the infinite by his own effort. But when the infinite desires to reveal himself to the finite, then the infinite has that power. If, you see, the infinite does not have that power, then that means the infinite is not truly infinite. Infinite is limited then. Infinite becomes finite because infinite cannot do certain things.

So how, but gradual revelation through increasing devotional dedication. So the way we understand God is gradually our understanding increases more and more. Gradual revelation through increasing devotional dedication. That means, the more we surrender to Krishna, the more we turn towards Krishna, the more we start understanding him through increasing devotional dedication.

So, how does this work? When we talk about the sunrise in the morning. Now, in the morning, when the sun is rising, the sunrise is gradual, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, the sun is rising, rising, rising, but our realisation, that the Sun has risen is sudden. Oh, it is morning now. It is dawn now, it is morning. So in the morning, when we are doing our chanting, and we are closing our eyes, opening our eyes sometimes, trying to concentrate, and we see the sunrising in the distance, and suddenly, we oh, the sun has risen. So now, what has actually happened is, the sunrise is gradual, it is gradual, gradual, gradual, but our realisation of the Sun has risen, that is sudden.

Similarly, every day that we are practicing devotional service, every day that we are becoming committed, dedicated to Krishna, we are getting purified, we are getting illumined. The Krishna Sun is rising in our heart. But our realisation, oh yes, now I believe in Krishna. I love Krishna. I want to offer my life to Krishna. That realisation is sudden, it happens at one moment. Although the background for that realisation has been created gradually, there are moments, flashes of inspiration that come to us at certain times, but those flashes do not come abruptly or arbitrarily. There is a background that has been created.

So that way, revelation works by giving us the opportunity to understand the infinite by grace of the infinite. We cannot understand the infinite by our own efforts. Now when we talk about understanding the infinite, what does it mean? So, the first point is that God is not alone. God has his energies. And Srila Prabhupada gives the example in the purport that fire is always connected with heat and light. Wheverever there is fire, there will be heat and there will be light.

At the same time, heat and light, they are different. Now heat is something which we perceive with our skin, light is something which we perceive with our eyes. And yet, we cannot really analytically separate. Here there is heat, here there is light, here there is fire. They are organic whole. They are organic whole, and still, they have also difference.

So in thinking, there are two categories of thinking, one is called as analysis and the other is called as synthesis. Analysis means to break things down into their parts, so when we take, for example, we take a computer and then we analyse it, ok, here there is the CPU, here there is the keyboard, here there is the mouse, here there is the power chord, so like that, there is analysis. So analysis is for understanding, but then when the computer is to work, it is not that the keyboard will work here, and the monitor will work there. They all have to come together.

So analysis is for understanding (13:09)
