Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8bGka4-tZMY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_002_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Invocation_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=8bGka4-tZMY&redir_token=3yDBs9DvbFN8oi62KTPW-X-QSTR8MTU0MDAyMTc1MkAxNTM5OTM1MzUy

Hare Krishna.

So today we continue with our discussion on the Isopanisad.

Until now, we have discussed the introduction of the Isopanisad in our first
class, in which we discussed a broad overview of the Vedic literature, the
presentation of Srila Prabhupada as a progression in that Vedic literature from
Vedic, Bhagavad Gita, Vaishnava, Srimad Bhagavatam, and Gaudiya Vaishnava,
Caitanya Caritamrta and Nectar of Devotion.

And then we discussed the position of the four books, how they give us an
understanding of the sadhya and sadhana, and then in the introduction we
discussed further about the Vedas, how they progressively lead to the Supreme
Lord, Sri Krishna.

Now, we will start with the invocation. Now, technically speaking, the
invocation is not a part of the Isopanisad. The invocation is actually a
standard Vedic saying which is spoken on various occasions. It conveys a very
profound truth, that is very consistent with the theme of the Isopanisad,
especially its first three verses, starting from isavasyam, and Srila Prabhupada
very aptly positions it before isavasyam in his book. Now, Isopanisad was not
written as a book by Srila Prabhupada directly. Srila Prabhupada wrote it as a
series of articles in his Back to Godhead magazines, which he had published
prior to establishing the Krishna Consciousness movement. The Back to Godhead
magazine was started by Srila Prabhupada in 1944, when at the peak of the second
world war, Srila Prabhupada felt that sharing the knowledge of God was the best
way to attack the problem of violence and conflict at its root. So from that
time, Srila Prabhupada struggled and maintained it for many years and then after
he went to America, he started Back to Godhead with his disciples taking primary
responsibilities for it.

So when Srila Prabhupada was running Back to Godhead at that time he wrote a
series of articles which were purports on the Isopanisad verses, and those
compiled by his disciples, and made into the Isopanisad book.

So, today we will discuss about the invocation of the Isopanisad. So, let us
start with the verse.

        oṁ pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ
        pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate
        pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya
        pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate

So, it sounds very sweet and arithmetic. So, adaha is this here, whatever is
here, it is purna. Adah is this not in terms of proximity, but is in terms of
what is primarily referred to. So that which is the object of meditation, object
of contemplation, object of discussion, that is purna. And purnam idam, what is
here? That is also purnam. From that complete, this complete has come out. And
the wonderful thing about that complete is, even when the complete comes out of
the complete, the purnam remains complete in and of itself.

So, this is almost a mystical address or glorification of the Absolute Truth
that the Absolute Truth is complete, this world is complete. That Absolute Truth
is a source of this world. So because this world has come from the complete, so
it is complete. But because the Absolute Truth is complete, so therefore, those
so many complete units come from it, it remains the complete whole. So what is
this actually talking about? The verse itself does not tell us what is this
purna thing. What are these pronouns referring to?

In English, we have pronouns, he, she, it, here, there... they are obviously
referring to someone, either male, female or a group of people, but what is that
being referred to is not directly stated in this verse. And this is the typical
style of Upanishad. The Upanishads are enigmatic. Enigmatic means puzzling.

They are primarily meant for intellectuals who love to speculate. So, if things
are given very straight and easy to intellectuals, they do not like it. They
need to have things presented with great sophistication and I have some stuff
that makes them strech their minds.

So the Upanishads cater to that need, while also leading these intellectuals to
the ultimate truth. So what is this complete? To understand this, we can use the
concept of infinity. Now, from the infinity, if we take out infinity, still
infinity will remain. So, hypothetically, it is said that actually there are
many infinites and in the sense that even if we take out many infinites from the
one infinite, still infinite will remain.

So in mathematics, for example if we take the set of all numbers, it is
infinite. The set of all odd numbers, that is also inifinite. The set of all
prime numbers, that is also infinite. So, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, if you go like
that that is infinite. 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, that is infinite. So, 1, 3, 5, 7, 11,
13, 17, 19, 23, these are prime numbers, these are also infinite. So now, but
still, although they are infinite, we understand that the set of natural numbers
is the biggest set and then there are the set of odd numbers, set of prime
numbers, they are infinite, but they are subsets of this set.

So like that, although there is inifinity, there are levels within infinity,
degradations within infinity, and even if we take out the set of all odd
numbers, take out the set of all prime numbers, they still remain infinite,
although remain a part of the infinite set of all natural numbers.

So, this is how when we come to the mathematics of infinity, things do not
remain very simple. So like that, when we talk about Absolute Truth, you know,
1-1=0, 10-10=0, 10.000.000-10.000.000=0, but infinity minus infinity is not
necessarily zero. Infinity minus infinity can still be infinity. So this is how
we understand the Absolute Truth that the Absolute Truth is infinite, and
although infinite, many infinites come out of it, the Supreme Lord is called
"ananta koti brahman nayak", still the Absolute Truth remains complete.

Now, of course, no material example is complete and it is always imperfect and
that is why when we talk about a set natural of numbers, and if we take out the
odd numbers, it appears that the set of natural numbers has become lesser, but
that does not happen to the Absolute Truth because the Absolute Truth is
complete in fullness.

So now, Srila Prabhupada, in his translation itself often integrates his
purport, because translation is also meant to illumine concepts. So the pronoun
the adaha which is kept ambiguous in the sanskrit, Srila Prabhupada explains it
to be the personality of Godhead. The personality of Godhead is perfect and
complete. So Prabhupada translates purnah as not just perfect, but perfect and
complete, and adah he translates as personality of God. I am talking about not
the word to word translation, but the sentence translation.

So, Prabhupada translates that, so purnam idam is, Prabhupada has almost given
like a sentence translation of this, because he is completely perfect, all
emanations from him, just as the phenomena of this world perfectly equipped as
complete wholes.

So Srila Prabhupada is playing around with the word perfect and complete, first
he uses completely perfect to describe the Absolute Truth, then he is using
perfectly equipped as complete wholes for describing the phenomenal world which
is an emanation from the Supreme Lord. So purnam idam, it refers to the material
world and why is it? Whatever is produced by the complete whole is also complete
in itself.

And Prabhupada adding this point, because he is the complete whole, even though
so many complete units emanate from him, he remains the complete balance.

So, now Srila Prabhupada's purport is very systematic and this is how the
purport can be divided into five parts. There are five paragraphs more or less.

So, first Srila Prabhupada talks about how the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the complete Absolute Truth. So, the Absolute Truth has many manifestations as
Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. So, Bhagavan is the complete manifestation of
the Absolute Truth. Bhagavan is the complete Absolute Truth.

Then, the material world is complete. So, we will discuss each of these
paragraphs later on.

Then, the human form offers complete facility as the third paragraph. We will
see what this means and how it applies in our lives.

So, beyond that, Prabhupada says that in the human form, it is a complete
facility for what... is it a complete facility for sense gratification? No. If
somebody tries for sense gratification, then there is illusory completeness. We
think that we will get completeness, but we do not.

And then the last paragraph, Srila Prabhupada says that it is by devotional
service that we attain real completeness. So, in this way, the concept of
completeness is in a way perfectly and completely analysed by Srila Prabhupada,
in his succinct and eloquent purport.

So, as I said earlier, in the Isopanisad, which is a Shruti, the Absolute Truth
is not referred directly by a personal name. Because the Upanishads are
transitional bodies of knowledge. They are taking people from karma kanda to
bhakti. So in karma kanda, all the people who are materially great, or want to
be materially great, are talked about. So, Indra, Chandra, Surya, Agni, all
these devatas are glorified in the karma kanda literature and their worship is
recommended. Because they are materially powerful and karma kandi people, those
who are worshipping God for the sake of material prosperity, they want to look
as ideals at those people, who are materially influential and powerful.

So, the Upanishads focus on rejecting material forms, rejecting everything
temporary and then taking people towards the Absolute Truth, but they do not
focus on the Absolute Truth directly. Nudge people onwards away from matter
towards spirit. So, from the karma kanda, if you remind karma kanda to be the
negative access, but moving towards the positive. Jnana kanda is the neutral,
zero, and bhakti is the positive access.

So, when we are moving like this, though in the Upanishads, the Absolute Truth
is not directly referred to by the personal name and Srila Prabhupada follows
that strategy in his purports also. He practically never uses the word Krishna
in the whole Isopanisad. He focuses on the concept of the Absolute Truth. He
uses the word Brahman, in fact Prabhupada at one place, and later purport, we
will see, uses the word family of the parambrahman. Now, normally brahman is
taught of as impersonal light, and family of brahman seems to be paradoxical as
brahman does not have any name, form, qualities, so how does he have family?

But Srila Prabhupada uses the terminology of the impersonalist to take
impersonalist beyond impersonalism. That means the impersonalists often think
that the Upanishads teach impersonalism. Impersonalism is the philosophy that
says that the Absolute Truth is impersonal. That the Absolute Truth does not
have form, does not have personality, does not have qualities, does not have
activities. The Absolute Truth is pure existence, pure consciousness, with
nothing else.

So, for example, right now, I am speaking, and you are hearing me. So, you are
perceiving, and I am the perceived object. So now in this, there are three
items. There are you who are the conscious being, there is a stream of
consciousness that is just flowing from your eyes to the video screen and then
there is a video screen in which I am there. And I am the object of
consciousness. So, there is this subject of consciousness, the conscious being,
there is a stream of consciousness and then there is the object of
consciousness. And the three come together, the subject, the stream and the
object, then there is conscious experience.

So according to impersonalists, the subjective consciousness and the objective
consciousness, both are illusory. So, you are illusory, I am illusory. So what
exists only is consciousness. So, this is the impersnalists' idea and they say
there is no person, there is neither perceiver, nor a performer, so there is
simply perception.

But what is that perception? That is just consciousness. They call it as pure
consciousness. Now, actually speaking, if somebody becomes liberated, there will
be nobody who will be conscious that I am liberated because there is no being
who is conscious according to the their philosophy. But the impersonalists
consider the Absolute Truth to be impersonal.

So, those philosophers consider that the Upanishads teach our philosophy. The
Upanishads teach impersonalism. Srila Prabhupada takes the Isopanisad, adopts
the terminology of impersonalists and then take the impersonalists beyond
impersonalism. He will show how actually the Upanishads themselves take people
to personalist conclusions. Let us see how Srila Prabhupada does that in this
purport.

So now, this is an important chart. We have to understand this carefully to
understand what Srila Prabhupada is saying. The Absolute Truth has three
features, sat-cit-ananda. Now the Absolute Truth is always sat-cit-ananda, but
the Absolute Truth is not always perceived as sac-cid-ananda.

So, here Srila Prabhupada explains that when the "sat" aspect of the Absolute
Truth is perceived, at that time the Absolute Truth is considered to be Brahman.
What does this mean? That means that the jnanis, who are perceiving the "sat"
aspect of the Absolute Truth they recognise that this world is temporary and
still I have a longing to live forever, so where does my longing come from?
There must be some arena of existence where existence is eternal. And it is to
that arena where I must belong. So when they think in this way, they slowly come
to the level of Brahman realisation.

That means they understand that beyond this world, there is an eternal world.
There is something eternal, not necessarily a world that they pursue. This is
some kind of eternal existence is there. And they consider that to be the higher
reality, in fact the highest reality. So, at this level of perception, they have
understood only the Brahman realisation or Brahman platform. The Absolute Truth
has three aspects: sat-cit-ananda. But they have pursued only the "sat" aspect.

Now, to understand this in another way, suppose say, in a kitchen, somebody is
cooking Gulab Jamuns. Now, a Gulab Jamun is a sweet delicacy, which is soft to
touch and if it is cooked in a particular way, it may also give nice fragrance.
So, if we have sweet that is being cooked in the kitchen. Now, I am not seeing
the sweet right now, but I get the fragrance. So, assuming that, it always has
the faculties of, it always has the characteristics of fragrance, taste and
touch.

All is considered, fragrance, sight and taste; three let us see. Actually,
Ananda Vancampo is a beautiful book written by Kavikarana Pur, and there he
describes the glories of prasad and he says prasad should be cooked in such a
way that even before we taste prasad, it should captivate us in other ways and
he says, this is how Radharani cooks for Krishna. And when Radharani cooks food
for Krishna, it is so wonderful that first that food attracts by the fragrance,
even before we see it, it starts captivating by the fragrance. Then, when we go
in the direction of the fragrance, we see it and it looks so wonderful and then
when we touch it, then each item is gratifying the sense of the touch in an
appropriate way. So if an item is fried, and it is supposed to be crisp, it is
crisp.

If an item is supposed to be soft and succulent, then it is soft and succulent.
So whatever is the appropriate tactile sensation, sensation to the touch
faculty, that that food item should give, it gives, and then lastly when we put
it in the mouth, and experience it on the tongue, it gives the perfect taste.

So in this way, he says that prasad should have fragrance that captivates,
attract, sight that attracts, form that attracts, then appropriate touch
sensation that it attracts, and finally the taste it captivates. So out of these
four, let us consider three right now. So if a delicious sweet is made, now the
sweet already has fragrance, the sweet already has shape, and the sweet already
has taste. All these three are simultaneously present in the sweet, but if the
sweet is being cooked in another room and I am here, so right now, its taste and
its sight are not accessible to me. All that is accessible is its fragrance.

So, similarly, at the Brahman level of realisation, now I am comparing the sweet
to the Absolute Truth. So when the Absolute Truth is not yet fully perceivable
to us, it is only partially perceivable. So at that time, we pursue only the
"sat" aspect, like perceiving only the fragrance of the sweet. So, now it is not
that Brahman is "sat". Brahman is actually "sat-cid-ananda", because Brahman,
Paramatma and Bhagavan are three references, three names for referring the
Absolute Truth, in its different features, but it is the same Absolute Truth.

So in the Bhagavatam, in the first Canto, second chapter, eleventh verse,
divinity and divine service, when the Absolute Truth is defined, it is said that
these three Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan, they are Advaita tattva. They are
the same non-dual Absolute Truth. So Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan are the
same Absolute Truth. So, it is not, so Brahman is also "sac-cit-ananda",
Paramatma is also "sac-cit-ananda", Bhagavan is also "sac-cit-ananda", then what
is the difference between them? Actually, there is no difference from the point
of view of the Absolute Truth. All three are the Absolute Truth. Just like some
person may perceive the Gulab Jamun by its fragrance, some person may pursue by
its fragrance and shape, another person may perceived by fragrance, shape and
taste.

From the Gulab Jamun's perspective, the Gulab Jamun is always the same, but from
the perceiver's perspective, the Gulab Jamun is perceived at different levels of
completeness by the three perceivers. So what this means is that actually the
Absolute Truth is perceived differently by different people, and when different
people perceive it differently, the primary focus is on perceiving the Absolute
Truth completely, but not everybody is able to perceive it completely.

So the jnanis, when they perceive the Absolute Truth, they perceive only the
"sat" aspect. They perceive that oh, there is some eternal existence that is
there. When the transcendentalists progress further, then they perceive the
"cit" aspect. So when they perceive the "cit" aspect, what happens?

"sat" and "cit"... so when they perceive "sat" and "cit", at that time, it is
like the same Gulab Jamun... first the fragrance was being perceived, but now
the fragrance and the shape is being perceived. So, the Absolute Truth, one has
moved closer to it now, one has moved closer to it just like one has moved
closer to the Gulab Jamun, smelling it and seeing it. So the Absolute Truth is
always "sac-cit-ananda", but at the jnani level, one has pursued only the "sat"
aspect.

At the yogi level, when one pursues the Paramatma, one pursues the "cit" aspect
also. What does it mean to pursue the "cit" aspect? When understand that the
Supersoul is there everywhere, the Supersoul is in my heart, it is in everyone's
heart and the Supersoul is conscious, it is conscious of me and my activities,
and I want to be conscious of that Supersoul. So, as I said, in the Brahman
realisation, there is only the conception that there consciousness all that
exists. There is neither the concious observer, nor the conscious observed.
Neither are there.

But here when we understand the Absolute Truth as Paramatma, the Absolute Truth
is being perceiving... in the eighth Canto of the Bhagavatam, it is described
that the Absolute Truth is never blink. The Supersoul is always awake, always
eager, watching.

Now, at this stage, one does not consider the Supersoul as the object of
devotion. It is primarily the object of meditation. So, object of contemplation,
admiration, and in that sense, there is devotion within that contemplation,
admiration, but there is no devotion in the sense of the reciprocation of love
through services and pastimes. That happens with Bhagavan.

So the bhakta perceives that the Absolute Truth is not just eternal, it is not
just conscious, but it is also filled with joy and that joy is expressed through
the performance of pastimes. So when the Absolute Truth performs pastimes, how
exactly does the Absolute Truth perform pastimes? That is through various
dynamic activities, which are called as lila.

We will discuss the concept of Lila later, but it is through the reciprocations
that the Absolute Truth is revealed in fullness as sat-cit-ananda, and this
revelation comes to the bhakta.

So, the Absolute Truth is in its complete manifestation, Bhagavan, because
sat-cit-ananda, all three features are realised. Without the Absolute Truth
coming to the level of realising all three sat-cit-ananda aspects of the
Absolute Truth, the seeker has not come to the complete realisation and that is
why that realisation, either if we are at Brahman level or Paramatma level is
incomplete.

So, when the person not only smells the Gulab Jamun, not only sees the Gulab
Jamun, but then picks a Gulab Jamun and eats it. That is the time when the
perception of Gulab Jamun is complete. So like that it is not just that one
understands something eternal is there, something is conscious, no, that
something is the object of love. I want to love him and he wants to love me, and
we will love each other eternally in the world of endless love. That is the
complete realisation.

That complete realisation is offered to the bhakta, who focuses on Bhagavan. So
in this way, Srila Prabhupada explains that in the first paragraph, the complete
whole is the complete personality of Godhead. And Srila Prabhupada talks about
how the complete whole is not formless. If he were formless, or if he were be
less than his creation anyway, he would not be complete.

So, we will discuss this more in detail about the Absolute Truth having form or
not having form in later verses. But here it suffices to say that the Absolute
Truth is complete, then sac-cit-ananda all three features are understood and
that is understood when we focus on the Bhagavan aspect.

Now the second paragraph talks about how this phenomenal world is also complete
in itself. And Prabhupada says, no other unit in the universe need make an
extranous effort to try to maintain the universe. Let us try to understand what
this means.

So, traditionally, there have been debates between the theists and atheists. The
theists always say that, see, there is so much right in the world, there must be
God. You see that the clouds are formed by the heat of the Sun, and then the
rains come and then rains produce grains, and grains nourish all living beings,
and this whole arrangement is so majestic. How could it have come by itself? It
must have come by some plan. Actually, it cannot be by itself. So therefore,
the theists say that there must be divine intelligence. There must be God.

Now, atheists say that there is so much wrong in this world, they say, if you
say rains are produced by God, then, and rains are produced to nourish all
living beings, then what is the need for rains in the ocean? What is the need
for so much water to fall where there is already a huge quantity of water? Whom
is that water nourishing? So they point to the many ways in which design seems
to be deficient, and they say, God has provided rains, then so many places there
are droughts, so many places there are floods, rains are too little, rains are
too many. Where is the benevolent arrangement? So much is wrong. Where is God? 

So, now, actually speaking, the evidence is design is undeniable in the world.
Now, clouds are so complex that they just cannot be formed on their own. Now,
sometimes people may say no it happens automatically, the Sun heats, and then
the water goes up, and then the water goes to water vapor. Water vapor
accumulates through some natural process and then clouds are formed.

However, when we say something automatically, that does not mean there is no
existence of a designer or operator. Automatically simply means, there is no
awareness, or there is direct intervention of the creator and the designer.
There is big difference the two. That means if a toy is made in such a way that
operates automatically, so a small child, normally used to watching their toys,
and the child, say, pushes the toy so that it moves. But somebody has made the
toy automatic so that it just moves on its own and the child is surprised. How
is it moving on its own? It is moving automatically.

Now automatically simply means that two things, from the observer's perspective,
there is no operator seen, and from the actual toy's perspective also, there is
no operator directly and constantly intervening. So there is no such thing as
there have been absolutely no operator and no controller. There is a designer.
There is a controller, but that controller can be delegated or made in such a
way that it is not required constantly, it is not visible.

So similarly, the Lord has made the world in such a way that nothing extranous
is required for its maintenance. That means the Lord has made this world in such
a way that once made, it will sustain itself. It will go on on its own. On its
own means that a married man and woman get together and produce a child, and
then the child, male and female child grow up and they unite, and they produce
children, and in this way, things go on.

So actually speaking, even in managerial terms, the perfect management is that
which requires minimal management or no management. Things are structured so
well that they go on their on with the least possible supervision. So, the
absence of the need of constant intervention is not indicative proof, not an
evidence that there is no intelligence. Actually, it proves that there is such a
perfect intelligence that the system is designed in such a way that there is no
need for constant intervention.

Now, of course, the Supersoul is there, and the Supersoul is constantly
overseeing, but the Supersoul does not have to constantly act, the Supersoul
does not have to constantly intervene in the material world. The Supersoul has
made material things in such a way that they go on by the arrangement of
material nature. So, Krishna says in 13.27 that by the arrangement of material
nature things go on. Now, of course, he also says in 9.10 in the Bhagavad Gita
... that he is supervising material nature.

So in that sense, both are important, but in our context, the point which we are
making over here is that nothing extranous is required for the material world
because the Supreme Lord has so perfectly arranged, so completely arranged the
material world that it is self-sustaining.

Once the systems are made, the material nature's processes go on their own. Now,
this is with respect to the function. The other is with respect to the purpose.
Whenever we want to evaluate a design, we have to evaluate it in connection with
its purpose. Now, if I take a cellphone, now when I have a cellphone and if I
decide that I want to write a book with the cellphone and I start typing. Now, I
can get frustrated. I try to over here and it is so stupid. The keys are so
small and on one key, there are so many letters. How can a book be typed over
here? And I can curse the maker of the cellphone. I want to write a book and
what a wretched device have you made?

It is taking me ten times more time than what is required for writing a book.
Now, if there is an intelligent person around me, that person will tell me, my
dear friend, a cellphone is not meant for writing a book. The cellphone is
primarily meant for communication through speech and as a suppliment, a facility
is provided for sending some brief messages. If you want to make write a book,
take another device, take a computer, type on a computer.

So, if I want to evaluate how good the design of a cellphone is, I always have
to keep in mind what its purpose is. If I impose my own purpose on the
cellphone, my purpose is to write a book and then I evaluate the cellphone based
on my purpose of writing a book. Then, I can point fault with this, it is stupid
design. Why? Because the purpose of the cellphone is different from the purpose
which I am putting it to use for. So the design is good if it serves the purpose
for which it is meant.

The same way, when we talk about the world, in the world, how good is the design
that has to be evaluated based on understanding its purpose? So if we want to
say that this world is for our enjoyment, if we think that our enjoyment is the
purpose of this world, then definitely, we can say that this world is
imperfectly designed. Why? Because there is not enough enjoyment in this world.
We have a few moments of sense enjoyment that is possible with the limited
capacity of the senses, and that is also for a few years, and when we grow old,
we get diseased. There is no enjoyment and then we die. And there is practically
the end of all enjoyment, and there is so much suffering before that during
disease and old age.

So if I want to evaluate this world and I assume its purpose, my purpose is to
enjoy, then I assume this world's purpose is enjoyment and evaluate it.
Naturally, I will find that the world is deficient. So then what is the purpose
of this world? So both the theists and atheists have got something right. They
say, the theists say that there is so much arrangement for provision, the
arrangements have been made to provide food, air, water for us in this world.
The atheists say that there is so much arrangement for suffering in this world.
Sometimes it is too hot, sometimes it is too cold, sometimes there is too much
rain, sometimes there is too less rains, so both are true. There is arrangement
for subsistence and there is arrangement for suffering.

Now, where do we see this? Are there any places in the world where both these
are there. There is subsistence, there is arrangement for living and there is
also suffering over there. We see this in two places among others. First is a
jail. A jail is a place where the food, clothing, shelter, even to some extent
medication of the prisoners is taken care of. At the same time, a jail is also a
place of suffering. So, just because there is suffering in a jail does not mean
that the jail is not designed, does not mean that the designer is imperfect. It
simply means that the designer designed the jail for a particular person, that
is to punish and reform the prisoners while at the same time providing for them.

The other example where there is arrangement for taking care and another
arrangement for suffering also, are there presence of suffering also, that is in
the hospital. In a hospital, there is, everything is well-planned, this is the
department for this, this is a specialist doctor for this, these are the nurses
were trained in this. There is arrangement, but at the same time, in a hospital,
people are suffering. So, just the presence of suffering, the presence of
factors which cause suffering, does not prove that there is no designer. There
might be some other purpose. The hospital is meant to cure the suffering.

So, the scriptures explain that this world is like a prison and a hospital. It
is a prison for those souls who have been rebelling against God, and want to
enjoy separate from him and it is a hospital for those souls who want to rectify
and heal their wrong mentality. So when we see design in connection with the
purpose, then we will understand how the material world is perfect. If we see
the design separate from the purpose, we will never understand how the design is
perfect.

So now let us move, here is an example of perfection and design. This is
remarkable. So I have given this example in my book on science and spirituality,
so this is an example of what is called a symbiotic factory setup. So in nature,
we see this factory setup that there is human body, which gives us the waste
product of carbon-dioxid, and that waste product becomes row material for
another factory, that is the plants. And the plants give out the waste product
of oxygen and that becomes a raw material for human beings. So, this is like an
industrial dream come true.

Now imagine that there are two factories, factory A, factory B. So, factory A
normally requires some raw materials and gives us finished product, but along
with that it also gives us waste product which has to be disposed of. But
imagine that if there is factory B which could use the waste products of factory
A as its raw materials and then it would give out some waste products, which
could be used as the raw materials for factory A again. Then what would happen
is factory A and factory B would feed each other, A's waste product will be B's
raw material, B's waste product will be A's raw material, and in this way, there
will be no expenditure, and there will be ongoing profit. So, this sort of setup
is just a theory. It is not possible.

Because the raw material, very few items the waste products are usable as raw
materials, and most waste products are not only not usable. They are expensive
to even dispose. But in nature, that which is the dream of industrialists, has
already been actualised. So we have plants, human beings acting as factory A,
plants acting as factory B. So human beings give the waste product of
carbon-dioxid, and that becomes the raw material for plants. So, we see this
majestic design. So we cannot deny the evidence for design. At the same time, we
cannot deny the presence of suffering. And that material world is complete in
the sense it fulfills its purpose. It is not perfect for material enjoyment, but
it is perfect for reformation, for turning towards God and returning to him.

Now, this brings us to the next point about the perfection. Srila Prabhupada in
the next paragraph talks about how human form offers us, it is the completely
opportunity for realising the completeness. So what is the human form offering?
Nowadays, there is a lot of talk about human rights. Now, what exactly are human
rights? Some people say that their human rights are violated. So the idea of
violation of human rights is that there are some prisoners that are tortured in
the prison, or some people are not given even basic needs for existence, basic
dignity for living and they consider this to be violation of human rights. Yes,
certainly, those things need to be provided for people. But actually, these are
not human rights. These are even animal rights, you know the arrangement for
food, clothing and shelter, the arrangement for food, clothing and shelter is
not just the arrangement for the human beings.

Animals, they have their food, they have their air, water, they have their
shelter. And these are actually animal rights. So, the animals get through
nature these things and providing these to human beings is not the fulfillment
of human rights. So human rights are that which none, but humans can get, that
is the right to englightenment, the right to understanding the purpose of life,
the right to understanding the purpose of the world, and living according to
that purpose, that is the actual human right, the right to enlightenment.
Certainly, whatever human right violations are happening, they need to be
corrected. But that is not the point. That is not what makes humans humans.

You know getting, our civilisation may be arranged in such a way that what
animals get, sometimes humans do not get that, that is regretable definitely,
but providing for that does not lead to the fulfillment of the actual human
rights. So, the real human right is the right to enlightenment and what is
enlightenment? It is not just some flash of light rushing through the head. It
is actually a coherent understanding of the purpose of life, and a corresponding
harmonisation of our living with that purpose. That is the essence of
enlightenment. So, actually speaking, it is only in the human form that we can
perceive spiritual reality. In the lower forms, one cannot perceive spiritual
reality. One only perceives the lower reality, eating, sleeping, mating,
defending.

So that is why the human form offers us the complete opportunity to realise the
Absolute Truth and that is why it is considered very special. We will discuss
more about the speciality of the human form in verse, in mantra 3. Here Srila
Prabhupada explains that human form offers the opportunity. The human form of
consciousness is developed enough by which we can perceive higher realities,
higher spiritual realities. We can think of things beyond eating, sleeping,
mating, and defending.

So now, in the human form, we can attain completeness. How is that? That is our
next part. So be a part, be not apart. Be a part, that means we are meant to be
a part of Krishna, be not apart, we should not live apart from Krishna.
Actually, this is based on Bhagavad Gita 15.7:

        mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke
        jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ
        manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi
        prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

So 15.7 Krishna says that all living beings are my part, are they my parts. So
that is be a part. When we live with Krishna as his parts, playing our parts in
his plan, in his service for his pleasure, then we are happy, be a part. But if
we become apart, it is be not apart, but we will become apart, then what
happens? We come under the mind and senses.

So, now, when we talk about our completeness, it is dependent. Krishna's is
independent. Although we are also complete, Krishna is also complete, but there
is a difference. Ours is a dependent completeness. Srila Prabhupada in the
purport uses the example of a hand. A hand is perfectly equipped to do what a
hand is supposed to do. But a hand cannot do what the head is supposed to do.
So, if the hand is cut off from the whole body, then it cannot do function. So,
the hand connected to the body is be a part. The hand cut off from the body is
be apart.

So, when the hand is cut off from the body, it cannot do any other things that
it is meant to do. So similarly, when we are cut off from Krishna, we are meant
to live a life of eternal happiness and love. We cannot do that when we become
cut off from Krishna. So, we are also complete, being emanations from Krishna,
but our completeness is dependent on our Krishna connection, just as a hand's
completeness is dependent on its connection to the body.

So now when we are in this incomplete condition right now, so we can seek
completeness in two ways, one is materially and the other is spiritually. So,
let us look at that, now, sense gratification promises us completeness. When a
man becomes young or a woman becomes young, at that time, they feel oh, we are
incomplete, we need a partner through whom we will become complete. But
actually, this is illusory. Because in this world, we cannot become complete.
Two incomplete beings cannot make each other complete. They both remain
incomplete. So sense gratification keeps us incomplete. It promises us
completeness, but because the pleasure is so little, it keeps us incomplete. And
we keep trying in way to fulfill the mind's foolish fantasies and draconian
demands.

So foolish fantasy, like a child sometimes, the mind says, I want this and I
want that, if I just get this, I will become happy, like a child sometimes says,
I want that toy, and the parent says, you already have so many toys, no, I want
it, just give it to me, I will become happy. And the child has foolish fantasy,
I will play with this toy, and the child thinks if I just get this toy, it will
be the perfection of my life. But after the child gets the toy, what happens? It
is a foolish fantasy. After some time, the child feels that this toy does not
matter, I want something more.

And sometimes the mind is not acting childishly, it acts draconianly, draconian
is like a dictator, the mind makes draconian demands, you must give it to me,
the mind starts tormenting us. So, we are promised completeness, but we never
get completeness to sense gratification. It is false way to completeness. So
Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport that, so the illusory representation of
completeness cannot fully satisfy them. So Prabhupada writes that and further he
says, the completeness of human life can be realised only when one engages in
the service of the complete whole. That brings us to the point of devotional
service.

There are many eloquent sentences in this purport of Srila Prabhupada, so for
example, Prabhupada writes over here, because the living entity cannot enjoy the
life of senses without being dovetailed with the complete whole, the misleading
life of sense enjoyment is illusion.

It is illusion, it promises completeness, but it delivers perpetual
incompleteness. I think if I get this new car, I will become happy. But if I get
the new car, what happens is I am happy for a few minutes until I see a better
car, or until I see a neighbour having a better car, which is worse, then I want
that new car, and that new car, and this urge for new things go on and we never
feel complete. This misleading life of sense enjoyment is illusion.

Now here, Srila Prabhupada explains that devotional service is what will make us
complete, so how does it make us complete? By connecting us perfectly to the
complete whole. That means we are tiny, we are limited, because we are limited,
if we try to enjoy on our own, we cannot get complete enjoyment, because we are
tiny, we can only get a little bit of enjoyment, but when we connect with
Krishna, then because Krishna is infinite, our connecton with Krishna enables us
to experience infinite happiness, and in that way, by connecting with Krishna we
attain completeness.

So, therefore, the way to completeness is through devotional service. When I
practice devotional service, at that time, I start experiencing that here is the
Supreme Happiness of life, here is the way I will experience happiness forever.
So, how devotional service will give us completeness will be the subject that we
will discuss later in the Isopanisad, but in principle, we cannot experience
completeness because we are tiny. And no matter how many other tiny things we
acquire, we will not become complete. But we connect with the infinite, and the
infinite love, and the infinite happiness that comes through that connection
will make us completely happy.

So, to summarise, in this verse and purport, we discussed about firstly,
mathematics, paradoxical mathematics of infinity, the Absolute Truth gives out
many absolute units, many units from itself, which are complete themselves, at
the same time the Absolute Truth remains complete.

Then, we discussed how the complete understanding of the Absolute Truth is
Bhagavan, personality of Godhead. Why? Because only in the Bhagavan realisation,
"sat-cit-"ananda", all three aspects are realised. So when a sweet is perceived
only through fragrance, the perception is incomplete, and when the sweet is
perceived through fragrance and shape, its perception is better, but not
complete. When the perception is through fragrance, shape and taste, then it
becomes complete.

So similarly, our perception of the Absolute Truth, when it is only sat aspect,
then it is Brahman realisation, then when it is Paramatma aspect, sat and cit
are realised, it is more complete, but when it is Bhagavan aspect,
sat-cit-ananda, all three are realised, then it is the most complete
realisation.

Then we discussed about how this material world is complete, firstly, the
perfect management is that which requires no management. Everything is
structured in such a way that things go on their own, so that is how the
material world is arranged in such a way that nature carries on its processes,
and things go on as if automatically, no extranous endeavour is required.

So then we discussed that automatically does not mean absence of a controller,
automatically simply means absence of awareness of the controller.

So then we discussed after that about how the human form is complete in the
sense that it offers us the opportunity for realising eternity. So human rights
are not just the rights to get the necessities that animals already get it
through nature. It is the right to enlightenment. So what is enlightenment? Not
to see the purpose of material world in our terms for enjoyment, but to
understand that it is for reformation.

So the atheists say that there is so much wrong in the world, and the theists
say that there is so much right, both are correct, so the correct understanding
is to see the world for its purpose, not to use a mobile for typing a book, not
to use this world for enjoyment, but reformation.

And then that reformation can be done through the practice of devotional
service, sense gratification offers us false completeness, devotional service
offers us actual completeness.

Thank you very much, we will continue with the next, first verse in our next
class.

Srila Prabhupada ki jaya, Sri Isopanisad ki jaya, Gaura bhakta vrinda ki jaya,
Nitai Gaura Premanande, hari-haribol.

Thank you.
