Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fkIOAxT66dI
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=fkIOAxT66dI&redir_token=8BaVNZUG5PS3qypJcqH8IgkqQop8MTU0MDEwMjU5MkAxNTQwMDE2MTky&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_017_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_13_part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to our Isopanisad course. We are discussing the thirteenth mantra
purport. So, today, I will focus on one theme from this thirteenth mantra
purport. Which we have not discussed until now in a systematic way. Although, we
have discussed it in an overview way. So, here are we, the topic that we will be
discussing is that like people who do not excl..., accept Krishna as sambhavat,
for them, they say that people are my God. So, people are my God.

This was when Srila Prabhupada had come to India with his western disciples. At
that time, there was a famous politician. He had said that people are my God.
And at one level, that had given a lot of popularity. Because the idea that I am
the servant of the people. And he just says some people worship God. I will
worship the general people. That had attracted a lot of public appreciation. But
Srila Prabhupada excoriated that person. He said that we cannot make people into
God. God is God. And people are not God. So, this idea is quite deep rooted that
serving people is service to God. So, today, we will explore it, first from a
sociological perspective. Then from a philosophical perspective. And then from a
practical perspective. Where we integrate the philosophical analysis with the
sociological analysis. So, this is actually a separate representation that I
give on manava seva, madhava seva. And because this topic is important, not just
from the point of view of this purport, or this book. But it is important in
terms of how we present Krishna Consciousness in the world. And how we ourselves
understand Krishna C..., the importance of Krishna Consciousness in our lives.
We will discuss this topic in detail. So, this is manava sevahi, madhava sevahi.
So, is manava seva not madhava seva? That is what we will try to discuss here.
So, this is the overview. So, Prabhupada had prepared long ago.

So, let the facts speak. We will discuss what the facts are. Then, we will look
at greed causes starvation. How can greed be removed? The secret of compassion.
Are good enough, good intentions good enough?

So, now, why do people think that manava seva is madhava seva? So, manava seva
means service to human beings. Madhava seva is service to God. So, people say
that service to man is service God. Or in today's gender neutral vocabulary,
service to humanity is service to God. Now, this seems to be very popular idea.
But if we look at it objectively, what is the reality? At first glance, many
movies talk about this. Many social critics talk about this. They say that you
people are spending so much money inside the temples. Now, they are, on the
stones in the temples. And outside, there are poor beggars who are starving. Why
don't you use that same money to feed the poor people? So, certainly, poor
people should be fed. No doubt. But is it that the money being spent inside is
the cause of the starvation outside? At an immediate superficial level, you
could ju..., we could just say that, oh, instead of spending money, just spend
money here. But beggars are not just starving outside the temples. Beggars are
starving on the, in the slums, on the streets everywhere. Beggars are sta...,
sta..., beggars will be starving outside the houses of the billionaires and
trillionaires also. But quite often, they have security around. And they would
drive the beggars away. So, it is not that beggars are only outside the temple.
And if you are going to look at starvation, why emotionally manipulate people by
contrasting the starvation outside the temple with the opulence with which
deity is worshipped inside? Why not contrast the starvation with the beggars with
the thousands and thousands of dollars that are spent on cricket, on movies, on
so many frivolous events. We have nothing against cricket or movies per say. Of
course, they are mundane. They are passionate. They are distracting from
spiritual life. But the point is, if we compare, comparatively speaking, you
know, spending millions of rupees on just watching one cricket match. In that
much money, how many po..., poor people could have been, you know, served. How
many poor people could have been, you know, fed. How many starving people could
have got so many means. As a matter of perspective, actually, the, the unicef
studies have shown that, all the starving people in the world can be fed, ju...,
if just the money that is spent by the European Union and America on perfumes,
were used for feeding, on starving people.

So, who, actually speaking, if you want to contrast, why not contrast this way?
So, that contrast, what does it indicate people? I want to smell God. So that I
can attract others. Even if for my sake of my smelling good, other people have
to starve to death. It does not matter. This contrast is very uncomfortable for
us. Because it interferes with our sense gratification. Whereas when you
contrast, you know, people, b..., starving people outside, the, outside the
temple with the people who are worshipping in the temple inside, what does it
do? It makes us f..., feel, in some way, superior to those who are going to the
temple and worshipping. And it exempts us from the responsibility of going to
the temple and worshipping. So, certainly, the goal is not that people ju...,
in, not justying starving at all. You know, it is the duty of those who are
prosperous to help those who are poor. But to c..., man..., manipulate in this
way the emotions of people against God is misleading, is profoundly misleading.
Not only is it misleading, it does not solve the problem fundamentally. So, let
us look at the facts. As I said here. So, these statistics might be a little
old. Figures might change slightly. But the point remains the same. And is what?

To satisfy the world's sanitation and food requirements would cost only US $13
billion - what the people of the United States and the European Union spend on
perfume each year!

So, actually speaking, we see that this cause of starvation is not so much a,
the, the money that is spent on temple. The money that is spent so much on
frivolous activities. So, when people identify with the body, they want to
decorate the body. When people identify with the mind, they want to titillate
the mind. And for the sake of titillating the mind, they will watch sports. They
will watch movies. They will spend millions, billions on entertainment. So, if
people rose to the spiritual platform. Then, they would not identify so much
with the body or with the mind. And then they would not have to spend so
frivolously and excessively on pandering the body in the mind. And then that
money for also needed the direct service of God. So, it is very superficial and
misleading to say because people are doing madhava seva. People are doing
service to God, that is why people are starving outside. This is misleading
propaganda at the very least. Now, if we look at it deeper, there are several
issues involved. If, if people became God conscious. What all would happen? Now,
if people became God conscious, one aspect of God consciousness would be, they
would see all living beings as the children of God. Many people say that, why do
you, why do you see God only in the temple? Why don't you see God in the beggars
who are all around? You know, fine. We are, we can tell them ok. Wh..., leave
alone seeing God in the beggars outside the temple. Why don't you see God in the
slaughterhouses where all the animals are being slaughtered? You know, is God
not present there with them, in their hearts? If God is everywhere, is He there
only in the human heart? Not in the heart of the animals? He is there
everywhere. Why not see Him there? And actually if people were truly God
conscious instead of just minimising God consciousness in the name of serving
poor people, then the truth God consciousness would reflect the change in their
diet. They would not be non-vegetarian. They would be vegetarian. And if they
became vegetarian, what would happen by that? A lot of difference would happen.
You know, when large percentage, in many countries, more than fifty percent of
the land, that could be used for growing grains for feeding human beings is used
instead to grow further to feed the animals, who are then eaten by human beings.

Now, the problem with this is, it is a very inefficient process. With this much
grains, if human beings eat it, so man, human, human beings fed for a good
amount of time. But that much grain, say, if it is used to feed a, an animal. Then,
that animal, most of it will be eaten, and most of it will be passed out as its
refuse. And a little from this much grain, may be a little bit of, of flesh will be
increased. And then, in that flesh, human beings will eat. So on an average, the
researchers have said that the amount of land that is required to feed one
non-vegetarian person, that could be used to feed so many vegetarian people. So
many, or, it can, that the statistics vary from five to fifteen. But all
statistics agree that the same amount of land can feed many many more vegetarian
people. So, the implication of this is, if we are serious about removing
starvation, become vegetarian. If become, if people become vegetarian, then the
immediate result of that will be so much of the land which is used to feed
animals, can be used to, to grow further to feed animals who are slaughtered,
who are artificially era..., raised, and fattened, and then slaughtered. It
could be used to feed human beings. And so many strong starvation could be
avoided. In fact, according to some statistics, several times the planet's
population can be fed, if all the land available for revegetation would be used
for making grains for human beings.

Similarly, if, so, people drink. Now, they think it is modern. It is fashionable
to drink. And those people who drink, do not drink alcohol, they see as people
are so primitive, so prohibitive. Enjoy life. But have these people thought
those people who drink, who say cheers. Have they thought that their cheers are
the cause of tears in the eyes of the starving people? How? Because when they
drink alcohol, what happens? Alcohol does not pop out of the air. Alcohol comes
from a sugarcane. And sugarcane has to be grown in the fields. So, so many
fields, all over the world practically, it is used to grow sugarcane or other
kinds of elements that are used for various intoxicated drinks. And that land
could have been used to grow grains. So, because that land has not used to grow
grains, so, therefore, you know, people starve. So, if, all the people in the
world stopped drinking alcohol, so much of the land could be saved from being
used for sugarcane farming. It could be used for grain farming and so people
could be fed again also. So, and, we see, when people become truly God
consciousness. They will stop eating meat. And they will stop drinking alcohol.
So, at a much deeper level, God consciousness solves the problem of starvation
in a far more fundamental way. In a far more far reaching way than just asking
one person who is worshipping God in a temple to feed the poor outside. This is
a very superficial simpli..., simplistic sort of, you know, point the finger at
other solution, which does not solve any problems. So, therefore, we have to
understand the issue seriously. So, yes, it is not that, God should not be. That
God should be worshipped. And God's children should be neglected. An ideal
culture would be where God is also glorified. And His children are also cared
for. And that is possible if people become more selfless, become more
spiritually minded. It will not happen be..., if people become more selfish
and more materially minded.

So, now, here again, we see greed. The real problem is not, you know, any kind
of God consciousness, or shortage of natural resources. Nearly one in four billion,
1.3 billion, a majority of humanity live on less than one dollar per day. This
is, few, as I said, while the world's 358 billionaires have assets exceeding the
combined annual incomes of countries with 45% of the world's people. So, money
is concentrated on few people. The problem is greed. So, there are some people
who are just chopping off the earth and eating it. While others are getting just
some uchist, you know, some refuse, remnants from the dirty mouth of greedy
materialists. Now, sometimes, people say there is starvation because of droughts
and famines.

But the problem is that much of the world's best land is being misused for the
production of cash export crops. A study of famines in Africa showed that on
every occasion the affected nation had within its own boundaries the food
resources to feed its starving citizens, but relief was intentionally withheld
due to economic or political motives. So, this is from book Food Force by
Frances Lappe Moore. And this is quoted by devotees Andatta Karma Prabhu and
M..., Mukunda Maharaja, Michael Cremo or Michael Grant in their book, Divine
Nature. So, again, why are we discussing all this in Isopanisad? Isopanisad says
that when we worship anything other than God, ano..., one results comes. And
when we, one result, worship God, another result comes.

    anyad evāhuḥ sambhavād
    anyad āhur asambhavāt

So, a popular "asambhavāt", a popular object of worship today, at least
notionally, you know, as a substitute for God is people, is humanitarian work.
So, we are saying now, the real problem is not just shortage of natural
resources. It is not wastage of natural resources on God. It is actually
mismanagement caused by greed. So, now, wh..., actually speaking, so many more
people can be fed if life is taken, if people are truly taken care of in a
proper way. How are they taken care of in proper way? By providing them God
consciousness. And if they are provided God consciousness. Then, there, they
will not be so self-centered. They will not be so shortsighted. And they will
care for others. And that was actually the culture that was there in India
thanks to its spiritual foundation. That was there. So, when we move forward.

What is the cause of starvation? It is greed. When people become godless, they
concomitantly become materialistic and greedy. And so exploit nature and their
fellow human beings for selfish enjoyment. So, yes, we are looking now that
starvation is a problem. But what is the cause? The cause is greed. And what is
the cause of greed? It is godlessness. Similarly, we can look at it from another
way. We may feed a few hungry people, but until we remove greed from wealthy
people's heart, hunger will continue to torment millions.

So, the problem is not so simple that some beggars are starving and we give them
food. And that will be, you know, that will be definitely helping, but a little
bit help for a very little time. A far more fundamental solution is purify
people's heart of greed. When their hearts are purified, naturally, they will be
able to do much more for humanity. The problem in this world is not shortage of
food. It is shortage of compassion. And shortage of compassion is there because
there is excess of greed. And excess of greed is there because people think that
material things will make us happy. So, I want to accu..., accumulate more, and
more, and more material things. But when people understand that, actually it is 
my connection with God that will make me happy. And therefore, I need to connect
with God as much as possible. Then, that was what will actually make me happy.
And then I want to run after material things so f..., passionately, so
insensitively, so recklessly, not mindful of the cost that it is inflicting on
others.

So, now, how can greed be removed? When people are offered spiritual education
and experience, they understand that their real happiness is in loving God, not
in accumulating material things. Then they give up greed. So, this is what
spirituality offers. So, actually speaking, when each of us, when we are
chanting Hare Krishna and then we are sharing Krishna Consciousness with others,
we are not just doing some religious ritual. We are actually participating in a
process that is transforming us positively and is going to transform others
positively when we share it with them. And by that, we are making tangible
contributions in this world also. And, this is how we are helping in solving the
problems of the world through the practice of God consciousness.

So, let us move forward now. How do we actually develop compassion? By going
closer to God. Because when we go closer to God, then naturally, what happens?
As here that we see, Mother Theresa was asked. What is the secret of your
compassion? She pointed to her rosary beads and said "By praying, I feel love
for God and all His children and so want to help them as much as I can". So, the
vision of a true spiritualist is that such a pers..., spiritualist, sees God in
all living beings. But not at a, as a, as an idealistic way that everybody is
God. But everybody is a child of God. Krishna says in the Bhagavad Gita, in Sixth
Chapter, 32 verse, He says:

    ātmaupamyena sarvatra
    samaṁ paśyati yo ’rjuna
    sukhaṁ vā yadi vā duḥkhaṁ
    sa yogī paramo mataḥ

He says that, by comparing all people with oneself, one sees the true equality
of all living beings, in their happiness and in their distress. And thereby, a
person wants to help them. So, this is compassion. And this comes when we become
spiritually evolved. So, spiritual advancement is a way of not just doing good
to oneself, but it is also doing good to the whole world. Because we are helping
remove greed from the hearts of people. So, now, there are many people who may
want to help. Ok, now, we discussed. From one perspective is, the perspective
of, so there is a problem of starvation in society. What is the cause of
starvation? One f..., pro..., cause is that there are greedy people who are
exploiting others. How do we remove the greed from their hearts? By offering
them spiritual education experience by which they will decrease their
infatuation with material things and find non-material nourishment. The other
is that there are poor people who are starving. But often, these poor people who
are starving, they have their own set of inadequacies, not just the shortage
that they are having because of sta..., that they are starving. Sometimes, they
are addicted to bad ha..., they have, addicted to liquor. They are addicted to
other bad habits. And even if they get money, they often misuse the money.

Now, before I was introduced to Krishna Consciousness, I used to, I was quite
interested in social service. So, when I was in my college, at that time, just
near our college, there was some slums. So, I would go there. And I would teach
to the slum children. So, I would teach them English, Math, and other subjects.
The idea was that literacy is the key to a good future for our fellow citizens.
So, I was going there for some time. And I had a friend who was much more into
this. And he would go to a village, and then that village, he would go and
maintain education for the children. And then we were discussing, and we
realised that the children, we are coming once a weekend, once a week, or twice
a week, or whatever, and what we are educating them. But the children are
influenced much more by the culture around them, most of all, their parents. And
generally, their parents, especially the father would be a drunkard. So, then,
we started talking with their parents. And my friend especially, he went to this
village. And he talked with so many of the villagers. And he inspired them all
to give up drinking. And they gave up drinking. They became sober. And I was
also doing something similar. And we felt that we were working. And then the
elections came up. And the local politician, the next day was the election. The
previous night, he sent three trucks in the village, trucks filled liquor
bottles. Free liquor for all those who will vote for him. And what happened?
The next time my friend went, next time I went to the slums, you know, everybody
practically was drunk. Not only the father, but some of the children were also
taken. So, at that time, we realised that just offering material literacy is not
enough. We have to find some way by which people can be changed internally. And
these were not bad people. You know, it is not that they were evil people. They
knew their duty to their family members. They knew how much their drinking was
going to hurt the family members. But just they could not, they could not
control themselves. So, at that time, we rea..., I realised that we have to do
something which will truly transform people internally. It was soon after that
that I was introduced to Krishna Consciousness. So, when I was g..., introduced to
Krishna Consciousness, I shared with many of my college friends. And I saw, not
only was I freed from whatever bad habits I had. But many of my other friends
were in..., much more into some bad habits. They all became free from those bad
habits. And it was not that it was struggling and fighting to give up the bad
habits. The bad habits just made, the bad habits just fell off directly. So, we
saw here that there is a very powerful means, a very potent process for
self-transformation. Because it gives a higher taste.

So, this self-defeating mentality that is there which results because of our
inability to control ourselves, this is going to hurt people. So, even if we
offer help to people, if they are not in a position to be helped in a sense that
they cannot take the help naturally. They misuse the help because of their own
inability to have self-mastery. Then helping them is like putting water in a
leaking jug. No matter how much water I put, it is just going to drain away.
So, quite often, there is the sad reality. Let us say if you give money to a
beggar. What, what do you think he will do with it? Some beggars are truly
hungry. But many beggars, if you give them food, they say, I have a practical
experience in the trains that when we give beggar to the, money to, when you,
food, as devotees, we give prasad. Many of them say that, prasad, you know. We
want money. We do not want food. Why? Because with money, they will smoke or
drink. It is sad. You know, we want to help. But they often do not want to be
helped in the right way. What they want is not food. Because food will just
satisfy them for some time. They get, we just kvetch their thirst, kvetch,
satisfy their hunger for some time. But they think that smoking, watering will
take us high. So, they will misuse the money. So, we may have good intentions.
But are good intentions good enough? Are they producing a good result?

Now, if a person with a venereal disease, is offe..., if we have a hospital
where a person's venereal disease is cured. What will he do afterwards?
Unfortunately, that person is likely to go and get the sa..., same disease once
again. Similarly, if we offer free treatment to an alcoholic, what, what do you
think he will do? Unless he is cured of his alcoholism, he was going to succumb
to it again. So, often, the road to hell is paved with good intention, is paved
with good intention. That means if we want to go, do good, but we end up doing
bad. As Srila Prabhupada gave the example that once he was, he saw that in his
neighbourhood, the mother was shouting, and somebody was screaming. And he went
there. And he saw the mother was severely chastising your daughter. And she had
a younger brother. And what did happen was that the younger brother had typhoid.
And he had been told not to take any oily food. And he was feeling a strong
hankering for oily food. So, when his mother had gone out for the market, the
brother had said, please, I, I want some pakoras. So, then, the sister had gone
out decided to a shop and got a big pack of pakora, then gave it to him. And
that child had eaten all of it. And he got almost, like that, so, while he was
eating, he was enjoying. But after he started vommitting. And he was almost
half-dead when his mother came back. The mother was shocked. She rushed him to
the hospital, and he somehow survived. The mother was chastising the ch...,
daughter. What did you do? So, the daughter had no bad intentions. But the
effect was nonetheless bad.

So, here, the point is not to say that, you know, all poor people are going to
have bad habits. Or all poor people are bad. But the point is that mere good
intentions are not good enough. We need a process. Just as we need a process for
transforming the greedy. We also need a process for transforming the needy. The
needy, if they are not able to use what they have for fulfilling their needs
because they think that their psychological needs are more urgent and important
than their physical needs. Psychological need is for the alcohol. Physical need
may be for food, clothing, shelter. But often they had put that aside to serve
conscious psychological need. Therefore, we cannot, we are not really helping
people at such a time.

So, now, all this, what does it mean? As devotees, social svers..., service to
be condemned? Not exactly. The point is we should not make people into a false
God to replace the real God, Krishna. We should not think, put social service in
such an exalted platform that we think that it is not only equivalent to
devotional service, but it is superior to devotional service. Why? Because
social service in and of itself divorced from spiritual service will not work.
Now, Srila Prabhupada himself was very compassionate. That is why he travelled
all over the world. He went right to the hippies. And, actually speaking, from
the historical record point of view, the hippies were such a nuisance from the
American Government's point of view. But it was unsolvable nuisance. They did
not know what to do with those people. And Srila Prabhupada went there and he
inspired them. And he enabled them to transform them by simply chanting Hare
Krishna, practicing spiritual life. So, it was remarkable what Srila Prabhupada
did. Was this not humanitarian work? Was this not, did not this, did, did this
not make, you know, socie..., contribute to the world in a positive way? It did
in a remarkable way, in a way that even the US government, with all its nuclear
power could not do. So, it is not that devotees are against the welfare of
others. But the important point is that we are not here to supp..., to l..., to
start Krish..., that Krishna gets supplanted. Supplanted means substituted by
something else as the object of worship.

So, we have to use social service with the attitude of "yukta vairagya" if we
are going to use it. That means that just as, what is "yukta vairagya"? "yukta
vairagya" means that whatever can be engaged in Krishna's service should not be
renounced. But the same time, we say that we will not renounce it. But that does
not mean that automatically it will get engaged in Krishna's service. We have to
be cautious about it. So, let us look at the overall Vedic system. So, social
service can be used to attract people to Krishna. How is that possible? You
know, if we distribute food. We are distributing prasad. So, we are distributing
Krishna. But people see that as humanitarian work. And they start thinking that
devotees are good people. And they get position perception about devotees. And
that enables them to eventually come to Krishna. So, attract people to Krishna
through it. Now, it is not just done for attracting people. Actually, material
welfare is also not important. It is important. Now, in the Fourth Canto of
Srimad Bhagavatam describes the story of Prithu Maharaja when the citizens in
his country were starving. And they were all suffering. At that time, what
happened? They came su..., to him and saying we are starving. Just as the f...,
as the, as the forest fire burns the entire forest. Our digestive fire is
burning us. Please help us. Now, what did Prithu Maharaja say? Oh, you know, all
of you are suffering your own past bad karma. Just tho..., just keep suffering.
No, he did not say that. That he immediately took emergency action. And he made
sure that the citizens' need is provided. Now, actually, if you look at the
whole pastime, there is nothing directly spiritual involved in it. It is not
specifically said that all of them were devotees of God. And they were praying
to God. Prithu Maharaja was, of course, Shaktyavesha Avatar. But here, he was
doing was, there is nothing directly spiritual in it. Or is it? Actually, the
whole culture was spiritual. Prithu Maharaja was himself the Supreme, Supreme
Lord. But the point is, here, he took care of material needs also, of people.
So, we cannot just summarily reject material needs.

However, there is a division of labor within varnashram. And that division of
labor involves the, it is the primarily ksatriya responsibility to provide for
material welfare. And Brahmana responsibility is to provide for spiritual
welfare. What is the difference between the two? Material welfare means social,
cultural, political arrangements for taking care of the material needs of
people. Spiritual welfare means, provi..., making the arrangements for
providing, and directly providing also spiritual education, spiritual experience
to people. Both are important. No doubt. Now, when both the ksatriya and the
brahmana work together, then materi..., the spiri..., material and spiritual
welfare are taken care of. When Srila Prabhupada went to America. He said I am
looking for brahmanas. Because he felt that the social body lacked the head. The
brahmanas were the heads in society. Brahmanas, of course, as we know, are not
by birth. They are by qualities. They are spiritual intellectuals. Spiritually
inclined human beings who also have a love for knowledge, and a love for sharing
that knowledge with others. So, he primarily wanted to acce..., it, create
brahmanas, and he wanted brahmanical society. But along with having brahmanical
society, Srila Prabhupada eventually wanted full varnashram. So, when he wanted
full varnashram. That means that he wanted that within the varnashram framework,
people's material needs also be taken care of. However, our primary goal is not
to offer material welfare to people. There are many institutions doing that. Of
course, more institutions are also needed for doing that. But there are very few
if any institutions offering spiritual welfare to people. This is our
distinctive contribution. And we will focus on doing this. But the same time, if
some devotees feel inspired to do, open some hospital, to do some f...,
charitable food programmes. To do other some sort of humanitarian work and they 
integrate devotional service in it to various extents. Then, that is wonderful.
Why is it wonderful? Because they have to do something for their living. And if
they do it in a way that also brings them a pu..., public appreciation, what is
wrong with that? Nothing wrong. We should not, when we talk about social
service should not be made into a false God, that does not mean, make social
service a sinful activity.

You know, we, when we take initiation, do we take a vow that I will not give
charity to anyone, anyone and anybody except the temples of ISKCON? Now, that
would be foolish. Now, we do not take a vow like that. We, I will never give any
charity to any beggar. We do not take a vow like that. So, the point here is the
overall propaganda that was there is, Srila Prabhupada has responded that
propaganda when he is making statement that, like this, that the idea that
people are my God is false. On an ideological level, replacing God with people
as object of worship and redirecting the whole social energy in a wrong way away
from God. That is what is to be strongly refuted and condemned. But that does
not mean that we have to become insensitive human beings in name of being
spiritual. Now, where there is suffering, a devotee wants to offer help. At the
same time, a devotee thinks deeply. What is the best way to offer help? And a
devotee knows the best ways to practice Krishna Consciousness and share Krishna
Consciousness with others. While doing this, a devotee also takes care, as much
as possible, for making sure that other people are attracted to Krishna in every
possible way. That includes varnashram also.

So, now, we see here, this is ins..., Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur advanced
gone to Sakshi Gopal temple. And Sakshi Gopal temple is a famous temple in
Bengal. And when he was there, when we came out, there were many beggars, who
were asking for charity. And he had gone there with his, on yatra, with his
grihasta disciples, and his grihasta disciples did not give charity to anyone.
So immediately, there only, outside the temple, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur
sat down. He got his grihasta disciples sat down and he said, and he gave this
quote. So, what is it?

"If married men think: 'I must not give any of my money, which I considered
reserved for Krishna, to the poor and deprived.', then they are really showing
symptoms of wretchedness, cruelty, and lack of compassion for others. They
should not consider that giving charity to the poor is a fruitive activity. This
kind of mentality will make their hearts hard and they will suffer from greed."

They will suffer from greed. So, this is very significant. What is it saying?
That, to no..., we, we, even if somebody thinks my money, this is only for
Krishna. Actually, they will become hard-hearted. The, this kind of mentality
will make their hearts hard and they will suffer from greed. So, if we do not
show compassion for fellow human beings, actually, we will become greedy. And
then, what does he say further?

"As a result of this, they shall not want to spend their money even on the
devotional service of the Supreme Lord, which is the ultimate goal in life. This
will invite offenses in service."

So, if we cannot show kindness to those who are suffering around us, then how
can we show, show affection to God who is beyond our visibility? This will, so
we will not be able to give money to God also. And this will invite offenses to
service, in service. And then:

"To save us from this kind of deceit and sinful concept, Sri Gaurasundara used
to give money and other things to the poor people during His pastimes as a
married man."

So, Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave charity. He is the Supreme Lord. He is teaching us
by example. And:

"The money we have, we have only gotten by the Lord's grace. If we give some of
it to the mendicant poor people, then it is not a waste of money rather it is
its correct use. Serving prasadam to others is the necessary duty of every
married Vaishnava."

So, giving some money to poor people, it is not a waste of money. It is correct
use. Then, further he says, now, he takes us to the karmano.

"Even if these people have become poor by their karma, even so they are still a
part of the Lord's family. Therefore it is definitively the solemn duty of every
honest married man to help them."

He is, a profound point he is making. And even if they have done some sinful
activity, even if the people have become poor by their karma. Even so, they are
still a part of the Lord's family. You know, we are not here to judge people on
how they have acted in the past. Whatever way they have acted, Krishna has not
rejected them out of His family. They are still members of His family. And we
have to take care of them. So, therefore, it is definitively the solemn duty of
every honest married man to help them.

So, now, we may wonder what is going on here. First, I said that, you know,
social service is usele..., social service does not solve problems. Greed is the
real problem. Lack of self-control is a real problem. And then, therefore,
we should actually help transform the people's hearts. And now, I am saying that
this is the duty of, people to, duty of, say, grihasta to be charity to po...,
poor people. And otherwise, their hearts will become hard. So, what are we
talking about over here? The two are not contradictory. They are complementary.
How? The essential idea is that a devotee's heart should be soft. And soft heart
means a devotee feels for other sufferings. You know, essentially, a soft heart
means, a hard heart means, one's emotions are restricted to one's own interests.
Now, a hard-hearted person cannot think about others. Others, in terms of their
emotions. A soft-hearted person, for soft-hearted people, their emotions are not
restructed to their, restricted to their own interest. They, their emotions
expand to encompass other people also. And that is why when other people are in
pain, then they feel pain also. So, now, our goal is ultimately to expand the
soft-heartedness of our heart so that it reaches Krishna. And we feel for
Krishna. And we feel like Krishna. We feel for Krishna means we feel emotions.
Krishna, I love you. Krishna, I want to serve you. I want to return to you. We
feel for Krishna. And we feel like Krishna. Feel like Krishna means not that I
am Krishna. But feel like Krishna means, we feel emotions the way Krishna feels
emotions. That means Krishna feels sorry to see his own children suffering. And
He wants to help them. So, we feel for Krishna. We feel like Krishna. That means
we feel that, we, Krishna's children are suffering. Why should we suffer? They
should all be taken back to Krishna. So, we are talking about soft, same
soft-heartedness expanding to other people, and expanding through other people
further beyond to Krishna. That means we do feel for sufferings of those who
are around us, even the material sufferings. Even if they are because of bad
karma. But we want to su..., remove the material fu..., sufferings at the
deepest possible level. And the deepest possible level, removal of suffering
happens by the purification of the heart. And purification of the heart means
practicing devotional service.

So, when we practice devotional service, effectively, we are actually purifying
our heart. And when we practice info..., in, in career, those two practice
devotional service, we are purifying their, helping them to purify their heart.
At the same time, if our heart is getting purified, then we should be becoming
more soft-hearted, more sensitive, more concerned about the suffering of the
others. And that is why we want, should want to help others. And how will we
help others? By giving them Krishna in various ways. So, for a poor person, if
you give them, him charity, and we also tell them, please chant Hare Krishna.
Then we are, we are spiritualising the charity also. So, essentially, let us
look at this stoma..., conclusive point of view.

What about social service? Do not exalt. Do not denigrate. Utilise in Krishna
Consciousness. Do not exalt means do not think that social service itself is
the, is the best thing in life. And devotional service is useless. Do not
denigrate means just, conne..., it is all mundane. It is all material. People,
just because, people are, their bad karma, they are suffering. You cannot
interfere with that bad karma. Or you will get the karmic reactions. You know,
these are considerations for, which are philoso..., philosophically true. But
they are devotionally very insensitive. Do not denigrate. But utilise in Krishna
Consciousness. Utilise in Krishna Consciousness means see how a devotee is not
primarily concerned with karma. A devotee is primarily concerned with Krishna.
That means how can I move closer to Krishna? How can I help others move closer
to Krishna? That is what a devotee is concerned with. And accordingly, the
devotee acts.

So, now, let us understand this from two social service now, from two
perspectives. One is the material perspective. And the other is the devotional
perspective. There are ordinary materialistic people who are concerned with
themselves alone. They are simply concerned with their own eating, sleeping,
mating, defending. And making better and better arrangements for that. They are
self-centered materialists. Now, a..., these mostly will be in passion. Above
them are in goodness. Those people who are, say, social ser..., social welfare
workers. They are humanitarian workers. And they want to help others. So, these
people, they are as compared to the materialist, selfless. Why selfless? Because
they are thinking beyond their own body and mind, beyond their own family
members. They are thinking of the larger society and community. And they want to
help them. So, they are in goodness. And goodness is higher than passion. And
actually, pure goodness, or transcendence, where the pure devotees are, and
where we are aspiring to go, what is that? That is actually the place where we
feel compassionate for people constantly. And when we are compassionate for the
soul, it is not that I will take care of your soul, but I will not even look at
your body. That is not my problem. We do not separate the soul and the body like
that. We take care of the complete person. So, actually speaking, pure devotees
are compassionate at every level. Srila Prabhupada himself would cook prasad and
give it to people who were not even his disciples, not even practicing devotees,
not even following regulative principles. But they have just some interest in
Krishna Consciousness. So, now, we could say prasad is spiritual. And prasad was
going to purify people. That is true. But still, Prabhupada was offering what
could be seen as bodily service at that time. He was doing washing their plates.
Why? Because that was the way he could approach Krishna. He could bring Krishna
into their heart. He could get them to approach Krishna.

So, in this case, there is a hierarchical, selfish materialists, relatively
selfless materialists, selfless social service workers, and then devotional
activists. Those who are pure devotees, who are spiritual activists working for
all-round benefit of people. So, in this hierarchy, social welfare workers are
definitely better. And social work is definitely better than sense
gratification. So, social work is better, but then, there is a problem if this
social work creates a wrong attitude towards devotional work. That means this is
social work. This is sense gratification. And this is devotional work. But if
social work makes a person think that actually devotional work is lower only.
What I am doing is higher. These devotees, what do they do? They just chant,
and dance, and sing. Nothing practical they are doing. I am doing much better.
In fact, some social workers are, are not just condemnatory of religion. They
are, they are not just critical of religion. They are, they are outright
blasphemous of religion. You know, there is, there is one social ser..., welfare
organisation whose slogan is God, in double quotes. God sends disasters. We send
relief. So, so, so demoniac. God does not send disasters. It is our own karma
which causes disasters. So, this is a very demoniac idea. And this kind of thing
is definitely condemned. So, si..., so similarly, in the Maya..., the, some people
who say that even just taking care of poor people is better. There is no need to
worship God. What are they doing? They, from the material point of view, may be
concerned for more people than our sense gratifiers. But because of their
negative attitude towards devotional service, they actually become lower. They
become less receptive to devotional service than even the materialists. And they
can mislead people more. So, from the material point of view, those in goodness,
those who are concerned with humanitarian work are higher. But from the
devotional perspective, because of their criticism and condemnation of
devotional service, they actually go lower. They can act..., so these two
hierarchies of materialists being lower and social workers being higher, these
can get reversed. Materialists will become higher because they are, at least,
more open to devotional service. Those who are social welfare workers they can
become less receptive. Because they are critical. They feel that we are, these
people are just wasting time, wasting money, and doing nothing.

Now, people who have this kind of critical negative attitude towards religion,
again are not many. There are a few people like that, but not many. So, there
are many social welfare workers who are actually concerned with people and want
to help people. So, then such people, if we can just expand their acce..., their
vision, their understanding, expand their circle of compassion and help them
become God conscious. Then, they can help so many people actually. So, our goal
is to not just condemn or denigrate social workers. It is actually to integrate
social work with spiritual work. With spiritual work being like the superset.
Soc..., social work being like the subset within it. So, in India, a, a year or
two ago there was this very, there was a wave centered around the Lokpal
movement. Lokpal movement was the idea that there should be a strong judicial
body which will punish the guilty. You know, because those guilty are doing a
lot of corruption in society. And corruption is eating up the social body,
nectar minds from within. So, they said that we have, we should have a really
strong judicial body to punish. So, now, this is important. At the material
level, the ksatriyas should have the authority to punish. And they should have
the capacity to punish. So, the, having a Lokpal to punish the guilty is
important. However, just by punishing the guilty, do we change the hearts of
people? Some people may become a little bit more fearful or be more cautious
about doing the corruption. Or still, what will happen is those people who have
more power, more influence, they are still do, keep doing corruption, and they
will keep escaping. So, you know, that does not mean that a ksatriya body is not
important. It is important. See, Lokpal can punish the guilty, but only Gopal
can purify the greedy. So, Gopal can purify the greedy means that when people
get connected with Lord Gopal, then they become purified by that contact.
Krishna is called as Gopal. "go" means cow, calf. "pal" means protector. So,
"go" also means senses. Krishna is the protector of the senses. How does He
protect the senses? When the senses are used in Krishna's service, the senses
experience a higher richer happiness than what is provided by the sinful
allurement of this world, by the selfish, greedy, lusty allurement of this
world. And then by this higher happiness, Krishna protects our senses. And
Krish..., when people experience happiness in relationship with Krishna, then
they become free from greed. So, there has to be a ksatriya bo.., level of
adminstration offered. And there has to be a brahmana, or a devotional level of
education and devotional level of adminstration also help for. And then, the
social body will be cured pro..., holistically.

So, you know, the best manava seva is to connect manava to madhava and to make
madhava accessible to manava. So, that is, that is manava, not manaya. It is
manava. So, manava means human being. Madhava means God. So, the best service to
man is to connect man to God. And to make God accessible to man. So, what are
the two aspects of this? To connect man to God means that, say, we go, Srila
Prabhupada encouraged us to go out and do book distribution. He encouraged
prasadam distribution. He encouraged harinam sankirtan. He encouraged outreach
programmes. By all these, we are giving people an opportunity to connect
themselves with God. And also, to make Madhava accessible to Manava. So, now, in
one way, how do we make the Lord accessible? Book distribution, other things are
there. But along with that, the temple. You know, Srila Prabhupada wanted big
beautiful temples. Why? Because in those temple, when the Lord is glorified, you
know, majestically, befitting his glory, his position, then that attracts
people. You know, if there is some small, people, you know, te..., people,
no..., temple, not many people will come. But if it is a big temple, then
many many people will come. And thousands people, thousands people come. Even
millions of people over the years. And when they come to the temple, they take
darshan of the Lord. They take prasad. They get some. They may take some books.
They associate with devotees. They hear the holy name. And their spiritual life
begins. So, temples, when big temples are there. They make the Lord accessible
to the people. Because the Lord has manifested in a, a majestic building, and
people are attracted to the building. In, you know, recently in Pune, we built a
big temple, MVCC. And the president of India came for then, Radha Krishna
temple. And the hundreds of people come to the temple. What is their idea? The
president came to see this temple. We should come to see. See, this is the
material mentality that God is there. I should go to see God is not the idea.
If the president came to see the temple, let us come. So, people are attracted
materially big things. And providing materially big things for God is a way of
attracting people to God.

So, similarly, Srila Prabhupada at one time was once in Hong Kong. And then he
was, he was head a press conference in a very big five-star hotel, the Hilton
Hotel. And one of the reports asked, Swamiji, you are a renunciate, you know,
why are you having a press conference in a five-star hotel like this? Why are
you living here? Srila Prabhupada said that, why, you know, I can sit under
a tree, and be happy, remembering God over there. But if I had called for a
press conference under a tree, would you have come? So, he understood the point.
So, the point is that we have to present God consciousness in a way that will
attract people. At the same time, we do not become insensitive to people's
material sufferings. Even people's material sufferings should inspire us to do
all that we can to share God consciousness more vigorously. And help people
r..., get rid of their suffering at all levels, material and spiritual. So:

        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u sambhūtyām ratāḥ

The Isopanisad says that those who worship something else other than God, which
they consider the, to be sambhuti, consider that to be Absolute Truth, they can
go into darker re..., regions o..., darker regions. Why? Because they mislead
people. You know.

So, to summarise, we discussed today about how manava seva, madhava seva,
service to, service to man, service to God.

We discussed that the cause of starvation in society is not just because so much
money is being spent on God or because the nature is so short. It is because
there is so, some mismanagement, are mismanaged because of greed in people's
hearts. And that greed can be removed only through purification, through
experience of higher happiness. And that is what spiritual education and
spiritual experience offers.

So, on one side, we have to remove the greed among the wealthy and we also have
to remove the lack of self-control among the needy. We discussed about alcohol,
alcoholism, and other problems among the poor which prevent them from taking
help even when that is offered. And they can also be empowered if they get
spiritual opportunities. And they get empowered by the power of God to overcome
the ever, evil powers in their hearts that are dragging them down.

Then, we discussed about how to make social service itself into a God will not
work because people in and of themselves are not God. They are part of God. So,
just to, we should not make that into a God and think that there is no need to
woship God. At the same time, we should not become utterly hard-hearted towards
people. We looked at Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur's quote elaborately. And
then, how he says that a devotee should be soft-hearted. And soft-hearted means
we should give charity to poor people. If we can spiritualise the charity by
giving prasad or making them chant Hare Krishna, that is the best. The point is
we should feel soft-hearted. And soft-heartedness will expand until Krishna.

And the last conclusion we discussed, the best manava seva is to connect manava
to madhava and to make madhava accessible to manava.

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande hari haribol. 
