Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ltooyiRWyFY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=LLDL4YSByG7Tl8t7GQtfKwnFSh98MTU0MDAyMTgzM0AxNTM5OTM1NDMz&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_005_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_03_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=ltooyiRWyFY

Hare Krishna.

So welcome back to our Isopanisad course.

So let us start with the overview of the first section once again, to understand
where we are. The invocation and the introduction, or the mantra one, give the
principle. What is that? Everything is perfect. And that perfection is based on
the fact that everything belongs to the Ishvara.

So in the verse yesterday, we discussed about how ... living in harmony with
Ishvara and the isavasya principle, benefits people. People can live life long,
for hundreds of years. Now in this verse, the contrasting point is made.  That
how living in disharmony with the isavasya principle harms us.

So let us look at this verse, so before we go into that verse, let us first look
at the purport, which Srila Prabhupada has given us. So this verse is:

        asuryā nāma te lokā
        andhena tamasāvṛtāḥ
        tāṁs te pretyābhigacchanti
        ye ke cātma-hano janāḥ

So, "asurya nama te loka", that those worlds are called the abodes of the
demoniac. Why? "asurya nama te loka", those worlds are called as the world of
the demoniac, "adnhena tamasavrtah", those are covered by ignorance of, by
darkness and ignorance, by the darkness of ignorance, "avrtah" is covered,
"andhena" is darkness, and what kind of darkness, tamasa, of ignorance, and
"tams te pretya", "tams te" means those words, pretya means after that, so
"abhigacchanti", one will attain that. Who will attain that? "ye ke catma-hano
janah", so those janah, those people who are "atma-hano", who are the killers of
the soul, and "ye ke" indicates that whoever they may be, they will go to these
dark abodes.

So basically, this verse is a warning, it is a warning that if one lives in a
soul-killing way, if one lives without awareness of one's spiritual nature,
without taking care of one's spiritual responsibilities, then one will, because
one lives ignorantly now, one will go into further deeper ignorance in the
future. So in this way, this is like a parent telling the child, if you do not
study, you will fail, and if you fail, then you will have no career ahead of
you. You will live in poverty. You will live in ignominy, nobody will respect
you, nobody will employ you. You will be miserable. So it is a warning that is
given.

So similarly, here it is said that if a person does not accept one's spiritual
responsibilities, then one will have to suffer. That suffer is, one will go
deeper into ignorance. So let us look at what the purport is saying. So the
purport basically has three sections, six paragraphs.

So in the first paragraph, which is brief, Srila Prabhupada explains who is a
demon. Here the word is, asurya nama te loka, so asura, Prabhupada explains,
covered asura. Then who is a soul-skiller? The word atma-hano, the killer of the
soul comes in the last line of the mantra. So what is that soul-killer? That
Prabhupada describes, so he clarifies these two terms from the sanskrit verse
and then he elaborates on the basic message. The basic message of the purport
is, liberate the soul, do not kill the soul.

And the first paragraph talks about how we human beings misuse, so we will
discuss the paragraphs in details, but first, let us look at who is a demon. Now
Srila Prabhupada said: the killer of the soul, whoever he may be, must enter
into the planets, known as the worlds of the faithless, full of darkness and
ignorance.

So Srila Prabhupada first explains that asura is one who is demoniac. Now, the
word asura has many meanings.

In general in sanskrit or in any language, there is a field of study, called as
etymology. Etymology means we study the origins of the words and by
understanding the origins of those words, we understand how their meaning is
built up. So for example, there may be the English word, say, lexicographer. So
graphy means who writes, lexico means dictionary, so lexicographer is a person
who makes a dictionary.

So like that by looking at the etymology, we can understand the roots of the
words, and then we can understand their meanings, so this is an elaborate field
of study. And in some cases, the etymological meanings may not be historically
precise, but they are semantically precise. Historically precise means, that may
not be the exact way the words have evolved in the history, but from the meaning
point of view, some meanings become well illustrated.

So asura, so what does asura mean? So "asu" refers to breath and "ra" means to
enjoy, "ramante" to enjoy. So the word "asu" as breath comes in a famous verse
in the Bhagavad Gita:

        ...
        gatasun agatasums ca
        nanusocanti panditah

So in 2.11 in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says, one who is asu, one whose life
air has gone, and one whose life air has not gone way, such a person, wise
person does not lament for either of those situations, so "asu" means life air.
So, "ra" means to enjoy. So "asura" means one who enjoys the life air. That
means the life air is in the body, one who wants to enjoy the body. So, one who
wants to enjoy at the bodily level, sense gratification, in a Godless, sanctuous
materialistic way, that person is called as an asura.

So Srila Prabhupada explains that in the Rigveda, it is quoted: "Vishnu bhakta
smritodevo, asurasta viparyaya". Those who are devotees of the Lord, are
bhaktas, and others are the asuras, and "Sada Vishnu paramam padan sada pasyanti
suryaha", the Supreme feet of Lord Vishnu, the suras are all seeing that, and
the asuras are exactly opposite.

So now, an important point to understand is: asura is not a species, but is also
a mentality. We generally think of a demon as maybe somebody having teeth coming
out of the head, teeth coming out of the mouth, horns on top of the head, but
that is not necessary. There can be demons like that and we see in the Ramayana
when the battle is there, now on one side are the human beings along with the
monkies, and other side, there are the rakshasas. And when the rakshasas have
ferocious forms, Ravana had ten heads, Kumbarkarna was a gigantic body. Many of
the rakshasas, especially those rakshasis who were guarding Sita, they were
hideous forms. So there can be rakshasas who have terrible forms also, but if we
look at the Mahabharata, the battle is not between manavas and rakshasas, it is
between manavas and manavas, human beings and human beings.

And actually in the Mahabharata battle, there are rakshasas on both sides. Now,
there is Gathodkachandra on the side of the Pandavas, he is the son of
Bhimatrumahidimbi, hidimbi was a rakshasi, so Gathodkacandra was a rakshasa.
And there is Alongbush, who is also a rakshasa, who was the relative of
Bakasura, who was killed by Bhima. So he wanted to take revenge, so he joined
Duryodhana's part. So there are rakshasas on both sides.

So the point here I am making is in the Mahabharata war, both sides were human
beings. But still, Duryodhana and those who were assisting him actively, they
are considered demoniac. So Duryodhana did not have the body of a demon, but he
had the mentality of a demon. So asura is not just a physical form. Asura is a
mentality. And that mentality can be persist by human beings also. In fact, in
the sixteenth chapter of Bhagavad Gita, when Lord Krishna describes the "daiva
asura sampada vibhaga yoga", so he says divine characteristics and demoniac
characteristics. So there he is describing human society itself. When he is
saying, they can have demoniac characteristics. So asura is not just a physical
form.

So Jayadvaita Maharaja has written an article in Back to Godhead, called who is
a demon? So he says, we think of a demon as a horned, jolt person with deep
portion, but that is not necessary. He says that your local politician might be
a demon, your grocer might be a demon, your neighbour might be a demon, you
might be a demon. So, all of us have the demoniac mentality within us, and if we
let ourselves become dominated by that demoniac mentality... we have a divine
side and a demoniac side. If we let the demoniac side take control of us, then
we behave demoniacly.

So here, when it is using the word "asurya nama te loka", so now, there are
mentalities which are demoniac, and for the demoniac beings, there is also
localities within the cosmography of the Universe. So we know that the Earth is
intermediate, often the fourteen planetary systems are referred to as three
lokas. The upper, the middle and the lower. So the middle planetary system is
the earthly planetary system. The lower is that which is below. And the demons
often go to these lower planetary systems.

So "asurya nama te loka", so for the demoniac people, there are also some
localities within the Universe. And those are the places where people who live
Godlessly will go. That is the meaning of this verse.

Now let us look at a very important point. That is the term atma-ha. Atma-ha is
a, is means literally killer of the soul. Now, the first lesson of the Bhagavad
Gita is that the soul cannot be killed. In 2.17 for example, Krishna says:

        avinasi tu tad viddhi
        yena sarvam idam tatam
        vinasam avyayasyasya
        na kascit kartum arhati

So in 2.17, Lord Krishna is setting, "avinasi tu tad viddhi", that the soul can
never be killed. But that same Bhagavad Gita, towards the end in the sixteen
chapter, Lord Krishna tells in 16.21:

        tri-vidham narakasyedam
        dvaram nasanam atmanah
        kamah krodhas tatha lobhas
        tasmad etat trayam tyajet

So Krishna says that there are three gates to hell, and these three destroy the
soul, and a wise person should stay away from them, and those three are lust,
anger and greed. Now interestingly, what is Krishna is saying? "dvaram nasanam
atmanah", "nasanam atmanah" means they destroy the soul. So now, in 2.17,
Krishna has said the soul can never be destroyed, and now, in 16.21, he is
saying lust, anger and greed will destroy the soul. So is Krishna contradicting
himself?

No. He is not contradicting himself. He is talking here in a non-literal sense.
So there can be literal readings of words, and in some cases, there can be
non-literal readings of words. So, we know that as a fact, the soul can never be
destroyed. So, killer of the soul means killer of the spiritual consciousness of
the soul. So what does lust do? We may be aware spiritually that I am not the
body, I am the soul. Life is meant for spiritual realisation.

But then if I expose myself to certain pictures, certain circumstances that make
me lusty, then that lust makes me forget that I am the soul and it arouses
bodily consciousness within me. So with lust kills my spiritual awareness. So
when we talk about the killing of the soul, it is not killing the existence of
the soul, it is killing the spiritual consciousness of the soul.

So here, atma-ha is a figurative expression. Now, in the Caitanya Caritamrta,
this is referred to as Mukhya-vritti and Gauna-vritti, or the Caitanya
Caritamrta says abhida-vritti and lakshana-vritti. So there are multiple names.
Vritti means mode of understanding. So Mukhya-vritti is the primary mode of
understanding. Gauna is the subordinate mode of understanding. Abhida is again
central, lakshana is secondary, symptomatic.

So these are both ways in which scripture can be understood. We can take the
direct literal meaning or we can take the indirect non-literal meaning. So when
do we take the direct meaning and when do we take the indirect meaning? So, we
cannot just arbitrarily take a non-literal meaning. Srila Prabhupada was very
strongly against taking the non-literal meaning of scripture when that is not
based in scripture.

For example, many Indian nationalist thinkers who use the Bhagavad Gita as a
tool in their political struggle for independency, were embarassed by the idea
that the Bhagavad Gita was spoken to make Arjuna fight a war. So they try to say
that this whole war was metaphoric. That actually it is just a battle within our
consciousness.

So Srila Prabhupada says where does the Bhagavad Gita say that? It is, the
historical event was there, and the historical context makes it very clear that
the Bhagavad Gita was a battle, led to a battle that was actually fought. So,
such interpretation, if it is not based on scripture, is wrong. But if the
scriptures themselves support a little non-literal interpretation, or a
figurative interpretation, then that can be accepted.

So now, in this case, in the Srimad Bhagavatam, in 11.20.17, there is another
verse, which literally explains what the word atma-ha means. So this verse is
actually a correlation for what is being said over here. That means when we talk
about scripture, we cannot understand scripture in isolation. So this is the
verse:

        nṛ-deham ādyaṁ su-labhaṁ su-durlabhaṁ
        plavaṁ su-kalpaṁ guru-karṇadhāram
        mayānukūlena nabhasvateritaṁ
        pumān bhavābdhiṁ na taret sa ātma-hā

So "sa atma-ha", such a person is the killer of the soul. So who is the killer
of the soul? It is described "nr-deham adyan", so when we get a human body, and
then, what is the nature of the human body? It is "plavan", "plavan" is a boat,
so "bhavabdhin", this is, material existence is like ocean, and in this ocean,
we are all struggling and drowning, so the human body is like a boat, and it is
"su-labhan su-durlabhan", so it is a play of words over here, "su-labhan" means
easily obtained, "su-durlabhan" means very difficult to obtain. What does it
mean?

That actually among the millions of specfies, millions and millions of living
beings that are there, very few get human body, so it is "su-durlabhan", but it
is "su-labhan", we get it naturally by the progression through the lower
species. So that we got it, and it is "su-kalpan", it is actually well-designed
to cross over the material existence. We will see how it is.

"guru-karnadharam", so when we have a boat, we need an expert navigator, the
captain. The captain is the spiritual master. The word "karnadharam" actually
refers to captain, literally speaking, "karna" is ear, "dhar" is to hold, so
"karnadharam" is one who catches the ear. That means the guru catches the ear of
the disciple, and corrects the disciple, when the disciple was wrong.

And "mayanukulena nabhasvateritan", that "mayanukul", that which is favorable to
me, "nabhasvateritan", the winds that are favorable to me are the scriptures
that are given by me.

So, with all these facilities, if the person does not cross the ocean of
material existence, such a person is an atma-ha. So when we are in a boat, we
need a captain, and we need the guru, the favorable wind, then it is easy to
travel. So all of us have got the human body. If you get the guidance of
spiritual master and then you study scriptures, when we say scriptures are the
favorable wind. What does that mean?

That means that actually if we study of scriptures, the study of scriptures
creates spiritual desires, spiritual thoughts, spiritual inclinations and
inspirations, and convictions within us, and these enable us to move forward
towards Krishna. So if we read mundane stuff, if we watch movies, if we read
mundane magazines, then those create material desires within us, and they create
opposite wind.

So if Krishna is here, we are here, reading scripture creates a wind that takes
us towards Krishna, reading mundane stuff, especially which is esssentially
provocative, that creates wind that takes us away from Krishna. So Krishna says,
all these facilities are there, but the person does not cross over the ocean
material existence, the person is ruining his or her spiritual prospect, and
that is why such a person is called atma-ha.

So, our point of discussion here is that the figurative meaning, non-literal
meaning should also be based on scripture. It cannot just be based on one's
mental concoction.

Now Sripad Madhavacharya explains that we can have three levels of readings in
scripture. So, especially with respect to the Itihasas, like the Ramayana and
the Mahabharata, he says, there can be a literal meaning, the ethical meaning
and the metaphorical meaning.

So literal meaning means that these events happen. For example, Sita went with
Lord Rama to the forest, and then Lord Rama went to chase the deer, and then
Ravana came and he abducted Sita. So this is a literal event. It actually
happened. And just by hearing the pastimes given in the scriptures literally, we
become purified. So, there is no need for any further interpretation, any
analyses, just Krishna, Lord Rama, these are manifestations of our beloved Lord,
and just hearing about Him purifies us. It increases our attraction for Him. So
the literal understanding gives us enormous purificatory benefits.

Now apart from that, there is an ethical understanding. Ethical means, from the
scripture, we can draw lessons. These historical events serve us moral
benchmarks to guide us in our present day ethical decision making. That moral
benchmarks means, ok now, it says, Sita was so chaste, and she went with Lord
Rama even when she was not obliged to go. That is an ethical decision. So we can
learn ethical moral lessons from these scriptural incidents. So Sita was with
Rama, but still she was attracted to Marichma, as coming as a deer. So when we
are with the Lord, we should not be attracted to other things. This is an
ethical lesson we can learn. So this is the ethical level of understanding. And
the ethical level is definitely valuable. It has to be taken in proper context
so that we do not make any misjudgements where ethical reading is also valid.

And beyond that is the metaphorical reading. Metaphorical reading means these
historical events symbolise truths relevant to the seekers on the spiritual
path. That means these historical events, they are true, but along with that
there can be further meaning derived by looking of them as symbols. So for
example, Srila Prabhupada used the example that after the six children were
killed from Devaki's womb, then Balaram ji appeared, and after that, Krishna
appeared. So he said that these six children referred the six anarthas, and
lust, anger, greed, envy, pride and illusion. And after these six anarthas are
removed, then the spiritual master manifests in our heart.

That means we can become fixed in guru nistha. We can become fixed in service.
And the spiritual master then prepares our heart and then Krishna appears. After
Balaram ji, Krishna appeared. So now, this is a metaphorical reading. The
children were actually there, but along with that, Devaki's six children
represent something else. So metaphorical reading is not wrong. However, it has
to be done in such a way that it is in consistency with the scriptural message.

So Bhaktivinoda Thakur also for example, in Krishna lila, his interpretation of
Krishna lila given in Krishna samhita, Caitanya Siksamrta, he describes how
different demons in Krishna lila represent certain things. For example, Putana
refers to false guru, or Shaktasura refers to our past conditionings coming back
to us to haunt us. So these are meanings which are non-literal and if the
acharyas have given it, and if they are overall in consistency with the
scriptural teaching, then they can be accepted.

So, Vedanta Desika gives the example, Vedanta Desika is a very prominent acharya
in the Sri sampradaya, and he appears after Ramanuja acharya, some centuries,
and he is considered as "tarkaratran" great logican, and he establishes
systematically the logical foundation of the personalist school of thought as
thought by Ramanuja acarya. And he gives the example of, say, Ramayana in one
verse, he says that this Ravana had ten heads and Sita was with Lord Rama, but
Sita was taken by Lord Rama, and kept in Lanka. So he says that the soul is with
Krishna, soul is with the Supreme Lord, but when the soul turns away from the
Supreme Lord for something else, then the mind comes and catches the soul. So
Ravana represents the mind and the mind is accompanied with the ten senses, the
five karmenriyas, five jnaninriyas, and all these ten, they catch the soul.

And then, Lanka represents the body. So the mind traps the soul in the body,
because the mind desires is to enjoy, the soul stays trapped in the body. Now,
an acharya has given this meaning, we can accept it. But this does not mean that
actually there was no Sita, there was no Rama. No, historically, such incidents
happened, but along with that, an additional meaning can be given. So,
metaphorical meanings are useful. They can definitely be used when they do not
contradict the literal meaning.

So here is the kiss principle to understand is. The metaphorical should
supplement, not supplant the literal reading. Supplement means add to. Supplant
means replace. So, Srila Prabhupada's objection was that actually Kuruksetra is
a geographical place that exists even today, and the Kuruksetra war was a
historical event that took place five thousand years ago. So those who try to
say that this is just metaphorical, they are not supplementing, they are
supplanting the literal meaning. And that was what Srila Prabhupada objected to.

However, Srila Prabhupada himself also uses this metaphorical meaning, you know,
in one of Srila Prabhupada's disciples, Hayagriva Prabhu's book, the Hare
Krishna Explosion, he describes that when Prabhupada gave the second time
initiations, the first early days of ISKCON in 1966, so at that time, he told
the devotees, now you need not lament because you have handed the chariot of
your life in the hands of Krishna. Krishna has now become your charioteer.

Just as Arjuna was lamenting before, but when Arjuna started taking guidance
from Krishna, his lamentation went away. So now with initation, you have
accepted Krishna as your charioteer, now you need not lament. So, Srila
Prabhupada is basically accepting the analogy that the body is like a chariot
and Krishna is charioteer.

So Prabhupada does use the metaphorical understanding also at times, but his
point was that it should supplement, not supplant. Now, is it that always it is
should not supplant? But it can supplant when the literal reading leads to
obvious absurdities. Literal reading leads to obvious absurdities means, for
example, the example that is given in Vedic hermeneutics. Hermeneutics is the
substudy of scripture, the branch of knowledge which studies scripture. So his
house is on the river if somebody says. Now, nobody's house can be on the river.
The river is a body of water, and house is basically made of land. So "his house
is on the river" means, that his house is on the banks of the river. So although
the banks is not mentioned over there, we understand that the literal meaning
here is not precise. We have to take a non-literal meaning.

So similarly, why are we discussing all this Isopanisad? Because we are looking
at the word atma-ha. So atma-ha is a word that should not be taken literally.
Here we have to take the metaphorical meaning because the soul can never be
killed, the soul is eternal. So atma-ha refers to one who kills the spiritual
awareness, spiritual consciousness of the soul. That person is called as as
atma-ha. So let us go back to the purport now.

So now, the third part is: liberate the soul, do not kill the soul.

So how do we kill the soul? If we live materialistically, then by living
materialistically, we do not allow the soul to get benefited from its spiritual
potential. If we do not use higher facilities of human form, then we have to
live worse than animals in this life and go to hell in the next.

So how do we have to live worse than animals? What does worse than animals
actually mean? So, Srila Prabhupada explains and elaborates over here, see,
today many people have this question that we have advanced so much. So are we
still living like animals? So we understand, first of all, with all our
scientific advancement, scientific advancement has changed form, but not purpose
of activities. What does it mean form, not purpose?

See, animals may gorge on refuse in a garbage pile, so a pig may go to a garbage
pile and may eat some refuse over there, whereas humans may titillate their
tongues with processed, packaged food. We may eat pizzas, and burgers and things
like that, but the essential pleasure that is there in both is the same eating.
So technology has changed the form, not the purpose.

You know, animals may mate in the middle of the street, whereas humans may
cultivate erotic fantasies, erotic fantasies mean they will imagine about sex,
through magazines, television, movies and the internet before indulging in
carnal revelry.

So essentially, a person, even if he is surfing on the net, going through
various sites, externally it appears, oh animal is just walking along, this
person is surfing on the net, knows all kinds of sophisticated technology, but
what is the purpose? The purpose is the same. The person is searching for sexual
stimulation and that is what the animals are doing. So the form is changed, the
purpose is not changed.

Similarly, animals may sleep on the hard street, whereas humans may sink into
oblivion on a soft bed in an air-conditioned room.

So essentially, our Prabhupada would say after we are going to sleep, both we
forget, where I am and what I am. So the essential pleasure is the same.

Now animals may snarl and show their teeth, whereas humans may brandish weapons
of mass destruction.

So what does it mean? Actually, it is the same thing. Both are doing a show of
strength. Both are trying to attack others, threatening to attack others. So the
essential activity that human beings and animals do, remains the same. Although,
there is so much technological advancement, the form has changed, the purpose
has not changed.

And actually if we see with respect to modern science, most of the advancement
comes by funding which originates in two main sources: one is defense, and the
second is the consumer industry. Now defense basically is about defending, isn't
it? So most of the technological advances come when there are wars, or there are
threats of wars, or some people want to shoot threats of wars. Then they, we got
this weapon of mass destruction, we got nuclear weapons, we got this. So much of
the funding for scientific research comes from the defense industry. And defense
is basically nothing, but the activity of defending.

And then, remaining, most of the funding, comes from the consumer industry. And
the consumer industry is basically talking about eating, sleeping, mating. So in
this way, if we see, what does the advancement do? The advancement is basically
furthering the animal propensities of human beings. For example, we may now have
very high class cellphones. So with cellphones, we can click photos. Now what do
the people use the photos for? They use the photos they do to attract opposite
sex, or for clicking titillating images. So they are using it mostly for sensual
purposes. So people have, many of the premier institutes, they have very fast
internet. And one of the top search items on the internet is basically
unfortunately sex.

So we have sophisticated technology, but what are we doing with that? Quite
often, we are doing the same thing which the animals are doing. So in fact, it
is an engine, engine for growth, is often this, is eating, sleeping, mating,
defending itself. So that is why we human beings with all our progress, we are
still doing eating, sleeping, mating, defending. We are not crossing over the
material ocean. And that is why the while modern civilisation is, Srila
Prabhupada uses in this purport the word, it is a soul-killing civilisation.

So atma-ha refers to an individual soul-killer, whereas today, it is not just
one individual soul-killer we have, we have an entire soul-killing civilisation.
So, when there is a soul-killing civilisation, what happens? Actually speaking,
it is not just spiritually that people suffer, that they will have to suffer in
the next life, when they will not be able to have an auspicious destination,
they will have an inauspicious destination. But more than that, even in this
life, they will have to suffer.

So people who do not believe that in the next life, there may be something wrong
that will happen, bad will happen as a consequence to what they have done, for
those people, we can tell them, the consequence that will happen in this life
and by pointing out those consequences also, we can encourage to take spiritual
life seriously.

So let us understand now what are the consequences that happen in this life. So
with respect to eating, sleeping, mating, defending itself, we human beings
actually suffer many times more than animals.

So animals do not die of starvation because of artificial shortages created by
others of their own species.

Now, what does this mean? Actually, there have been many surveys of feminis and
quite often, for example, Frances Moore, did a study book called: "Food first".
And in that book, a history of several feminis over a decades in Africa was
done, and each of these cases, actually food, necessary for feeding the starving
was there in the same country, but because of political vested interests, that
food was not released from the go downs and people starved.

In fact, many times when wars are over there or when business interests are
selfish, then business persons hold grains, hold food, and raise the rates up.
And then what happens? That leads to artifical shortage and people die.

So animals, it never happens like this. Human beings, we have so much
technology, but despite all the technology being available, people are suffering
terribly. They are suffering because they, it is a shortage created by other
human beings. So, we are not eating as well as the animals.

Now, the second is that no animal needs to take a sleeping pill to sleep. Now, a
dog may sleep in the middle of the street. We may have a comfortable large bed
and still, we cannot sleep without the sleeping pill. And sometimes, we cannot
sleep even with the sleeping pill. So we suffer. So what happens is we are not
getting the basic pleasure of sleeping, the relief, bodily relief and release of
sleeping. So are we really advancing?

Similarly, animals do not suffer heartbreaks because of betrayed love. Now, a
dog does not think that oh this bitch has ditched me and therefore I will sing
songs of sorrow or of that I will commit suicide now. So actually we human
beings are suffering more than animals. So eating, sleeping, mating, in all
these, we suffer more than the animals, similarly with respect to defending.

Actually, with respect to defending also, for us human beings, the biggest
danger is other human beings only. Isn't it? You know, how many of us actually
fear that some tiger or lion will come into my house and kill me? But many
people live in fear that some terrorists may come and blow up our ... the
building where I am in, or some thieves will come, and break into my house and
steal, so we are afraid of other human beings only most. You know, which other
specy, the members live in mortal fear of the other members of their own specy?
It does not happen so much. So actually, leave alone spiritual advancement, even
with respect to eating, sleeping, mating and defending, humans are in many ways
worse off than animals.

So, now apart from this, suffering in eating, sleeping, mating and defending,
humans suffer more in others ways also. What are the other ways? You know, which
animal has to do a course on stress management? You know, animals do not feel
stressed because of overwork, or loneliness or any other reason. The human
beings suffer from stress so much. You know the biggest problem in today's
society.

And animals do not fall prey to addictions, isn't it? You know, a fish sometimes
gets attracted to a beet, and then it gets trapped by that, sometimes in a mouse
trap some cheese may be kept, and the mouse may go over there and may get caught
by the cheese. But the animals have their excuses. You know, they do not know in
advance that it is a trap. And secondly, whatever they are provided, whatever
they are allured with, it looks like their food. The beet looks like food. The
cheese looks like food.

But we human beings do not have either of those excuses. Cigarette does not look
like food to anyone. And who does not know that cigarette smoking is injurious
to health? But still, we get attracted and still, we suffer. So humans suffer
from addictions. So we have higher intelligence, but what is happening? We are
suffering more than animals, and, now of course, some cases, some animals who
become contaminated by human association, they may also become addicted. That
means what? That means if a man has a pet dog. And the man thinks I do not want
to smoke alone, so the man teaches the dog also smoking. So that the dog will
normally not smoke, who will take fire into his own mouth? But because of the
bad association of the master, the dog will also start smoking. So this
unfortunately happens at times.

So animals do not commit suicide. Human beings commit suicide so much. According
to WHO, one million people commit suicide. So one million is actually more than
the number of people who are killed in war or in violent crimes throughout the
year. So one million people kill themselves every year through suicide. That
means more than the number of the people who are killed by others are the number
of people who are killing themselves. What does this indicate? This indicates
that there is something seriously wrong in the way we are living, in the way we
are living. That is why people are so frustrated with their life that they feel
better let me end my life, better let me, I cannot tolerate living this, let me
die. Which other animal is commits suicide in this way? Practically none. In
such quantity, definitely none. Therefore, there is something seriously wrong
with our civilisation.

And Srila Prabhupada called this soul-killing civilisation, with so much
suicide, it is also body-killing civilisation. So, people are killing
themselves, and what is the reason for this? Srila Prabhupada explains in the
purport that we are misusing the higher for the lower. Let us see what this
means. Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport. So, if we go to the Isopanisad,
in the purport, Srila Prabhupada explains that the, Prabhupada uses the word
over here:

"There are swine, dogs, camels, asses, etc., whose economic necessities are just
as important to them as ours are to us"

Now, economy necessities does not mean that they have some currency and they
have to earn a salary. What Prabhupada means is they also have to make
arrangement for food, they also have to make arrangement for eating, sleeping,
mating, defending, but he says:

"but the economic problems of these animals are solved only under nasty and
unpleasant conditions."

So what is nasty and unpleasant conditions? You know, suppose, we are sitting to
eat prasad, and we are sitting to eat prasad, now we are about to eat prasad,
and somebody, bang, hits with a huge stick on the head, ah, we fall unconscious.
Now, if we have a threat like that, we will not be able to eat food, peaceful
food. We are afraid that somebody is going to beat us up. But what happens to an
animal, you know if I want, or a lower specy?

A mosquito comes around, and hits, biting my skin. Now, what is the mosquito
doing? The mosquito will not say "maha prasade govinde" before sucking my blood.
But the mosquito is basically eating. And what happens? The mosquito is eating.
Bum. One blow comes and you know, its food becomes its graveyard. It dies over
there. So like that, the animals live in so much danger, their, economic
necessities, Prabhupada says, are fulfilled under nasty and unpleasant
conditions. So human beings do not have to do like that. Why? Because human
beings have higher responsibility. Srila Prabhupada used the example that a
judge and a clerk are in the same court, but the judge is paid much more than
the clerk. Why? The judge has higher responsibilities. The judge is also
honored, judge is paid more, judge is cared for attentively, the clerk does not
get all that because the judge is having higher responsibilities.

Similarly, he says, that the human beings have to do higher responsibility. That
higher responsibility is spiritual inquiry. So if one does not do the higher
responsibility, then one is not entitled to the privileges. You know, if the
judge does not do the work of a judge, then it is a serious flow in the legal
system.

The humans, when they do not act like humans, when the humans do not pursue
spiritual realisation, which is what they are meant to do, they live
animalistically, then they are being irresponsible in the whole system of
nature. And what is the consequences of irresponsibility? There is suffering.
Human body is a very advanced facility. So this advanced facility is meant for
advanced purpose.

See, if there were a, imagine if there is a very smooth Mercedes Benz, and there
is, let us say, two friends, one friend has been a farmer living in the village,
and the other person is going to the city, become very wealthy, and because they
were close friends, so the old friend from the city decides to give his farmer
friend a gift, and so he comes and brings a Mercedes. When he brings the
Mercedes to his friend, and the farmer does not know any news of the Mercedes.
So when he gets the Mercedes, instead of a tractor, he puts the Mercedes and
starts ploughing the field with the Mercedes.

Now what will happen if he starts ploughing the field? Three things will happen.
First is, the Mercedes will get spoiled, the field will get spoiled and the
farmer gets frustrated. Isn't it? So, the human body is like a Mercedes. Now,
the lower species are like the tractors, or the jogs (?, 42:57), which are used
for ploughing this mission. So the human body is meant to go back on the express
way back to God. So we have got the specy, but all around us, we live in a
culture, where most people do not know about spirituality. They only thing that
they know is eating, sleeping, mating and defending.

So, when we get the human body, based on our current culture, based on our past
stain or lower species, we start using the human body for low, for eating,
sleeping, mating and defending. That is like using a Mercedes for ploughing. So
what happens? As I said, the body gets spoiled. We are, say, eating, sleeping,
mating and defending. We are suffering so much. We do not get sleep properly. We
suffer from starvation. We get diseases, so many diseases. How many animals
suffer from indigestion because of overeating? Human beings suffer from obesity
so much. Why? Because we are misusing the body.

So, most of the diseases that human beings get, are many of the diseases, are
because of the attempt to seek higher pleasures through or the, to seek lower
pleasures through the higher instrument, the higher body. So, there is an
epidemic of sexually transmitted diseases. Why is this there? Because people are
trying to seek more and more pleasure through the body and they cannot get it
because the body's capacity is limited.

So using the human body for animalistic pleasures is like using a Mercedes for
ploughing. So in eating, we suffer. We get obesity and so many diseases because
of obesity which come up. So, well the old saying, which say that you know, what
most people eat, on one third of what people eat, they live, and on the
remaining two third, their doctor lives. So they eat so much more than, because
of eating more, they have to go to the doctor and the doctor survives that way.

So people suffer because of obesity. People suffer because of sexually
transmitted diseases. Why? Because they get into sinful activities. So you know,
AIDS is such a mene, so AIDS is acquired immune deficiency syndrome, actually
AIDS is not just acquired immune deficiency syndrome, it is acquired intelligence
deficiency syndrome. What does intelligence deficiency mean? That actually
people think that sex is just meant for enjoyment, and they engage in sex
indiscriminately. And they get infected by the disease. So there is this
mentality of thinking that human life is just meant for sexual enjoyment,
indiscriminate unlimited sexual enjoyment, that actually is intelligence
deficiency. And that is also acquired. How is it acquired? It is acquired
through the culture. It is is acquired through the TV, the movies, the internet.

So this intelligence deficiency causes us suffering. So when we use the human
body for animalistic activities, the human body suffers. It gets diseases. And
then not only that, what happens is, as I said, the field suffers, field gets
spoiled when the Mercedes is used for ploughing. So similarly, when we human
beings use our advanced technology for trying to enjoy, what happens is we spoil
the environment. How do we spoil the environment? There is a biologist,
Joberson, among many others, who has said that, in nature, there is a perfect
balance.

So every specy contributes to the ecology of the planet. So for example, if the
shrubs, and herbs, and plants die out, then all the herbivores animals will
suffer. If the herbivores animals die out, the carnivores animals will suffer.
So any specy, if it dies, it creates some imbalance in the ecology. But he says,
there is one specy, if that specy dies out, there will be no imbalnce in
ecology. In fact, if that specy dies out, most of the imbalance that is there in
the environment, that will be corrected. Which is that specy? That is human
specy.

So we humans actually, if humans became extinct, most ecological problems,
climate change sort of problems, will be minimised if not completely cured. So
now, isn't this very jolting? It is embarrasing. It is humiliating for human
being. That we humans are considered to be the most intelligent of all species.
Then, how is it that our presence on this planet is only a nuisance for the
planet's ecology? If there were a class, and then in that class, we know one
student is the most intelligent. Then, we would expect that student's
contribution would be the most constructive, not the most destructive.

So how is that when we human beings are the most intelligent among the species
in this planet, why is our contribution to the ecology is destructive? That is
because we are living in an imbalanced way. Now, we human beings do not
contribute to the ecology much at the material level. We are meant to contribute
to the ecology at the spiritual level. Now, all the species, when they come to
the human, then they can become spiritually realised, then they can become
liberated. So we do not have to contribute at the material level to the ecology,
we contribute at the spiritual level, by fulfilling the purpose of the whole
material nature. That is to elevate, educate and liberate the conditioned souls.

So, when we human beings do not do that, when we use our higher intelligence for
seeking lower pleasures, we create more sufferings for ourselves than what it
necessary. What would we create suffering for ourselves, we create suffering for
others. As I said, when a Mercedes is used for ploughing, the Mercedes gets
spoiled, the field gets spoiled, and the driver gets frustrated. So similarly,
when we use the human body for material enjoyment. The human body itself gets
sick and suffers, the ecology suffers, and along with that people get so
frustrated, they get stressed, they get depression, they get into addictions,
and as I said, they commit suicide.

So we can clearly see that using the human body for animalistic purposes is
counter productive. It leads to suffering for ourselves, and suffering for
others. So, Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport that, actually people say
that we have no time for spiritual life. And they say we have to work to feed
the hungry stomach. But, although they are ready to work all day to feed their
hungry stomach, nobody is ready to give them jobs, and they have to suffer. So
what has happened?

We have created an economic system, where people focus only on economics, and
even economics are not taken care of. Why is that? Because we are abusing the
facility that we have been given. See, to understand this point once again,
suppose a student gets into IIT. Now, IIT is the premier institute for education
in India. And all the Indian students aspire to, dream about getting into IIT.
Now, if a student gets into IIT, now in IIT, the student can study well, and as
a bright career, he can go into the biggest companies, and get very bright and
high. You create jobs in the future.

So promising career is head for the person, but if you students gets into IIT,
and after getting into IIT, the student just thinks, ok, where will I get good
food to eat? He is constantly searching all over the campus, and in the nearby
facility where is the best hotel? And the student does not study, the student
does not even go to classes, the student does not perform the experiments, and
flunks at the exam. Now this will be a tragedy. Now, the student has to eat,
eating definitely has to be done, but if the student focuses so much on eating
that does not study. Then what will happen?  Eventually, the student will be
expelled from the College. And then, he will not have a job, and then he will
not be able to eat also.

So what has happened is the student had to go IIT, not to, not with the primary
worry about eating. The primary worry should have been study. And because the
student did not do studies, he has tried to focus on good food to eat.
Eventually what happened? He lost IIT, and then lost the opportunity to eat also
because there is no job available, no career available.

So the human form is like a spiritual IIT for the soul. Even when the soul gets
the body, there are millions and millions of souls in different lower species,
souls who come to the human specy, "su-labhaṁ su-durlabhaṁ", so when we youth
souls come to the human, we come to a premier educational institute. If we get
education over here, by getting this education, we have a bright career, in fact
eternal career. We will go back to the spiritual world, forever liberated from
all material miseries, and eternally happy with Krishna, the life of endless
love. That is the prospect that awaits.

But if we focus here only on eating, sleeping, mating and defending, you know,
people all over the country are eating. The students at IIT also have to eat,
but they do not have to make eating their primary focus. So like that, eating,
sleeping, mating, and defending, something which all species have to do. Even
humans have to do that. But humans do not have to make that their primary focus.
When humans make eating, sleeping, mating and defending their primary focus,
what happens is they are not using the human body's facility properly.

And then, just as student make it expell from IIT, the souls get expelled from
the human body. And then, they do not go back to Godhead, they go back to
doghead. Doghead means, they get the head of a dog again. They already have the
mentality of a dog, they have the intelligence of a dog, and they will go back
to the lower species. So they go back to lower species again, and continue on
cycle of birth and death, get expelled from human form.

And what to speak of future suffering? Even here, when using higher intelligence
for lower purposes, we create bigger troubles for ourselves than what is
necessary.

That is why Srila Prabhupada says this is a terrible civilisation, where people
instead of liberating the soul, are entangling the soul, they are killing the
soul in the sense that they are actually not allowing themselves the opportunity
to make spiritual advancement and experience spiritual happiness.

So now Srila Prabhupada after this analyses, he contrasts, he says, I may decide
that I will put all my energy in material life and I will not spend any time on
spiritual life. So if I just put all my energy in material life, not only will I
not get any things spiritually, but rather, I will not get any things materially
also. I will make things worse for myself materially. Now in contrast with this,
if a person puts even a little energy in spiritual life, and makes little
advancement, that little advancement will permanently be there, it will never be
lost. It will be there life long, not just life long, but eternal asset of that
soul.

So Srila Prabhupada quotes from the Bhagavad Gita in the purport, and he says
that, in 6.41-6.43, it is said that, a person who does a little bit of spiritual
life also, in the next, in the future life, the soul will be born:

        ...
        sucinam srimatam gehe
        yoga-bhrasto 'bhijayate

So, one is born in a wealthy family or in a learned family. So Prabhupada writes
in the purport, so: "By simply attempting to realise God, one is guaranteed
birth in a wealthy or aristocratic family.".

So that means, leave alone succeeding, just attempting, spiritual life itself
brings auspicious result. But then he says "But those who do not even make an
attempt, who want to be covered by illusion, who are too materialistic and too
attached to material enjoyment, must enter into the darkest regions of hell" -
so they are living hellishly now and they will go into hell in future. This is
the misfortune that people have to suffer.

So even the attempt brings success, in fact, the Bhagavad Gita describes a very
interesting trajectory, first it says, if one practices spiritual life, but does
not complete, why? Because the person has many desires to enjoy. Then, Krishna
feels positive about the spiritual seeker, ok, you have material desires to
enjoy, I will take you to heaven, and you can enjoy materially over there, and
exhaust your desires, then you can be born here, and then you can continue on
your spiritual life.

So he describes first:

        prapya punya-krtam lokan
        usitva sasvatih samah
        sucinam srimatam gehe
        yoga-bhrasto 'bhijayate

So in 6.41 in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says, that the person who is lost, who
comes deviated with the spiritual path, such a person goes to heaven and for a
long time. "usitva sasvatih samah", for a long time such a person enjoys in the
heavens, and then he is born in, "sucinam srimatam gehe", so what does this
mean? Even those who fail in spiritual life, or those who do not succeed in
spiritual life, they also enjoy heavenly pleasures. So this is like saying,
somebody appears for an exam. Say, there is an IIT entrance exam, or some
competitive exam interest in there, if it says that, if those who fail in this
exam, they will get free stay in a hill station, similar, for six months with
all facilities already paid for. Then who will not attend for it?

So, if you fail in the exam, you get such a luxurious facility, and what we can
imagine what will happen if somebody succeeds, how much more will be there. So
Srila Prabhupada is making this point that even if those who fail, they get
heavenly enjoyment, and they are born wonderfully in this life. So Srila
Prabhupada is right now talking at the material level of consciousness people,
so even if people do not believe, believe in heavenly enjoyment, and they exist
... (?, 57:00), ok even in this life, a person will be born auspiciously, and
will have a good life in the next life, so why should one not make the attempt
at least?

Those who do not make the attempt also, they are the most unfortunate. They are
"atma hano janah", and they, what happens with? "asuryā nāma te lokā" - They
will go into the lower species. So the overall mood of this verse is that
practice spiritual life, live in harmony with God, live according to isavasya,
do not just live materialistically. That will lead to disaster. Living
materialistically will lead to disaster.

And Prabhupada has a very punching conclusion in this purport, he says: "The
conclusion is that as human beings we are meant not simply for solving economic
problems on a tottering platform, but for solving all the problem of the
material life into which we have been placed by the laws of nature."

So we are meant not simply for solving economic problems on a tottering
platform. What does this mean? That actually, the tottering platform is a
platform of material life. So we are here for some time and after some time we
die, and we leave material existence, we go away. So, actually speaking, on such
a tottering platform, where our existence itself is uncertain, trying to solve
economic problems is actually a lost cause. It does not work. It will not work.

And I have been nominated to several national conferences, so one time I was
there at a UNISCO conference, and the UNISCO head of India division, he was
speaking, and he was telling that after the United Nation was established,
almost 60 years ago, have passed, and millions of millions, billions of dollars
have been spent, and in many many areas, they even have worked very hard to
improve the situation. But he was telling that it is regretable, despite so many
intelligent, sincere, diligent endeavours, in all the areas we have worked on,
whether it is child protection, whether it is marry time law, whether it is
education, whether it is labour rights, actually speaking, the conditions have
only become worse.

The conditions are not improved. What does this indicate? Actually, it indicates
that unfortunately if we just work at the material level to improve things, we
do not improve things, we make them worse. We need higher level of
consciousness. Albert Einstein said that problems cannot be sold at the same
level of consciousness in which they were created. So it is materialism which
has created the problems said, in materialism we cannot solve the problems. We
need spirituality. We need a higher level of consciousness to solve the problems
of life. We are not here talking about ultimate problems of birth, old age,
disease and death. That can only be solved by spirituality, but even the
problems that we face in society today. They are caused by lust, anger, greed,
envy, pride among people, and they cannot be solved at the same level of
materialistic consciousness.

So as devotees, when we practice spiritual life, we are not just doing it
selfishly. We are not just doing it so that we will not have to suffer in hell.
We are practicing spiritual life because that is the most intelligent way we can
create an auspicious future for ourselves, and that is the most intelligent way
by which we can contribute to the good of the world in this life itself, so to
say.

So we are meant for solving all the problems of material life, into which we
have been placed by the laws of the material life. So we make permanent solution
to all the problems of life.

So to summarise, we started the discussion by first talking about who is an
asura, not just a person, not just a form, biological form, but it is a
mentality, and even humans may have demoniac mentality.

Then we discussed atma-ha, killer of the soul.

There, we have elaborately discussed how metaphorical meanings are valid as long
as they do not contradict, or substitute, replace, do away with the literal
meaning. So we discussed how Madhavacharya says that there can be literal
reading, ethical reading and metaphorical reading. And metaphorical reading,
there are many examples of it, Bhaktivinoda Thakur talking about demons in
Krishna lila, Prabhupada talking about the six children of Devaki, Vedanta
Desaki talking about Ravana being like the mind, and Lanka being like the body,
Sita the soul. So this is fine as long as the literal reading is not replaced.

So then we, so atma-ha, logically speaking, the soul cannot be killed, so
literal meaning does not work. Ok, that is why the metaphorical meaning is one
who kills the spiritual awareness of the soul, the spiritual opportunity of the
soul to become liberated from material existence. And this is the meaning which
the Bhagavatam also uses, we discussed the word "nṛ-deham ādyaṁ su-labhaṁ
su-durlabhaṁ".

And then we discussed the concept of how modern society is actually soul killing
society, just killing the soul because it is actually depriving the soul off the
conducive environment for making spiritual enquiry and making spiritual
advancement.

So we discussed all our scientific advancement as simply, they changed the form
of eating, sleeping, mating and defending, not changed the purpose. And we are
suffering even in eating, sleeping, mating and defending. We get so many
digestive diseases, so many people are not able to sleep, so many people live in
fear of others of their own species, so many people suffer from heartbreaks and
because of their sexuality go on haywire, and not being able to satisfy their
desires.

Then we discussed, using a human body for animalistic purposes, we gave these
two examples, one is using Mercedes for ploughing, so the Mercedes gets spoiled,
the field gets spolied, farmer gets frustrated, similarly, our body is getting
spoiled because of using it for eating, sleeping, mating, and defending, we
disussed the statistics about how the humans, they became extinct, there would
be no problem in ecology, in fact most problems would be solved.

We discussed about people comitting suicide also. So, our body is getting
spoiled, the vehicle is getting spoiled, the environment, the field is getting
spoiled, and we are also getting frustrated. We get distressed, depression,
addiction, suicide.

And similarly we discussed the example of a student going to IIT, and instead of
studying, just watering about eating, we get expelled. Similarly, we human
beings, the soul, when it comes to the human body, we are meant to do spiritual
enquiry. If we are just wondering about eating, sleeping, mating, and defending,
we will suffer and we will be expelled from the human body back to the lower
species.

And lastly we discussed that the glory of spiritual life is such that even if we
attempt, there will be auspicious results, so why not at least attempt? And by
attempting to raise our consciousness, not only will we benefit in the next
life, but we will be contributing productively, effectively even in this life to
solve the problems of material existence.

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande hari haribol.
