Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OUHyStcFuAM
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_003_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_01_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&redir_token=5nI2QGbOj2avhyhSyzL8fUlEvNx8MTU0MDAyMTc4MkAxNTM5OTM1Mzgy&v=OUHyStcFuAM

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to our Isopanisad course.

So today we will discuss the mantra one of the Isopanisad. Until now, we have
discussaed the introduction and the invocation.

So before we start discussing mantra one, let us have a look at the overview of
the Isopanisad.

So as the name "Isa", Supreme Lord, Ishvara, the whole Isopanisad is centered on
the Ishvara, the invocation to mantra three, is giving the message live in
harmony with Ishvara.

Then if I want to obey someone, I should know that person. So how do I know the
Ishavara? We can know the Ishvara by spiritual vision. Four to eight talks about
the spiritual vision that enables us to understand Ishvara.

Now, developing the spiritual vision has two parts, it is, first part is
cultivating the proper knowledge, and then developing the right disposition of
the heart.

So nine to eleven talks about cultivating right knowledge, that is right and
wrong avidya for understanding Ishvara.

Then twelve to fourteen talks about right and wrong upasana, for worshipping the
ishvara.

So we have two faculties, the head and the heart, to understand the Supreme Lord
is not just an intellectual exercise. We have to offer both to him. So these two
sections talk about how we offer the head and the heart to the Supreme Lord.

And then fifteen to eighteen talk about prayers to Ishvara to reveal himself. So
it is not just that by applying our head and applying our heart, we can
understand. This is something which we have to do as a part of endeavour to
understand him, but ultimately, it is up to the Supreme Lord to reveal himself,
so we pray to him to reveal himself.

So in this way, the Isopanisad has five sections, very easily we can remember
it, we have to obey the Ishvara, for that we have to know the Ishvara, to know
the Ishvara, we have to cultivate the right vidya, we have to do the right
upasana, and we have to do yacina, we have to pray to get his mercy, by which we
will be able to understand him.

Now, let us look at slide detailed overview of the Isopanisad, first section.
First section is invocation to mantra three. So essentially, this talks about
the isavasya principle. The Isopanisad is also called as the isavasya upanishad,
that is also another name, so what is this isavasya principle?

In a sense, we could say that the first invocation says everything is perfect,
everything is purna, and then the first mantra, which is the beginning of the
Isopanisad, as I told earlier, the invocation is not technically a part of the
Isopanisad, so it tells the principle that everything belongs to the Ishvara. So
the first point in being able to see everything being perfect is to see that
everything belongs to Ishvara.

And then, how living in harmony with it, it refers to the principle, the
isavasya principle, the underlying unifying principle of the Isopanisad, how
living in harmony with it benefits, that is mentioned in mantra two and then in
mantra three, how living in this disharmony with it harms, that is what is
discussed. So the essental message of this whole first section is that we should
live in harmony with Ishvara, with the isavasya principle that centers on the
Ishvara.

So, we discussed yesterday about how everything is perfect, in its own position,
only the Supreme Lord is independently complete, independently perfect,
everything else is, we all are dependently perfect. So now let us look at this
verse, everything belongs to the Ishvara. So let us go to the verse, this is the
mantra:

        isavasyam idam sarvam
        yat kinca jagatyam jagat
        tena tyaktena bhunjitha
        ma grdhah kasya svid dhanam

So "isavasyam", "isavasyam", "avasyam" means he resides in it, he owns it, "vas"
can refer to reside. So the Prabhupada translate is that it is controlled and
owned by the Supreme Lord, so the isa owns and controls. Idam sarvam, the word
idam was used in the previous verse also, in the invocation, so idam, this world
is owned by the Ishvara, it is controlled by the Ishvara. So everything in this
"jagat", all that is animate and inanimate, within the universe is controlled
and owned by him. So the first line is saying "isavasyam" and the second line is
emphasising that, everything in the universe.

Then, "bhunjitha" means actually to enjoy, so the scriptures are not going to
tell us something which will deprive us happiness, even at the material level,
the scriptures ultimately aim to give us spiritual happiness, but even at the
material level, the scriptures do not say we have to give up all happiness.
"bhunjitha", we can enjoy even at the material level, but how? By him, what is
given, we can enjoy our quota. "ma grdhah" means do not enroach upon what is not
your quota. Knowing to whom it belongs. Know that it does not belong to me, it
belongs to the Ishvara, it has been allocated as a quota to somebody else. I
cannot take and enjoy.

So, now, let us look at the purport, so the overview of the purport is here.

The first two paragraphs talk about the glory of the Vedic knowledge. So Srila
Prabhupada, as I said, the book Isopanisad begins from here, so here Srila
Prabhupada uses a brief introduction of the Isopanisad, then

In paragraph three and four, he talks about how the Lord is the proprietor of
everyhing. So, first three-four paragraphs talk about the first two lines of the
verse. Prabhupada is giving an analyse by which we can understand this point.
And then after that, he gives the example ... of how the Lord has allocated
quotas for everyone.

So first he gives the example of a quota from nature, how the animals take their
quota and do not take anything more, and then Prabhupada gives the example of
quota in human position of the earth, how we should be following the quota and
how we are presently not following the quota that has been given to us.

Then after that, in verses, in the paragraphs nine to ten, Srila Prabhupada
talks about within our diet, so the first was about position of natural
resources in terms of land, and here it is natural resources in terms of our
diet, how we need to follow our quota with respect to what we eat.

And then last, he talks about the conclusion of this verse, that "isavasya midam
sarvam", that live according to the isavasya principle, then we will be able to
live properly.

So let us look at this purport now systematically. So the Isopanisad, as I
mentioned, is one of the prominent Upanishads. There are eleven Upanishads which
are considered to be very important among the 108 Upanishads.

1. Isa
2. Kena
3. Katha
4. Prasna
5. Mundaka
6. Mandukya
7. Taittiriya
8. Aitareya
9. Chandogya
10. Brhad-aranyaka
11. Svetasvatara

So, each of these names has a particular significance with respect to the
content. So Prasna for example is centered on a question. Brhad-aranyaka, Brhad
refers to big, so it is relatively speaking compared to other Upanishads, it is
quite large. The Isopanisad is very small actually, 18 mantras. So,
Brhad-aranyaka, comparatively speaking, is much bigger. And Svetasvatara is also
an important Upanishad. These are the eleven principle Upanishads, and
generally,  within the Vedantic circles, the first class I mentioned, the
various schools of thought, they want to establish that their teachings are
based on the Vedas, then they have to comment on these three books, the
Upanishads, the Shruti, they comment on the Upanishads, the Smriti, they comment
generally on the Bhagavad Gita, and then in the Nyaya, they comment on the
Vedanta Sutra.

So Sankaracharya commented on the Prasthana treya, Madhavacharya has commented
on the Prasthana treya, Ramanujacharya commented on the Bhagavad Gita as well as
on the Vedanta Sutra, and one of his prominent commentators commented on the
Upanishads, and then Baladeva Vidyabhusan, in our Gaudiya Vaishnava Sampradaya
has also commented on all the three books.

Now, the Isopanisad being an important Upanishad, has been commented by many
great acharyas, so Madhavacharya has commented, Baladeva Vidhyabhusa has
commented, Bhaktivinoda Thakur has commented, and because such an important
Upanishad, Srila Prabhupada even before he started the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness commented on it and wrote elaborate purports. So in our
study of Isopanisad, we will not discuss too much from the previous acharyas'
commentaries. We want to focus here on Srila Prabhupada's purports. Because we
want to understand Srila Prabhupada's mood and the Isopanisad is having a flow
which Srila Prabhupada develops in a masterly way through his purports and we
look at the internal flow in the Bhagavad Gita much more.

We are looking into the flow of Isopanisad also, occasionaly, I may refer to the
previous acharyas' commentaries for the Isopanisad, but here, our study will
focus primarily on the Bhaktivedanta purports. In the Bhagavad Gita, we will
refer to the previous acharyas' commentaries extensively, and we will try to
understand the flow of the Bhagavad Gita and how they illuminate it, because we
are going step-by-step, in the first books, Isopanisad and Nectar of
Instruction, we will not focus so much on previous acharyas' commentaries,
because we have to learn step by step. So here we will focus primarily on
Bhaktivedanta purports and we will do paragraph-wise division as you have seen
earlier.

And then after that, when we come to Bhagavad Gita, we will go into previous
acharyas' commentaries, at that time, I may take some relevant points from the
previous acharyas to the Isopanisad also, where it is contextually important
with respect to the Bhagavad Gita.

So, now, as I mentioned earlier, the Upanishads are a part of the Vedas. So here
you will see, the slide may not be very clear to you, the important point is
that you can see on top, there is Rig-Veda, Yajurveda, Samaveda, Aihakvaveda.
These are the four Vedas.

Now, these Vedas have been divided into four parts. If you look at the Rigveda,
you will see on the top is Samhita, and each of them has Samhita. So, Samhitas
are the first parts of the Vedas, they are like the primary parts. So there is
Rigveda Samhita, then Yajurveda has Taittiriya Samhita, Kathaka Samhita,
Vajasaneyi Samhita, and then the other Samaveda and Atharvaveda Samhitas have
their own names. Samhita is one part of the Vedas.

The second part is Brahmanas. Now, the word Brahmana is different from the word
Brahmin. Brahmin refers to one particular varana in the varnashram system.
Brahman refers to the aspect of the Absolute Truth, which is considered to be
impersonal. Brahmani generally equated in the brahmayoti, in the way Srila
Prabhupada uses it, but Brahman is a reference to the Absolute Truth in general
and Brahman as it is used over here is one subset of the literature within the
Vedas. So the three words: Brahmin, Brahman and Brahmana.

So here, Satapatha Brahmana, that is a prominent Brahmana literature. So now
here, each of the Vedas have their own Brahmanas. So these are the sections
called Brahmanas. So these are especially meant to be directing, starting the
initiative of the seeker from karma kanda to jnana kanda. From material
religosity towards understanding transcendence.

Then there are aranyakas, aranyaka means, as the word aranya means forest. So
aranyaka means that which is studied in the forest, so there are many in that.
Here we have discussed a few.

And then you will see at the bottom, the Upanishads, so the Aranyakas take
further the metaphysical quest, but the metaphysical quest becomes central in
the Upanishads. The word Upanishad means to sit close by. So generally, the
Upanishads are in the mood of conversations. So the guru and disciple, the seer
and seekers sit together, the seeker at the feet of the seer, and there are
question-answers, and through those question-answers the deepest truth of
existence are revealed for people to understand. Often, the Upanisads speak in
abstruse ways, ways that are difficult to understand because they are primarily
meant for those who would like to to be speculative.

So we will see that in the Isopanisad itself. Now, among the Upanishads, you can
look at the Upanishads there, Aitareya, Kausitaki are a part of Rigveda, now
Yajurveda has two parts, there is the Krishna Yajurveda and Sukla Yajurveda, the
Sukla refers to white, Krishna refers to black. So, in the Sukla Yajurveda, the
last part of the Yajurveda, one of the last chapters, is the Isopanisad, so what
is being written over here is also sequential, in terms of the constitution of
those particular Vedas.

So before the Isopanisad comes in the Yajurveda, Sukla Yajurveda, comes the
Brhadaranyaka Upanishad, and before that, Satapatha Brahmana has come.

So, now, we are going to focus on the Isa Upanisad and the Isa Upanisad it is
described, essentially is the prayers offered by Manu to Yagna avatar, so the
same, similar prayers are described in the Eight Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam and
the verse is also similar. Here it is "isavasya idam sarvam", there it is
"atmavasyam idam sarvam", that is how the prayers that Manu is offering to get
Yagna avatar, they start like that.

So, the Upanishads are revelations that come from the higher reality, but they
are received by sages and they are spoken by the sages, but those are not
considered to be the words of sages, they are considered to be transcendental
sounds and the sages are simply channels for receiving and transmitting that
sound.

So now let us move forward to the purport, so Srila Prabhupada mentions in the
purport that we have four defects and that is why we need apauruseya source of
knowledge, we need transcendental source of knowledge. And that has come down
through the Supreme Lord, and Prabhupada writes that Isopanisad is a part of the
Yajurvedas. That is what I explained.

Now let us move to the next part of the purport, where we will see how the Lord
is the proprietor of everything. So, in general, the concept of proprietorship
fascinates people. The idea that now I want to own land, more land, more and
more land, so there have been great world conquerors, for example Alexander's
idea was I want to be the ruler of the whole earth, or at least how much of the
earth was known at that time. So we all want to be proprietors. And the idea
that God is the proprietor of everything, how do we understand it logically?

Srila Prabhupada gives us scriptural logic for this and he quotes from the
Bhagavad Gita. So Prabhupada quotes from the Bhagavad Gita 7.4 and 7.5, where
Krishna is telling that ... so it is described that earth, water, fire, air,
ether, mind, intelligence and ego, these are apara prakrti, and the soul is the
para prakrti.

So now both of these are the energies of the Supreme Lord. They both belong to
him. So, this is I am speaking right now, Srila Prabhupada would give you the
example that the speech of a person is the energy of that person. So, the speech
comes from that person, and is controlled by that person. If I want to speak
loudly, I speak loudly. If I want to speak softly, I speak softly. So like that,
Prabhupada is saying that the energy belongs to the energetic. Because
everything is in this world is either matter, or spirit or combination of both.

And because both matter and spirit belong to the Supreme Lord, therefore
everything belongs to the Supreme Lord. So Srila Prabhupada is giving a
cross-reference based on another scripture for this. So the Isopanisad
"isavasyam", and Prabhupada uses the cross-reference from the Bhagavad Gita to
substantiate this point, everything belongs to the Supreme Lord.

Now, logically speaking, experientially speaking from our perspective, we may
think that I own this land, this particular house is in my name, fine, it may be
in our name right now, but how long? How long for the few years of our lifetime
and what happens after that? We may say that it will go onto my descendents, my
sons, my daughters, but then, there may be some attack by some other country or
there might be natural devastation, and everything might just be lost. If one
country attacks another country and assaults all the properties, then nobody
will be the owner, so who actually is the owner? So our ownership, because it is
transitory, it is considered to be illusory. It is transitory in the sense that
we have it only for a short amount of time and despite our best efforts, it can
be arbitrarily taken away from us at any time.

So, our proprietorship is illusory in that sense. Not that we do not have
control, but we have limited control, we have partial control. Just like in a
kingdom, the king is the owner of everything, and there may be farmers who are
also subordinate owners. So if the king wants, the king can take the land away
from them. Similarly, actually everything belongs to the Supreme Lord, and in a
sense we can say that we are secondary owners, or we are tenants, we are not
even the owners of our own body, what to speak of the owners of our property. We
are tenants in the body, and just as tenants can be evicted from a house by the
land owner, similarly, we as tenants in the body can be evicted from this body
at any time, when that occurs.

So, we can understand by looking from a long-term perspective how we are not the
proprietors, how the Supreme Lord is the proprietor. Now, somebody may say ok, I
am not the proprietor, but it is nature residing over there, I do not see God
owning it. But where does nature come from? Ultimately, everything has to have a
source. And that source is God. Because that source is God, now atheists may say
that everything has come by chance, but the fundamental problem with this
hypothesis is that it has no support. Things do not come by chance.

The idea that things come by chance is based on a misuse of the word chance.
Now, if a bridge across the river collapses, and the structure engineer says the
bridge collapsed by chance, chance will not be accepted as explanation there,
because the word chance is applicable when there is a pattern of events, which
are likely and there is a certain probability of each of them. So when a person
throws a dice up, and it falls six, at that time, there is a set of
possibilities, and each of them has one sixth probability. So if it falls six,
why did it fall six? By chance. By chance means that there is one sixth
probability of it happening, and why this particular thing happened at this
particular time, why it fell six? That is by chance. But when there is no
pattern of possibilities given, and there is no probability of each of those
possibilities occurring, then to say chance is to just cover up the ignorance.

So just as a structure engineer saying that a bridge, if it collapsed, it was by
chance, that will not be accepted reason, because the structure engineer should
have constructed the bridge in such a way that it should be able to sustain the
natural forces of the elements of nature in terms of whatever problems come up.
So the word chance, by to use as a casual principle, is misleading. And again,
still, even if we say that things came somehow, but where did they originally
come from? Somehow refers to how they are orderly right now, but what is their
origin? So that is a fundamental question. Everything has to come from something
or everything has to come from nothing.

So if everything is coming from nothing, we have no experience of that. Either
in our day-to-day life, nor in the history as far as we know it. Logically,
everything comes from something. So, that something from which everything comes,
is that nothing or is that something? It has to be something. Now, what that
something is is beyond the scope of modern science to know. Scripture tells us
that that is God and that God is Krishna. So, logically what we can prove,
science cannot tell us how everything came about and from where everything came
about. Science may have some speculative theories about both, but both of them
are largely unproven speculations. So now, if everything has not come from
nothing, if everything has come from something, how do we know what that
something is? That we have to turn to scripture for that.

So that something from which everything has come, that something is still owning
and controlling everything. And that something is, the scripture tells is God.
So, logically, we may not be able to prove that Krishna is God, because logic
has its limits. But logically we can establish that everything has to come from
something. And that something is still controlling everything, so that something
is still the owner of everything.

Now when we as devotees use something, we often use the word ICO, in the care
of, it is not that I own this, I am the, it is under my care, Krishna is
interested in my care and I should keep it carefully.

So let us look at the next point now, one example of one's quote in nature. So
ok if everything is owned by God, does that mean that I am not supposed to take
anything? No, we are meant to take and not just we humans, but all living
beings. So Srila Prabhupada gives the example from nature of a cow. Srila
Prabhupada writes the cow for instance uses milk, but she does not drink that
milk. She eats grass and straw and her milk is designated as food for human
beings.

So, every living being has its quote. A lion will not eat grass, even if the
lion is starving, and a cow will not eat flesh. Of course, in modern times,
people are expert at distorting nature, so they may feed within the cow food
flesh sometimes, and that can lead to diseases, like mad cow disease. But in
general, within nature, all beings follow the patterns that are set by nature.
So now some people say actually the cow's milk is meant for the cows, it is not
meant for humans. However, that is not true, because the cow gives more milk
than the calf can drink and be healthy. Now, it may not be happening all the
time right now because the cow is not just a dead machine which produces milk of
a particular quantity. It is not like there is a petrol tank, and we say ok the
petrol tank has much milk, the petrol is there, so it can go to this distance,
this much petrol is there, so it cannot go to this distance.

So we should not think of the cow as a petrol tank or something like that, which
contains this much quantity petrol, or not this quantity petrol. The cow is a
living loving being, it is a person, and when the cow is warmly cared for, when
the cow feels secure, its bodily metabolism works in such a way that it gives
more milk. And we have seen in various devotee communities also, when the cows
are cared for, when the cows were previously not cared for, the milk that they
give increases. So the bodily metabolism works in such a way that the cow
produces abundant milk when they are well taken care of, and at that time, the
milk that the cows give, it is far more than when the calves can healthily
drink. The calf takes some milk initially and after that, the calf is windered,
that means gradually the calf is encouraged to take other food and the remaining
milk is used by humans.

So this is the arrangement of nature. Now, if we keep cows in artificial
conditions, in fearful conditions, in conditions that are unhealthy, then the
cow may not produce so much milk. And when we take what we are doing within our
artificial setup as the standard and try to say that, this is the normal way
things are, and there cow only gives this much milk and therefore the cow's milk
cannot be used by other beings. That is wrong, because our experience is
limited. When cows are kept in natural setting, are offered proper care, are
kept in good health, then we can take abundant milk.

So Prabhupada says such is the arrangement of the Lord. Thus we should be
satisfied. With those things, he has kindly set aside for us.

Now let us look at the example of quota in human position of the earth. So Srila
Prabhupada here talks about communism and capitalism, and before that, we use
the example of our own dwelling. So, now, if I say I am living in a particular
house and this house is mine, but actually, everything that made the house, all
the ingredients came from nature, and because nature is not owned by me, the
ingredients that have come from nature are also not owned by me. And therefore,
these ingredients actually which belong to the Lord, ensure that even what is
made of the ingredients also belongs to the Lord.

Srila Prabhupada uses the example that if a labourer, carpenter, makes something
for us, we provide him the good, the nails, and the carpenter makes a
particular, say, a wooden table for us. Now just because he has manipulated the
ingredients, it does not make him the owner. We provided the ingredients, so we
are the owners. Similarly Prabhupada says that because all the ingredients come
from the Supreme Lord, everything belongs to him. And there are many incidents
when Srila Prabhupada would highlight this point. For example, once he met a
famous industrialist, and he said that, what do you do? He said, I am a glass
producer. Ok, Prabhupada said where does glass come from? So he said, ok, it
comes from ultimately from transformation of nature, it comes from silica, sand,
things like that, where do all that come from? He said that it comes from
nature. Where does all that come from? It comes from Krishna. Therefore, he
says, your factory is not your factory, it is Krishna's factory.

When you are calling it yours, you are a thief, and then the person became
embarassed, and he was trying to sway face, and he said, but Prabhupada, I give
donation also to Krishna. And then Prabhupada smiled and said, ok, then you are
not a big thief, you are a small thief.

So, the idea is all of us, if we do not acknowledge the authority of God, we are
all enroaching on God's property, and therefore we are penalisable, we can be
punished. Now Srila Prabhupada after giving this individual example of
proprietorship, then moves to a global level in the purport, and gives the
example of the battle between the communists and the capitalists. So, this was a
prominent background fear during the post second world war time. So, the cold
war extended from 1945 to 1950 onwards, still on until the end of 1980s when
communism collapsed in the USSR.

So, Srila Prabhupada is giving this example from his period in history of how
people are battling over the world with the assumption that the world belongs to
them. So the communists and capitalists are fighting saying that ok the
communism should be the predominating ideology of the world, or capitalism
should be the predominating ideology of the world. And Srila Prabhupada says in
the purport, men face one another in enmity and snarl just like cats and dogs.
Sri Isopanisad cannot give advice to the cats and dogs. So Prabhupada is being
sarcastic over here. He is saying that people snarl like cats and dogs.

So one country's head announces we will destroy that country. And that country's
head announces we will annihilate this country from the face of the world.

This is basically like cats and dogs. So, now, let us understand this point of
capitalism and communism. So what exactly was the problem with capitalism and
communism? Both were claiming to be right, but both were wrong because both were
Godless. So basically when we see that everything belongs to God. So at that
time, how is this practically implemented, the idea if I say that "isavasya",
everything belongs to God, how is this administered in society?

So, God, Krishna exists in the spiritual realm, then in the human society, there
are four varanas, the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Shudras. The Brahmanas
are not by birth, but by quality. They are spiritually inclined. They study
shastra, they teach shastra, they live shastra, and that is why in the hierarchy
they are shown the closest to Krishna. Those who know Brahma, the spiritual
truth are called Brahmanas, and the highest manifestation of spiritual truth,
the Bhagavad Gita explains that parambrahma is Krishna.

So, 10.12 in the Bhagavad Gita is Arjuna's acknowledgement that Krishna is
parambrahman. So now the Brahmanas who are close that Brahma, close to that
Krishna, they are considered to be Bhudevas. Bhudevas means that they are like
Gods on earth, Bhu is earth, Deva is godly beings. So they are Gods on earth.
Actually, the Brahmanas are so spiritually inclined that they are almost like
anomalies on the earth. They do not seem to belong here. They fix so much on
God, whereas everybody else in this earth is focusing on themselves.

So now, the Brahmanas teach and live shastra, and because the Supreme Lord is
here, the Brahmana is here, and the rest of the world is here. So the Brahmana
is the connection between the Supreme Lord and the rest of the world. And that
connection is made through their teaching and living shastra. So now, the
Brahmanas do not get directly involved with the administration of the world,
they give the principles, but with the practical management that is concerned,
they do not get entangled in that. So that is the responsibility of the
ksatriyas.

So the Ksatriyas focus on the material realm. So, they are rulers of the world,
they do the management, they do the administration. Now, they are also
considered to be special beings. They are called as naradevas. Why naradevas?
Because they are human beings, but they are like Gods, they are considered to be
the representatives of God among human beings. And they use shastra, shastra
means weapons. That means the Brahmanas tell what is the right to shastra, and
people who are intelligent accept that and live accordingly. And now there are
some people who will not live according to what is told in the shastra. They
need to be punished. So there is Shastra. So the Ksatriyas also punish. And the
Ksatriyas then create all the seas and systems, by which the whole of society
can be taken care of. That is why we had the rest of humanity below.

So in this way, God's proprietorship is first and foremost acknowledged by the
Brahmanas. And the Brahmanas acknowledge it, teach it, live it, and they train
the Ksatriyas. The Ksatriyas are the active ruler, they get the honor, they get
the power, but then they publicly and privately remain devoted to God, just like
in Jaganath Ratha Yatra, even today, the king of Jaganath Puri comes and sweeps
the road in front of the cart of Lord Jagannath. So that is a public
demonstration of the subordination of the king to the king of all kings, to the
Supreme Lord. So like that the Ksatriyas, they are the rulers of the world, but
they also, through their actions, tell that God is far greater than me, I am his
servant, and by this everybody also becomes devoted to God.

When the king says that actually nothing belongs to me, everything belongs to
God, I am the caretaker. Then everybody else also follows that exam. So the king
has possessions, possession of the kingdom, but does not think that I am the
owner of this. He thinks that I am the caretaker.

So this was the ideal Vedic system. So when we say everything belongs to God,
that does not mean that we have no responsibilities, or expect nobody to have
property in their own name. The idea is that there has to be an evolution of
Consciousness. By which people do not become possessor or greedy for
accumulating land, but understand things in the proper broader picture.

So, in the Vedic culture, this was the system, so Krishna's will was, thought by
the Brahmanas, was implemented by the Ksatriyas, and in this way the whole
society lived according to the isavasya principle. So looking at it from another
perspective, if we have a pyramid, so God resides at the top of the pyramid, and
all the varanas follow, so Brahamana is nearest to God, and then there are
Ksatriyas, and then there are Vaishya, Shudras and then there are Outcasts. Now,
Outcasts are again not so much by birth, it is by quality. Those who live
without following any regulations that are there for those who are in the
varnashram. Those people are called as Outcasts.

So now let us look at this varnashram system and compare it with capitalism and
communism. So, varnashram acknowledges the Supreme Proprietorship of God.
Communism and capitalism do not acknowledge the proprietorship of God. So now
what does communism do? Communism says ok everything belongs to the people, so
now, because everything belongs to the people, so everything should be
distributed among the people. So what does it do? It imposes artificial material
equality. That means it says that everbody is equal, everybody should have the
same amount of wealth, everybody should have the same amount of prospects, but
then the problem with this is that the talented are not rewarded. Imagine a
class room in which the teacher says, that at the end, everybody gets the same
marks because we want equality in the class.

What will happen by that? The talented will not be rewarded and everybody will
become lazy. The talented will not study, because they will feel we do not get
anything special, and the lazy will stay lazy, because anyway, we are going to
get the marks.

Now, another problem with it is that most people live in scarcity, and so, they
stay satisfied, because the total amount of resources in the world is not such
that, if they are distributed, everybody will become wealthy. Everybody can live
with adequate means, if the resources of the world are distributed properly, but
everybody will not be prosperous. And the bigger problem that comes in communism
is that as a political attire George Orwell said about communism, all people are
equal, but some people are more equal than others. That means there were
administrators who would have more than others, and they would be normal sleeper
prosperous, and allow others are starving.

So what happened is that the exploitative mentality came up in communism and
that sabotaged communism. So although everything belongs to people, but
eventually some people took more and left other people with less. So, Prabhupada
would say spiritual communism where everything belongs to not to the state, but
to God, is the perfection of communism.

Now, let us look at capitalism. So, in capitalism, they say that, ok, to whom
does wealth belong? Whichever person is qualified for the wealth, is intelligent
enough, is industrious enough, that person will get the wealth. And then, when
the person has the wealth, that will determine that person's position and power,
allows wealth to determine position and power. Now, what happens because of this
is? Those who are wealth, they exploit the needy. And there is cut-throat
competition and insecurity because everybody wants to become wealthy, and
everybody is fearful that somebody will assert me, so there is no security over
there, very less security.

And overall capitalism, although the talented are rewarded, but those who are
rewarded often become exploited. And because everybody is greedy for money,
nobody is satisfied, whether it is the poor or the wealthy, everybody being
greedy, everybody stays dissatisfied.

Now, varnashram, it does something wonderful, it integrates absolute spiritual
equality of all people with their relative material diversities. That means,
what does it do? As souls, everybody is equal. As souls, we are all children of
God and all of us have the right to live. So when America became independent,
they made a declarations of rights, that is considered to be a path-breaking
document in the history of humanity. We are all meant to be born free and they
all have the rights to live and to pursue happiness. That is actually principle
accepted in the Vedic culture.

But it is not implemented in an idealistic way. It is implemented in a realistic
way. So what is idealistic and realistic? The idealistic understanding is that
all of us are children of God, all of us are spiritually equal. But the
realistic assessment is also that we are all materially different. So all of us
can best contribute to the overall system that God has created by our respective
talents. So different people...

As everyone is engaged according to their natures, they work diligently and
happily and society gets maximum benefit. So in varnashram, the isavasya
principle is acknowledged, so those who are vaisyas, they have property, the
ksatriyas take taxes, the shudras do menial labour, and they all live
cooperatively because they all understand that actually everything belongs to
the Supreme Lord. And they all work for fulfilling their own spiritual mission
in life, that is to become God realised, while also taking care of the worldly
necessities. So, the principle of isavasya is implemented through the system of
varnashram.

Now, Srila Prabhupada moves forward and discusses in his purport, how we all
need to have the right dietary choices. So, now let us look at diet, example of
quota in human diet. Now, today many people eat non-vegetarian food, and it is
often thought non-vegetarianism is the standard way to eat. But is it actually?
If we look at the object to human anatomy. Now, we do not have jos petruary out
by which we can cut any animals, devour animals, nor we do have sharp nails, so
we cannot kill animals. We have slaughterhouses or butchers specialised to kill
them. And our digestion system is also very similar to that of the vegetarians,
not the non-vegetarians. So, this, I have written a full article about it which
is there on my website. There is the book Higher Taste which talks about.

So overall, we human beings are meant to eat vegetarian food. I will talk about
how help the world through your eating. HELP.

H is health. Our health will be better if we eat vegetarian food.
E, the environment will stay better.
L, life stock, the animals will not be killed if we do not eat meat.
P, and P is poor. Actually, if the land that is used to raise food for animals,
is used instead to grow grains for human beings, we can grow several times more
grains for filling human beings. On an average, a land that is used to feed one
non-vegetarian person can feed anywhere between three to fifteen vegetarian
people.

So in this way, the point is we human beings are meant to eat according to our
quota. And our quota is to eat vegetarian food. So let us look at this a little
bit.

So look at the common objections. Some people say OK, you say that you are going
to be vegetarian, but even plants have life. Aren't you killing plants also? So
don't they feel pain? Yes, they feel pain. But we can look at the differences
between killing animals and killing plants from scientific point of view,
natural point of view, and intuitive point of view. From the scientific point of
view, the plants have a less developed nervous system. That is why they feel
much much lesser pain as compared to animals. And the principle is of any
sanctioned, sensible, sensitive human being is that I should cause as less pain
as possible to others. So the animals will feel so much pain because their
nervous system is developed. The plants will not feel so much pain. That is
scientific reason.

And now natural also is that actually the crops, when grow up, and they are
cultivated, harvested, at that time, if they are not harvested, they will simply
dry and die at that time. Now, the animals are generally not killed when they
are about to die. When they are fleshy, and they can give the maximum flesh,
that is the time when they are killed. So, actually speaking, we will look at
fruits, fruits just fall off from the tree, they are meant for human
consumption, if there are not eaten, they will just dry away. It is not the same
with animals. Animals are often grown in artificial conditions and artificially
factored, and then they are brutally killed when they are often in their prime
of health. So Srila Prabhupada would say that even if some people have to eat
meat, let them wait just for some time. Let the animals die, and then let them
eat their meat, of those animals.

As soon as they die, you can eat their meat. Do not kill the animals, Prabhupada
would say. So from the natural point of view, the killing of animals happens
much much prematurely as compared to the fruits and crops.

And intuitively also, we can see a big difference. When there is harvestation of
the crops, there is jubilant atmosphere, everybody in the festival, the nature
itself seems to be smiling happily. Whereas if you go to a slaughterhouse, the
activity of slaughtering is horrific. The animals are screaming, blood is
everywhere and faces off, those who are slaughtering are also grave and it is a
horrific sight. Any parents, if we tell them, if the school tells, today, we are
going to take your children to see harvesting, no parents will object. But if
the teacher in the school administration says today we are going to take your
children to see a slaughterhouse. Parents, what? We do not want our children to
see such things. Why? Because intuitively you know that there is a difference
between slaughtering animals and the harvesting of crops.

So actually speaking, there is a huge amount of difference in terms of degrees.
And it is all about, that is why vegetarian food is much much preferable. But
Srila Prabhupada's point is much deeper here. Srila Prabhupada's point is not
that we should be vegetarian. Its first point is that we have to eat according
to our quota. And our quota is that we should be vegetarian. So now, some people
may say no we human beings are not meant to be vegetarian because we human
beings have been given canine teeth, and because we have canine teeth, so we are
not herbivores. We are meant to be omnivores. That means, omni means everything.

So herbivores are those who eat herbs, plants, they are vegetarians. Carnivores
are those who eat flesh, like tigers and lions. And omnivores are those who eat
everything. So some people say that human beings are meant to be omnivores
naturally. However, if that were the case, then all our teeth should be canine.
Now, we have only got small canine teeth, and even those canine teeth are a
little underdeveloped. So if a tall meat is not supposed to be a part of our
diet, it is a small part of our diet.

And historically also, most people, they would live on crops and grains, and
fruits, and vegetables, and meat would be a small part. It is only in modern
times that we have massive slaughterhouses with high scientific technology and
the slaughtering of millions of animals per day almost, for the feeding of meat
to people. So if at all people want to eat meat, in the Vedic culture those who
were at a lower level of religion, they were allowed to eat meat, but it was
under regulation. For example, a person who wanted to worship Devi, Kali could
kill a goat and then divide into six parts, take only one, kill only one
namavasyadeva, divide and take one part, give the remaining parts in charity,
and while cutting say the word mamsaha, like as I am, so this I will be.
Mamsaha, that means, as I am now, so I will become like this person.

That means I am slaughtering the goat, in the future the goat will become me,
and I will become the goat, and I will be slaughtered by this goat. So the point
is, it was allowed, but it was regulated, and it was only for the people in the
lower level of religion, towards the higher level of religion, meat eating was
discouraged and even rejected.

So our quota is primarily to eat what the nature has arranged for us and what
God has arranged for us through nature. So what is that that God has arranged?
That is for us, Prabhupada would use the word: be a prasadian. We are not
vegetarian, we are not non-vegetarian. We are prasadian. Now, some people use
the word we are Krishnaterian, now Srila Prabhupada has never used the word
Krishnaterian as far as his written records go. In the Vedabase, we do not see
the word Krishnaterian used by Srila Prabhupada, and it does seem slightly
rasabha, slightly inappropriate because we do not eat Krishna.

Vegetarian means we eat vegetables, non-vegetarian means we eat non-vegeterian
food, so Krishnaterian would be we eat Krishna. But that is not what we do, we
eat Krishna prasad. So proper would be prasaditerian or prasadian. So Srila
Prabhupada has used the word prasadian. So we want to take prasad. Why? Because
the perfection of life is not to just avoid karmic entanglement, less or more it
is to acknowledge and love the Lord. So if we kill animals, there will be more
karmic entanglement, if we do not kill animals, if we only eat vegetarian food,
there will be less karmic entanglement, but still karmic entanglement will be
there at that time also.

So if you want to avoid karmic entanglement, which is the ultimate goal of life,
then we have to acknowledge the Lord. What happens when we acknowledge the Lord?
At that time, we are living in harmony with nature. My dear Lord, you have given
this to me, and I thank you for what you have given, and please accept my
gratitude through the prayers that I am offering, and please let me serve you
with my life.

So actually, almost throughout all the cultures of the world, there is some
ritual, some method by which people at least in the past used to offer
thanksgiving to God. For example Christians have grace, so before taking a meal,
they chant prayers and thank God for the food that they have been given. So,
this is, the point is that to acknowledge and love the Lord. It is not just to
avoid karmic entanglement. So, in the Vedic culture, we just do not thank the
Lord, we offer the food to the Lord. The point of offering the food to the Lord
is to understanding that the Lord is actually the enjoyer, and everything that
is cooked is for his enjoyment and then we take prasad. Krishna says when we do
this, then:

	yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ santo
	mucyante sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ
	bhuñjate te tv aghaṁ pāpā
	ye pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt

In 3.13 in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna say that, when we offer the food to him as
yajna... the reminence of yajna, when we offer the food to the deities and then
we chant the mantra, so through that, we are doing a yajna, by which the food is
being offered to the Lord, and .. what remains when we take that .. so that, so
those who are saintly people like that.. they become free from all sinful
reactions, because Krishna is all pure. When we offer the food to him, by his
Supreme Potency, he purifies that food of all karmic reactions... And that is
how the food that is there, when it is offered to Krishna, it becomes
spiritualised, it becomes filled with Krishna's purifying potency.

So the food that we take as prasad, it is not just karma free, it is bhakti
filled. It is filled with the bhakti of Radharani and all the Vaishnava acaryas
through whom the food has come down to us. When Krishna honors it, it sends it
down. So it purifies us, it elevates us. It enables us to develop love for the
Lord. So we at one level, our goal is to acknowledge the Lord, yes, my dear
Lord, you have given this to me, I am grateful to you, but beyond acknowledging
the Lord, we want to love the Lord. And for the sake of loving the Lord, we want
to purify ourselves of not just the karmic reactions, but purify ourselves even
of the sinful desires that we have.

So the prasadam prayers that we have ... if you look at it, it is not just
simple thanksgiving prayer, my dear Lord, I would die if I had no food, you have
given me this food, I am so grateful to you, no it is a profound prayer, much
much deeper. What it is saying is that I am being dragged here and there by my
senses, and my dear Lord, you by giving me prasad, eternally satisfy and purify
my senses. And I want to devote myself to you.

So the prasadam prayers that we sing are so elevated that they are not just a
thanks for all survival, they are thanks for our purification and elevation.
That is being done through the prasadam. So the point is to acknowledge and love
the Lord.

So I will summarise what we discussed today.

We started by talking about the overview of the Isopanisad, so the Isopanisad
talks about the Ishvara, living in harmony with the Ishvara is the first
section, invocation to mantra three, then cultivate spiritual vision to
understand the Ishvara is mantras four to eight, then nine to eleven is get the
right vidya, twelve to fourteen is get, do the right upasana, and fifteen to
eighteen is pray to the Ishvara so that he will reveal himself.

Then the first section, mantra one tells the isavasya principle, everything
belongs to the Lord.

Second verse tells us how we will benefit if we live according to this
principle.

Third verse tells us how we will be harmed if we do not live according to this
principle.

And within this mantra one, first we discussed how the position of Isopanisad in
the Vedic Canon is the last part of Yajurveda.

And then discussed about how Krishna owns everything and how whatever we have,
within nature, cows follow quota, individually we should follow the quota,
globally also we should follow the quota, varnashram was the way by which
isavasya was implemented within society.

And then how quota system can be implemented in our diet, by not only becoming
vegetarian, but becoming prasadian, by causing minimal pain to others and also
by acknowledging the Lord and loving the Lord.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
