Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l7bxJMIpb7k Audio:
https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=XtDV-NfN1T2KydYOl44x5XpIa8N8MTU0MDEwMjYyMkAxNTQwMDE2MjIy&v=l7bxJMIpb7k&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_018_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_14_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to our Isopanisad course. We discussed mantra thirteen in three
detailed classes. Where we first discussed about demigod worship. Then, we
discussed about Mayavada. And then, we discussed about social service. So, these
three are the s..., alternatives to Krishna that people can choose as objects of
worship. And we discussed how all of them are ultimately futile. Now, the
Isopanisad goes to the next mantra where it talks about how we can balance. Just
because everything is, everything in the material world is temporary, does not
mean it all has to be rejected. It has to be utilised. So, just as mantra eleven
talked about the balance between vidya and avidya. This mantra will talk about
balance between sambhuti and vinaso..., sambhuti and asambhuti. So, here the
word asambhuti does not refer to just temporary material things. It refers to
that which is used for the service of Krishna in the material realm. So, it
refers to knowledge of this world, which ca..., helps us to become fixed in the
service of Krishna, use it in the Krishna service, service of Krishna and go
back to the spiritual world. So, let us look at the mantra. He says mantra
fourteen:

    sambhūtiṁ ca vināśaṁ ca yas tad vedobhayaṁ saha vināśena mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā
    sambhūtyāmṛtam aśnute

So, earlier, the word for, was sambhuti and asambhuti. So, here asambhuti is
ref..., re..., replaced by "vināśaṁ". The two are commonates. They are more or
less equivalent words in terms of that implications. Asambhuti is that which is
temporary. "vināśaṁ" is that which is temporary. So, "yas tad vedobhayaṁ saha",
"veda", "ubhayam", when one knows both of these, when, that person become free
from what? "vināśena mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā", that by knowledge of material world, one
will be able to navigate through the material world, through the ocean of
immortality. "sambhūtyāmṛtam aśnute", by sambhuti one will attain immortality.
So, Srila Prabhupada translates this as:

"One should know perfectly the Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
transcendental name, form, qualities and pastimes, as well as the temporary
material creation with its temporary demigods, men and animals. When one knows
these, he surpasses death and the ephemeral cosmic manifestation with it, and in
the eternal kingdom of God he enjoys his eternal life of bliss and knowledge."

So, Srila Prabhupada translates sambhuti as the Lord along with Nama Rupa Guna
Lila. And then he translates sa..., sa..., "vināśena" as a material creation
with its own variety of living beings.

So, let us look at the purport now. In the purport, Srila Prabhupada basically
talks about, the first two paragraphs is "vināśena". Nothing can make this world
deathless, not even science. When "sambhūtiṁ ca vināśaṁ ca", so Prabhupada's
reasoning in this purport is that this world is temporary. And science also
cannot change the reach out this world. So, then, what can we do? Is there a
realm beyond death? Yes, there is. So, Vedas give us information about the death
filled world and the death free world. The death filled world is this material
world. Death free world is the world beyond. So, Krishna talks about this also
in the Eighth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, very contrast, the temporary and the
material, and encourage Arjuna to strive for the eternal. So, from 8.15 onwards
until 8.22, He talks about contrast. So, 8.15 is:

        duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

Then 8.16 is:

        ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ

Right from Brahma's planet, down to the lowest, all are places of repeated birth
and death. And then He talks about how even Brahman's lifespan ends. And then
from 20 to 22, He talks about the spiritual world. To 8.20, He says:

        paras tasmāt tu bhāvo ’nyo

The another "bhāvaḥ". So, this set of verses, 15 to 22 is illustrating about
Srila Prabhupada is saying over here that the Vedas give information about the
death filled as well as the death free world. Then, "sambhūtyāmṛtam aśnute".
"sambhūtyāmṛtam aśnute" means only by surrender to Krishna can we transcend
death.

So, this is talked about then in a more specific sense in the next verse where
it is, says. We have to give up misconceptions to attain immortality. So, all of
us, we can have various misconceptions. For example, I am the body is a
prominent misconception. I am God is another misconception. So, like that, there
are misconce..., many misconceptions which prevent us from attaining the shelter
of God. So, we have to give up these misconceptions by which we can ultimately
attain immortality. When we attain God, automatically, we attain immortality.

        mām upetya punar janma duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam nāpnuvanti

When we attain Krishna, and He says in 8.15, then we will not come back to this
world. So, attaining mo..., immortality means attaining Krishna, attaining love
for Krishna. And attaining Krishna thereof. So, in this class, we will primarily
focus on understanding how the world, material world with its variety of
timescales for different living beings, is still ultimately mortal. So, we will
look at the concept of time. Because time is a prominent reality in this world.

        kalo 'smi loka-ksaya-krt pravrddho

Krishna says in the Bhagavad Gita, time I am the destroyer of the world. So, let
us look at this. So, before that, Srila Prabhupada talks about the six, he calls
these are six laws of transformation. We discussed this earlier also in our
discussion on mantra eleven that the living things and the non-living things.
The difference is non-living things basically go through three phases: creation,
    deterioration, destruction. Whereas non-living, whereas living things go
    through three additional phases: growth, maintenance, reproduction. Along
    with birth, depro..., deterioration and death. So, now, Srila Prabhupada in
    his purport called these six as the six laws of transformation. Everything
    material has to get transformed through these six things. And because of
    that, because these six things cannot be stopped, therefore, ultimately,
    death cannot be stopped. So, this is how, the, everything in the material
    world is unstoppably, irreversibly moving towards destruction and death.

Let us look at the concept of time now to understand how, what is the
implication of this death. So, now, in today's mainstream society, there is the
Judeo-Christian modern scientific time model. What is that? It is a linear
approach from start to the end. So, for example, they say that, one particular
point, there is a creation of universe. And then from there onwards, there is an
appearance of unicellular organisms. Then, it, now it is all speculative,
           exactly when it happened, how it happened, nobody knows. And then
           after some time, they say there is evolution of human beings. And
           now, after evolution, have we attained the peak or is something else
           going to happen after this? No one knows that. Maybe, the way life is
           going. Maybe, we are going to devolve.  Maybe, we are going to get
           destroyed. So, it is all question. Then, ultimately, the researchers
           also say, no that this res..., this world is not eternal. It is going
           to be destroyed. So, how it is? It is a linear model. Now, there have
           been science religion wars in the west, centered on first the
           Copernican model where the Catholic church based on a model of
           ptolemy, which it had adopted into its own theology, proposed that
           the Sun moves around the Earth. So, ptolemy was a pre Christian Greek
           thinker who had proposed such a model of the universe. And the Bible
           had models adopted. The Bible had thinkers and models, adopted it,
           Christian thinkers. And then when Copernicus opposed to, that was a
           big confrontation. And then Catholic church took a big beating over
           there. Because Galileo's discovery of the telescope, or an invention
           of the telescope and subsequent findings, more or less gave very
           strong empirical evidence for the idea that the Earth is moving
           around the Sun, not the Sun around the Earth. Then after that, there
           was a big confrontation just went on until Darwin's theory of
           evolution. And then, there also, so..., some, religion seem to take a
           beating.

So, we may think that religion and science in the west have been in a state of
conflict for almost four hundred years. However, the Judeo-Christian world view
ha..., and the scientific world view have many similarities. Both are linear.
The Judeo-Christian world view had the idea that all of history is moving
towards a particular time. That time was the coming of Jesus, Center Agustine
wrote, was a prominent Christian thinker after Jesus. And he wrote a series of
books in which he tried to prod history, rewrite, reshape history to fit a
linear model. Where everything, all, all events in history were progressing
towards the appearance of Jesus and after the departure of Jesus, now, all the
events are progressing towards the re..., the return of the Messiah. And when
the Messiah returns, at that time, then heavenly paradise on Earth, and all the
sinners will be cast into hell. So, basically, the Christian idea of the
universe was itself a linear model.

Now, before Jesus, and before Agustine's writings, even in Europe, the Greek and
the Roman model of universe was cyclic.  And we see that la..., most of nature
around us, about us, in us is cyclic. We see, the Sun rises. The Sun sets. The
moon has phases, which keep waxing, waning, waxing, waning. The seasons, summer,
     rainy season, winter, summer, rainy season. That is in India. Other places,
     it might be, you know, might be spring, autumn. The names may be different.
     But it is cyclic. You know, we have morning, afternoon, evening, night,
     morning, afternoon, evening, night. So, basically, all of nature, we see it
     moves around in cycles. So, the, in that sense, the linear view of time, as
     if time were arrow progressing towards some particular point was in a sense
     a Christian idea.

And then science adopted it. And science simply replaced God and Jesus by the
secular God. That is progress. So, evolution theory basically starts from the
idea that in the past everything was regressive. Everything was very simplistic.
There was no life at all in fact. Then, there were microscope organisms. And in
from there, it moved on, moved on, moved on, and then we have human being. We
have a..., animals. And then we have monkeys. And then we have human beings. And
then as the human beings grow, grow, grow, evolve. And then now, we have todays
cellphone using, computer operating, car driving, and all the high-tech emb...,
          emblazoned modern person. So, it, it is actually a very self-serving
          model of history where we have planted ourselves at the top of
          history. That we are like the, we human beings and the modern human
          beings are the pinnacle of evolution. And if you think about it, this
          vision is radically opposed to the Vedic vision. Not only in the terms
          that Vedic vision is cyclic and this vision is linear. But in the
          cyclic Vedic vision, w..., th..., the current brand of humanity is not
          at the top. The current brand of humanity is at the bottom.  There are
          four yugas. Satya Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dwapar Yuga, Kali Yuga. And in
          that Kali Yuga is at the lowest. So, the scientific lo...,  version of
          history, or vision of history. It is actually one version, not a true
          vision. So, that is basically an outgrowth of the Christian idea of
          linear time, but with God replaced by secular concepts, like natural
          selection, and evolution, and progress. Essentially, it is the same
          idea moved forward.

So, as contrasted with that, the Vedic idea is cyclic. Cyclic is, there is
creation, maintenance and annihilation. And then there is creation, maintenance
and annihilation. And once we understand the soul. Then, we understand this goes
on life after life. So, we know that is, what is the basis of the cyclic idea?
We understand that there is a way out of the cycle. Because we know the, above
what you see, above is the spiritual world with, with Goloka Vrindavan at the
top. Then, Vaikuntha is all around it. Then, there is brahmajoti. And below
that, there is a material world. And we see the universe. So, one of the
problems with the cy..., cyclic model is that it appears as if there is no
chance for progress. Because anyway, after morning, there is going to be night
and darkness. Similarly, no matter how much we evolve, after Satya Yuga, there
is going to be Kali Yuga. So, this model seems to le..., leave no room for human
progress. And that is why many western thinkers, they have often thought of the
Vedic literature as very pessimistic and life-denying. However, the Vedic model
does have room for progress, tremendous progress. But that progress is of a
different nature. That is spiritual progress. So, rather than envisioning the
progress in the material realm, as a linear prog..., linear vertical
progression, the Vedic scriptures accept the fact in nature. That at a material
level, what we call progress is basically cyclic. And what is progress now? We
will go down to regress, then again progress. So, in a sense, this vertical is
like a horizontal only. So, it is a wheel here. And it is moving round, and
round, and round. And real progress is not to move towards the top part of the
wheel. Even if one moves to top part, one will have to come back to lower part.
Instead, the progress is get out of the wheel. And there is a spiritual reality,
    where is eternal, where it is eternal.

So, w..., actually, human beings cannot live without the concept of progress. We
all want to improve things. A cow can eat the same grass month after month, year
after year, decade after decade. You know, cow does not think, oh, today, I want
to put some masala in the grass. I may have tasted the same thing for so long.
The cow does not want new delicacies. The cow does not have any conception of
progress. You know, it just does its eating, sleeping, mating, defending. We,
    human beings, have a more evolved conception of life, more developed
    intelligence. And because of that, we want to improve things. So, modern
    society by denying the spiritual dimension of reality, restricts the human
    idea of progress only to the material level. And in a sense, the last five
    centuries, and especially last one and half, two centuries, have seen
    scientific progress at a feverish pace. So, as compared to ten years ago,
    the technology then, and technology now is phenomenally different. And this
    progress cannot be denied.  There is progress. But the, but there is an
    issue with it. Problem with it is that the human intelligence which could
    have been used to come out of the cycle of birth and death has simply been
    used to just go around in cycle of birth and death. So, the, at a material
    level, there might be progress. But at a material level, ultimately, there
    is no progress. Because ultimately, everything is going to be destroyed. So,
    despite so much progress, we still have problems. We have used technology.
    But still, we have stressed people. We have distressed people.  We have
    suicidal people. We have addicted people. So, now, we may be technology
    improved. But psychologically, we have regressed. What to speak of
    spiritually.  We are definitely regressed onwards.

So, the modern idea of progress by restricting our definition of progress to
progress at the material level has, let us, created this imbalance. Because
people have no idea that they can progress at a spiritual level. What does
progress at a spiritual level mean? It means increasing our understanding
philosophically of spiritual reality. And it means increasing our experience of
spiritual rea..., reality through the process of yoga, centered ultimately on
bhakti yoga. So, this enables to experience spiri..., us to experience spiritual
reality. So, when the Isopanisad is starting that both have to balance. What
does it mean? Do whatever is required for maintenance in the cyclic material
world. But then focus on going beyond this world. So, just like, fr..., here
from the material world to the spiritual world, we want to go.

Now, we will try to understand how the material world, things are cycling
ultimately. So, this is, this may seem a little complex at first glance, but we
can start from the top. So, we see there is a life of Brahma. It is gigantic.
So, three point, three hundred eleven trillion years. Now, what is, happens in
that? So the, at the left is creation to destruction on the top. Now, within
that, if we take one kalpa, one kalpa is one day of Brahma. Brahmaji has a year
of 360 days. So, 36000 kalpas is his life time. So, now, we take one kalpa from
there and we expand it. So, one kalpa is 4.32 billion years. So, now, within
tha..., within that, you know, there are 14 manvantaras and 15 sandhyas.
Manvantara is the time duration of one manu. And in-between two manvantaras,
           there is the sandhya. Sandhya is like a joining period. And because
           it is in-between two, so there are 15 sandyas. Now, we take one
           Manvatara and expand it in the next slide, next part of the slide.
           And there we will see that one Manvatara is 306.72 million years.
           That is 71 divya-yugas. And at the beginning and at the end of that,
           there is yuga sandhya. So, juncture, that is 1.728 million years. So,
           describe what is significance of this 1.728. And then, so then, one
           Man..., one Manvantara, there are 71 divya-yugas. One divya-yuga is
           one cycle of Satya Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dwapar Yuga, Kali Yuga, one set
           which starts with Satya Yuga, ends with Kali Yuga. And again begins
           with Satya Yuga.  So, now, this is, divya-yuga is 4.32 million years,
           four yugas combined. In that, there is Satya Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dwapar
           Yuga, and Kali Yuga. And in Kali Yuga, in the five thousand, in the
           four hundred five thousand years. Right now, only five thousand years
           have passed. And that is where we are situated now. So, what is the
           age of Brahmaji now? It is fifty first year, first month, first day.
           Wha..., what does it mean? That actually, when we calculate his life
           from the beginning of the universe. This is the figure that we work
           out. And as we said, the seventh Mantavara, and 28th divya-yuga. This
           is the time when Krishna appears in this world. So, we modern man, as
           compared to the vastness of the universe, we are so small. And we are
           at this insignificant corner in the universe. They are technical
           claims. We just look at this quickly and not read all of it. We just
           look at the figure on the corner that you see.

So, every yuga has its yuga sandhya. Kali Yuga has three lap, 60.000 years,
    360.000 years as central period. And therein, 36.000 years, that run in the
    beginning, 36.000 years at the end. So, they are called as sandhya. And the
    sandhya is actually one twelfth the time of the yuga in which it is. That
    means if the yuga is, you see, it is 432.000 years, then this becomes 36.000
    years.  And both of them together, plus the central period of the yuga, that
    becomes the full time of the year, full time period of the yuga. You know,
    at the end of each manvatara, there is another Sandhya Kaal when, a great
    flood wipes out most life on earth. At the end of the kalpa, all life on
    earth, is destroyed but the planets continue to exist. The souls of
    individuals also continue to exist to be reincarnated in the next daytime of
    Brahma. You know that. So, not all souls are either liberated, definitely
    not. Those souls who remain, they can go to Brahma loka. Now, at the end of
    a life of Brahma, that is Maha-Pralaya. First is called Naimittika, smaller
    Pralaya. The whole universe is destroyed. The point of this is:

        a-brahma-bhuvanal lokah punar avartino 'rjuna

Everything in the world is destroyed. This is, now again, another some
mathematics. Do not bother about the figures. Just understand the principle
here. So, we are calling the termination of Kali-yuga as "K". So, 432.00 years
it is. So, Dwapar-yuga is twice. Treta-yuga is thrice. Satya-yuga is four times.
So, totally, one Mahayuga or divya-yuga becomes 10K. "K" is a plead of
Kali-yuga. And one Manvatara is 710K. You know, each one Manvantara is preceeded
and followed by a Sandhya Kaal. So, therefore, the duration of, the day of
Brahma is calculated to be 1000 Mahayaugas. Now, similarly, about one mate, one
day is 4.32 billion years. One day is 4.32 billions human years because day and
night are together. But they are continuous in that sense they are different.
They keep alternating. And one second is hundred thousand human years. So, this
is, this is how tiny our life is compared to the life of Brahma. So, this is how
the universe is fashioned.

You know, age of the Earth. So, we know that the lower planetary systems are
destroyed when they, so what this means is that since there are, how old is our
Earth? We have to look at six plus one Manvatara. Because there are seven
Manvataras. And there are seven Sandhyas which pass. That way, you can
calculate. And this, of the figure works out to be 1.972949108 billion years.
So, now, similarly, age of the universe, you can calculate out to be, and it
works out to be 155.521972949108 trillion years. So, this is the time duration.

Now, ultimately, all this is from different perspectives how different things
look. So, in one milli..., in millisecond of Brahman, actually our entire life
is coming and going. So, we can see different planets. And we can have different
sizes. And we can have different ideas of whether like maybe there or not. But
actually, our vision is so limited. We have to see through scriptural eyes, then
we will to see properly. So, most of you know the story. So, Bra..., Brahmaji, I
heard that your one second is our one thousand, one hundred thousand years. Yes.
So, and that your dollar is ours hundred thousand dollars. Yes. So, then he says
can I have your one dollar, please? So, what did Brahmaji say? One second, wait
a second my child. So, wait a second is wait for hundred thousand years. So,
  actually speaking, life is s..., so small for us. We know about this.

Lomharsha Rishi, you know, he would have the benediction that his life, one hair
would fall in one Brahma's day and he will die when all of his hair had fallen.
And yet he would individually build a hat for himself. And when his disciple
wanted to beat, have a hat for him, he said, what is the use? I am going to die
so soon. What is the use of wearing a hat? So, you know, his life is so long.
But still, he also feels that his life is temporary. And he wants to live, he
wants to use all the time for self realisation. This how everything in this
world is temporary. No matter how much we try, we cannot change the essential
nature of this world. Now, so actually, our life is not very long. And the
earlier we recognise it, the better it is for us. So, it is said that life takes
off when we understand how soon life takes us off. So, life takes off, when we
understand how soon life takes us off. That, life takes us off means we are here
in the material world in a particular body, but we are not going to live here
for long. Life is going to take us off from this world to another world. And
when we understand, imagine if I have got a car, and with this car, say, I am in
Mumbai and I have to go to Pune. And I have been told that you will have the car
only for two and a half hours. And then I will have to drive very fast if I want
to reach Pune. And I am told if I am not able to reach Pune, then wherever I
have reached, I will have to drop the car over there. Then I have to find
another car, hire another car, and after that only, after I got adequate money.
Then I will be able to move forward by another car. So, then, what will I do?
Then, I will just move straightforward. I know that I will be taken out of this
car after the prescribed time, so let us, let me go as fast as possible so that
I can reach the destination as quickly as I can. But if it happens that I start
fooling around. I see this sight. I go to this hotel. I watch that movie. And
then what will happen? Even before I got to one, one tenth of the distance of
Puna, what, I will be lost in the sense that my car will be taken away. And
nothing will be left with me. So, therefore, what I have to do is, I have to
recognise that I have less time. And therefore, let me drive as fast as
possible. Similarly, in our spiritual life, life takes off when we understand
how soon life takes us off. Takes us off. So, we will be taken off by life from
this car of the body and put in another body. So, recognising the temporary
nature helps us to fix our minds on the eternal. Whatever be our ashram.
Whatever be our situation.

So, now, main part of this verse is that a devotee transcends death. Now, we may
wonder what exactly does it mean for a devotee transcend death. Is it something
that can be logically understood? So, we will discuss it in these three with
phases. Past, present and future. So, we will discuss the reactions that
materialistic people have. And how the reaction of devotees is different. So,
              what is the example that Srila Prabhupada would often give for the
              difference between the death of a devotee and the death of a
              materialist? His favorite example was of akhya, of a kitten. When
              a cat holds a kitten. When a c..., when a, say, his example would
              be that, actually speaking, when a per..., two people may be held.
              But one is held by love. The other is held by, by the fear of
              death. So, in both cases, the holding is there. But the purpose is
              very different. And because the purpose very dest..., different,
              the destination also is going to be very different. So, the c...,
              same cat might appear, but the cat has a kitten in its mouth. And
              the cat has a rat in its mouth. So, both of them feel entirely
              different. So, similarly, Prabhupada would say that for a devotee,
              for a materialistic people, Krish..., person, Krishna comes as
              time. And for a devotee, time comes as Krishna. That means time
              reveals himself as Krishna. So, what does it mean time reveals
              himself as Krishna? That means a devotee is able to return to
              Krishna through time. And that is how a devotee is satisfied. So,
              now, it may happen that a devotee may also feel fearful. How does
              it happen that actually I have become detachment, I have developed
              detachment. So, we have to understand that what "utsahan",
              "niscayad", and "dhairyat" means. So, "utsahan niscayad dhairyat"
              will be discussed later in more detail.

But here, let us focus on how we can beyond the trauma of death through God
consciousness. So, death is something that happens to the body. And as long as
the soul is attached to the body, the soul has to suffer the trauma of death.
Let us see, now, we know that, the Garuda Purana says that when a person dies,
    that person gets chunk, chunk, chunk, what, if the pain is like forty
    thousand scorpion bites. Now, when the scriptures give this kind of figures,
    we have to understand they illus..., they are meant to illustrate a
    particular point. Now, one scorpion bite is so stinging. It can be
    poisonous. It can be extremely painful. So, forty thousand scorpion bites is
    immensely, intolerably, frightingly fearful. So, this way, by understan...,
    by giving a quantification like this, we are impelled. And who wants to in
    the world? Not sure, I know.  So, now, is it precise that everybody let it
    fa..., has exactly face forty thousand scorpion bites pain? No, it depends
    on the person who is attached, and how attached that person is to the body.
    But everybody will have to face the trauma of death. And this trauma is not
    at all pleasant to face. So, people face suffering in three phases. One is
    sorrow about the past. When a person is about to die, at that time, person
    has sorrow about the past. Because actually when a person is about to die,
    everything that he or she has been attached to, that everything is going to
    be ripped away. Not just everything, but also everyone. And everything means
    everything. Even the body is going to be taken away from us. And there can
    be no bereavement greater than that. So, thoughts are caught in the past.
    Why I had built this house. I had this family. I had these children. I had
    this spiritual devo..., whatever. And all these things.  And all of them are
    taken away. So, definitely, at the time of death, there is immense sorow.
    Because one is losing everything that was dear to oneself. And then what
    about the present? That the present, the body is breaking down. If I have
    lung cancer and I am taking treatment. But treatment is not working. Then I
    am coughing constantly. Even when I have to speak. And then I suffer in
    various ways because the body to which I am so attached is falling, is, is
    falling down, is just breaking apart, getting, it is getting self-destroyed
    in many ways, without any terrorist coming to attack to destroy it. Just
    that, the greatest terrorist of time itself comes. And time destroys the
    body. And then, for a materialistic person, in addition to the pain of
    present, there is the fear about future. So, what is the fear about future?
    Because a materialistic person does not know what is going to happen after
    death. So, because the person does not know what is going to be happen after
    death. So, am I going to exist? If I exist, where will I exist? Will I
    suffer? If I suffer, what kind of suffering will I have? None of these
    things are known. And because of that, see, if we, if, if we are just
    staying in a house and we are evicted out of the house, and then we are
    putting above van, and we do not know where the van is going. Is it going to
    take us to lockup hall? Is it going to men..., mental asylum? Is it going to
    take, get us, take a wi..., witness in a court for some disease, for some
    case that we were, we were a witness to. And we refused. Now, none of this
    is known. So because of this, there is, you know, enormous f..., suffering.
    Suffering into pa..., into past detachments. S..., present new challenges,
    because the body is under pain. And the future uncertainties. But for a
    devotee, all these three get transcended.

So, how does it happen for a devotee? Sorrow about the past. Now, a devotee,
    actually gives up all material attachments. And a devotee tries to become
    attached to Krishna. When those devotees are successful in getting attached
    to Krishna, then they actually suffer from the bodily pains at the time of
    death, far far lesser. Because they do not have much emotional attachment to
    the things. Their heart is primarily with Krishna. And because their heart
    is primarily with Krishna. And because their heart is with Krishna, they
    have no lamentation about to, losing the ti..., losing their attachment,
    losing their beloved ones. You see, they certainly love their family
    members, relatives if they are grihastas. They take care of them. They are
    affectionate to them. But they ultimately love them because these are
    Krishna's children. These are Krishna's family members. Then I am a
    caretaker on behalf of Krishna. So, even the relatives and family members,
    they, their presense increases a devotee's devotion and dependence on
    Krishna. And in this way, the devotee does not have much to lose from the
    past. In fact, what a devotee loses is the material body, just source of so
    much misery and so much distraction. So, on one side, the body causes misery
    at a physical level. But even if it is not causing misery at a physical
    level through various diseases, it through essential level keeps alluring us
    and keeps causing distraction to us. So, that is the, about, that is the
    ISKCON desire tree. That is the explanation, sorry, that is the explanation
    about how a materialistic person is suffering. But a devotee is not
    suffering because of the p..., past attachments are lost, are, because the
    devotee does not have any material attachments in the past. All the material
    attachments are spiritualised. Or everything material is used for Krishna's
    service. So, there may be some sorrow because of separation from devotees,
    but then there is the eagerness to be reunited with Krishna and the
    eagerness with Krishna's community of pure devotees in spiritual world.

Now, what about the pain in the present? Is the pain at present there for a
devotee? Actually, when the body breaks down, a devotee may also take treatment.
But there is a difference between a devotee suffering and non-devotee suffering.
For a devotee, the suffering is not exactly a suffering. It is an inconvenience.
If I fall down and I fracture my hand. That is a, that is a trouble for me. But
if I am going out in a vehicle, and the vehicle gets a puncture. The puncture of
the tire of my car and the fracture of my hand are not the same thing. Because
actually, the puncture of the car is out something external to me. But when a
person becomes self-realised or moves towards spiritual advancement and
self-realisation, one understands even this body is external to me. So, in a
sense, the fracture of the hand is not much different from the puncture of the
car. So, Krishna also uses the word:

        yantrarudhani mayaya

"yantrarudhani mayaya" means that this body is like a machine. And because it is
like a machine, so a devotee who sees it as a machine does not get affected when
it is, it starts deteriorating or it has some problems. You know, if the car in
which I am going, has got punctured, naturally, I have to repair it. And it is a
problem. But it is not a suffering. On the sense that there is no emotional
involvement unless I am very attached to it. There is just a physical
inconvenience. So, for a devotee, problems are unavoidable. But suffering is
avoidable. We cannot avoid problems in this world. Things going wrong. Things
are not going according to our will. But the associated miseries that come, they
depend on how much we are emotionally entangled in them, those things. So, to
continue this example. Suppose a person has a car, a brand new car. He is
proudly driving in that car, and then comes to red signal and stops. And
suddenly, tuck, somebody hits the bumper from behind. Aaa. That person screams.
The person feels like, you know, beating that person, and actually, it has a,
    the car's bumper has just mis..., slightly detached. But the person thinks
    that it, my heart has been torn apart. Because my car. My car. My car. So
    that, as so, now, actually, nothing has happened to the person. But because
    of the attachment, a lot has happened in the heart. And the person is
    agonised. You know, suppose that person sells the car away. And now is, say,
    driving another car. And then that old car is with somebody else. And that
    somebody else is driving the car, and then suddenly, a truck comes and tuck,
    hits it severely from behind. And now, it is not just a scratch in the
    bumper. That was actually complete, the back side has become crashed. Now,
    will this person still feel pain? Not really. You know, naturally, there
    are, some human concern will be there if somebody is injured. But beyond
    that, the way it would, the pain would have been there if it had been my
    car, it won't be there. Because the attachment is not there now. That car
    was solved away. That car does not belong to me. Now, my car is here. So,
    therefre, what happens to that car is not such an emotionally turbulent
    thing for me. So, similarly, for a devotee, the body. A, the devotee
    understands that body is given ultimately by Krishna. But it is given
    through material nature. And material nature is actually using the body to
    give me my karmic reactions, good and bad. So, as long as I am attached to
    the body, it is like I am in the car which I am attached to. And a slight
    hit causes me tremendous pain. But as I become detached from the body, then
    the amount of pain and we, decreases. Because the amount of emotional
    entanglement in the body decreases. It is just like for car. It is outside.
    That is hit. Not my car, somebody else's car, a car that I was earlier
    using, is hit. The person does not feel so much trouble or pain.

Similarly, we do not feel so much trouble or pain when the body grows old. This
does not mean that, no, we do not feel any pain at all. We do feel. But it is
more in the nature of inconvenience. Hari Sauri Prabhu writes in his
Transcendental Diary that when Srila Prabhupada was in Mayapur. You know if
other devotees would be there while Prabhupada was taking massage, Prabhupada
would be self-conscious, would be a little bit more conscious and cautious. But
if nobody would be there, then he would not like to s..., talk at that time. He
would just become completely silent, and become internally absorbed. And in the
sense, he would fee..., he said I would feel as if, you know, Prabhupa...,
    Pra..., just like when a person goes to a scenic place, maybe a garden, very
    nice beautiful natural place. And if the person go..., has come in a car,
    the person drops the car off in a garage for you do the overhauling of the
    car. And I am going out for a walk to see the sights in the garden. So, he
    said that, I felt as if the Prabhupada had left his body with me to do some
    overhauling and I wa..., Prabhupada had gone out to see what is happening.
    He had gone, gone out of the dham, to relish the dham at a spiritual level.
    So, Prabhupada would be just lost in an con..., internal absorption of the
    Supreme Lord. So, that is how a pure devotee transcends the body by
    absorption in Krishna. So, because of that, for a devotee, the suffering at
    the physical level is much much lesser. It is there. No doubt. But it is
    much lesser.

So, there are many Prabhus, see, wonderful, Prabhupada disciples who had
departed from this world. And His Holiness Giriraj Maharaja has compiled a book
called Many, "Many Moons" about their life. How they have lived gloriously and
they left gloriously. And we see many of them, they left in such an
extraordinary consciousness, utterly fearless, even to the last minute. So, that
was how they were transcending death for all practical purposes. So, there are
many inspiring stories. I would like to share here the story of Sridhar
Maharaja. But before I do that, let us look at the fear about future. Does a
devotee have fear about the future? Not at all. A devotee welcomes future.
Because the devotee knows that actually I am going to return to Krishna. The
very event that I have been waiting for so long, that is going to happen now.
You know, and devotee looks forward to the future in fact. And that is how the
devotee transcends the fear of death overall. Transcends, transcends the trauma
of death. So at the physical level, a devotee is not going to transcend it.
Everybody has to suffer at a physical level. But by raising the consciousness
above the physical level, one minimises the pain that is there. Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakur gives the example of how, when a woman is married, and is
about to go to the groom's house. Now, she has some uncertainties, some fear.
Because she does not know anybody over there. She does not know her husband. She
does not know her in-laws also. But, so then, there is apprehension. But if that
marriage has been preceded by long courtship. And then she knows her groom very
well. And they are in love with each other. Then, when she has to, she gets
married, at that time, there is no apprehension. There is only anticipation,
    eager anticipation. Because she is going to be reunited, because going to be
    united for life with her beloved. Similarly, he says that for a
    materialistic person, then death means, no what, nothing is known about the
    future. There is appre..., naturally apprehension, regulus. Extreme fear is
    there. But for a devotee, there has been a long courtship. You know, the
    whole process of devotional service is in a sense a courtship. We were
    developing a relationship with, with Krishna. And then, in a sense, for a
    devotee, that is just a take off. But that is not a termination. That is a
    transition. It is a transition from this level of existence to a higher
    level of existence. So, a devotee ei..., looks forward and eagerly. As a, in
    the Jagannath Ashtakam, it is said:

        hara tvaṁ saṁsāraṁ druta-taram asāraṁ sura-pate hara tvaṁ pāpānāṁ
        vitatiṁ aparāṁ yādava-pate

So, my dear Lord, take me out of this samsara. Please t..., free me from the
ocean of sinful reactions that are there and take me back to you. So, as we
said, Sridhar Maharaja. You know, he said some severe liver problems. He was a
dynamic devotee who started preaching, who was introduced to Krishna
Consciousness actually while reading the Isopanisad book itself. He got the book
and he was, li..., liked it very much. And then, he heard from devotees that
Srila Prabhupada wanted a lot of devotees in India to help in the preaching. So,
he came to India. And he lived much of his life in India in helping in the Juhu
temple. And he was a very cheerful, although he was renounced and very devoted
to Krishna. But he was also very cheerful. So, many of the Indians, Indian
ci..., life members, traditional hindus, you know they had the idea of a sadhu
was a very grave, sober person. But Sridhar was always joking and jolly. So,
they gave him the name Jolly Swami. So, he was, throughout his life, very
cheerful. And then, he was told at one time, by a doctor that you, you have got
severe problems with the liver. And you will die in a short way. And then he
thought, ok, that is the will of Krishna, that is, that is, I will keep serving
Krishna. And them somehow, he lived all for over a dozen years.  It was a
miracle how it happened. You know, his, his whole body was collapsing. But he
has lived on, on, on. And then he had kept, kept vigorously traveling and
preaching. And then at one time, when he was in Canada, at that time, the doctor
told, now just your liver is completely broken now. Now, there is not much
chance of any further. So, he decided that he will stay with his disciples and
give them association. And then he will depart there itself.  So, he and
Indradyumna Maharaja were close friends. So, Indradyumna Maharaja was in South
Africa.  He called him. And Indradyumna Maharaja said, no, you should go back to
Mayapur. Now, all your life, you have given yourself to others. Now, it is the
time for you to focus undistractedly on Krishna. And the holy dhamas are meant
just for that. You should... So, then when he, Indradyumna and Sridhar agreed.
And Indradyumna said that, Sridhar Maharaja said that you should come with me.
Then I will, we will go together to Mayapur. He said that ok, we will meet in
London. I will come to London. You also come to London. So, both of them came to
London together. And then they met in London. They were staying in the London
temple at that time before they were about to go to the flight. So, Indradyumna
just came to Sridhar Maharaja's room. And Sridhar Marahaja was taking a bath.
So, he saw that.  His body was discolored. You know, there were different color
patches on his body. It basically looked like the blood was of a different
color. So, he saw it, yeah, what is it? He said actually the blo..., those blood
vessels have gone now. So, all the small vessels have gone. When the big
vessels, blood vessels go, I will go. Just talking causally go as if you know, I
am going somewhere out for a walk or something like that, utterly fearless. And
when they were checking the tickets, just, final baggage.  So, normally, when
American devotees come India, generally come with a round ticket. You know,
co..., arriving at this state, departing at this state. So, then Indradyumna saw
the ticket. Maharaja, your ticket is all wrong. It is just a one way ticket. And
then as he spoke it, he realised.  You know, Sridhar Maharaja is not going back.
He was going to go into Mayapur to leave his body. So, he just checked his
tongue. And Sridhar Marahaja said laughingly, yes, he said, Krishna has given a
one way ticket, back to Godhead:

        yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama paramam mama

So, he just made a joke, joke out of it. And then they went to the airport and
somehow they got into the plane. And the whole effort was very exhausting, you
know, the final stages. So, when he was in the hospital, the pain, even there is
the plane sitting, has, the pain became unbearable. So, Sridhar Maharaja started
moaning slightly. And then he gave some pills to hi..., some pain killing pills
to him, the, but then their hosts came along. Is something wrong? And Sridhar
Maharaja said, until now, just been moaning, he opened his yes, and he just
looked her, he says, there is always something wrong in this material world. And
he started preaching to her about how this world is "duhkhalayam asasvatam".
And he says, the best solution is to get out of this world and to go back to
God. So, yeah, makes sense. She was, she was so affected by the experience, yes,
yes, makes sense. Now, is that what you are going to, what you people are doing?
Sridhar Maharaja looked at Indradyumna's face. Yes, that is exactly what we are
doing. We are getting out of this world and going back to God. He says, ok, very
good. He says, ev..., and then, to the surprise, Indradyumna saw that Sridhar
Maharaja reached out with his week hand, took out a book and gave it to her. If
you want to know more, you can read this book. So, even in last minutes, he was
doing book distribution. She was, ok, say yes, I will come and give a donation.
And she took the book. And then, finally when they reached Calcutta, the
devotees had arranged for a car to take him from Calcutta to Mayapur. So, some
of his leading disciples were there. One of his leading disciple was there in
the car. He was lying down on a strecher on the back side. And Sridhar Maharaja
started speaking as, to his disciple as if he represent all of his disciples. He
told, you know, all of you have assisted me so much in my service to the Srila
Prabhupada. I am forever grateful to you. You know, when I became a sannyasi, I
felt that that I had renounced the whole world. And the joys of family which
most people have, I would not have that. But when all of you came in my life.
Now, I have so many sons and daughters. And you have in so many ways made me
proud. I am grateful to you. Please continue on with whatever Srila Prabhupada
has given you. And he was appreciating the services of that devotee as well
other devotees. So, it was a very intimate loving exchange. And finally, when
they reached Mayapur, at that time, the, it was a morning time when they were
going to reach. So, the Ma..., the, the, the devotees, Mayapur devotees had
cancelled the Bhagavatam class. And it was, that was the time when the GBC
meetings were going on, just before Gaura Purnima. So, they decided that
everybody will be out to welcome Sridhar Maharaja. So, right from the main
Mayapur gate, Mayapur Chandrodaya temple, from Maisis gate and especially the
conch building where the devotees were staying, outside the temple. There were
devotees lined up everywhere. And then when the Sridhar Maharaja reached there
and he saw, you know, there are hundred of devotees there doing kirtan to
welcome him. It was like a warrior who has fought in glorious wars and has come
back home. So, the whole country has come to welcome that warrior for, for the
final, hon..., to honor for whatever service he has done. So, then they took him
inside and then, he went. And he had darshan of the deities. And then finally,
they took him to a room upstairs. And when they took him to, when he, he himself
walked through all the room ups..., to the room upstairs. And finally, the whole
effort was very exhausting. Because he had been in the flight, then in the
train, and then, you know, all the devotees around doing kirtan, walking and
taking darshan of all the three deities. It was too exhausting, so he come,
almost like fell out, unconscious. And because he had a lot of gas in his
stomach because of the liver problems. So, his stomach had also become bloated.
So, he met the devotees, some of the doctor. And doctor came. And doctor started
using stethoscope to see what it is. And Sridhar Maharaja came back to
consciousness. He opened his eyes and looked around. And then he saw all the
devotees looking so grave and somber. He looked at the doctor using stethoscope.
And he said, doctor, is it a boy or a girl? So, even at that time, he was just
so humorous. And this is why he told Indradyumna Maharaja that I have got three
desires. You know. I want to reach Mayapur dham. I want to be there for the
installation of Panca Tattva. And I want to be there for Gaura Purnima. So, by
Krishna, by Sri, Lord Caitanya, by Sri Krishna's mercy, all the three desires
were fulfilled. He was there. He saw the Panca Tattva. Although, he was
physically weak. He was there, try it on the altar in the Panca Tattva
installation, helping in the up..., aarti, participating in the aarti of the
deities. Then, he was there for Gaura Purnima also. So, then, devotees said
Gaura Purnima will be ideal time for him to depart. He said, no, I am praying
to Lord Caitanya that I do not depart at the time of Gaura Purnima. They said
why? See, because I want this to be the festival of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. I
do not want this to be the festival of Sridhar Swami. So, I do not want the
center to shift from the Lord to me. So, even in the last moments, his
consciousness was so selfless.

So, one, I was there in Mayapur at one time, had gone for a camp. He was there. So,
I had gone to meet him along with some other devotees. So, I asked him how he
was feeling. So, he said, you know, the, India has a gas production company,
called ONGC. Oil Natural Gas Corporation. So, he said, there is so much gas in
my stomach that ONGC can set up a plant over here. It will be a profitable
plant. So, I, rather than complaining, I have so much pain and so much disease.
He made a joke out of it. And until last days, he was cheerful hearing
Prabhupada's, Prabhupada's pastimes, inspiring devotees. And then finally, on
Gadadhara Pandit's, on, on, on, on a holy day, he departed from world early
in the morning beholding the beauty form of Radha Madhava, which had been, they
had put in beautiful lamination in his room and the Brahma murti, departed from
the world. And throughout, he was fearless. He just went through death as if it
was nothing to, very, nothing fearless.

So, actually, this is how a devotee can transcend death. This is not just one.
There are many example like this of devotees departing from the world very
gracefully. So, now, what happens by, what, what is happening over here? A
devotee, physically, death is happening. But the devotee has transcended the
pain. Because the consciousness is shifted to a higher reality, fixed on that
higher reality. Some devotees may not depart so gracefully. But how they depart
is not as important as where their consciousness is. If the consciousness they
have cultivated a life time practice of devotional service of redirecting their
consciousness towards Krishna, then the precise meth..., way of transition is
not important as the destination of the transition. They are going to attain
auspicious destination. And all of us can attain the same destination. If we
also practice devotional service systematically. You know, and the glory of the
process of Krishna Consciousness, which Sri Krishna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
Srila Prabhupada had given us is that actually this is some, this has enabled
people all over the world to become purified. Everyone is, as Jayadvaita
Maharaja writes in Vyasa puja offering to Srila Prabhupada that, you know, if a,
if an eminent school, if there is a big exam, a very important exam, say, in
IO..., India, there is an exam called IJE fo getting into IOT. And there are
coaching classes just for this. And the coaching classes are advertised. You
know, so many students from our c..., coaching classes crack the JE. They are,
top the JE. You know, it does not matter of pride for the coaching class. But in
general, we, if we look at the system how it is, these coaching classes which
queued the top, give, give out toppers. Actually, they are taking toppers also.
That means within the coaching classes, if we have to join the coaching classes,
they often have cut-off percentage. Then only these people. People about, you
should have this much merit and then you can join. So what is happening? People
who already have caliber, they are taken in. And then they are trained. And they
are able, they are given, they achieve a lot. But imagine if there would be a
coaching class which says, you know, we will take all failures. You know, if
persons who are barely scrapped to understand the exam, we will takem
them. And that coaching class transforms them into toppers. That would be
something extraordinarily remarkable.

So, he said, Srila Prabhupada has given us Krishna Consciousness sure like that.
Of course, when Srila Prabhupada went to America and preached, there were many
great souls who were seeking spirituality. who were ready to renounce the world
for the sake of spirituality, and seriously seeking God. But many others, there
were also people who had just rejected the world and were in many ways aimless.
They were, they had become hippies. And they were, you know, in situations which
involve breaking all the regular principles. So, Prabhupada took them and from
there he elevated them. And he made them into exalted devotees who lived a life
full of service to Krishna and at the end, they left in remembrance of Krishna.
This is how, this process, "sambhūtyāmṛtam aśnute", this verse description is
actually manifested in the way we see things in ISKCON also. So, a devotee
understands that the scriptures are not just a, ancient book. They are living
reality. And they are lived reality. They are living reality for those who are
living according to it. And they will be lived reality for us if we try to live
according to it.

So, to summarise, we discussed today about how everything in this world is
temporary. And in that connection, we discussed the various timescales. And we
discussed also about the western model of time, which is linear, and the Vedic
model of time which is cyclic. And how that reflects a natu..., Vedic model
reflects a natural reality. And then after discussing figures about Brahmaji and
other deva lifespan. Then we discussed about how materialist suffers at the time
of death because of sorrow at losing all the attachments. Pain because the body
is breaking down. And fear because the future is unknown. A devotee's sorrow is
much lesser because there are no attachments to material things left. The pain
is much lesser because the body is a vehicle, which is, whose breakdown is more
more of an inconvenience than a suffering. And there is no f..., very little
fear because a devotee knows that going to be ultimately reunited with Krishna.

And then we discussed how this has been done by Srila Prabhupada in a, through
his Krishna Consciousness movement where he has got many many moons. Srila
Pra..., many many moons refers to, Janaki Pandit was saying that:

        ekas ca dastan mohantini cataraha sahasrasa

That even one moon is better than a, a hundreds of stars. Because one moon can
illuminate the whole sky. So, Srila Prabhupada used this scene, saying, to say
that I want one glorious disciple. Even that is enough. I do not need hundreds
of namesake disciples. But Prabhupada was saying that Krishna has been so kind
to me that he has given many many moons, given me many illustrious. So, we see
how Srila Prabhupada has taken people from all backgrounds even if they were,
no, a, non-spiritual, anti-spiritual, and elevated them to the highest levels of
spiritual consciousness. Therefore, by demonstrating this verse, "sambhūtyāmṛtam
aśnute".

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande hari haribol.
