Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cMLn6axaH6g
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_009_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_07_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=KHVRo7yZx4V-NyM_TABRmqib4Dl8MTU0MDEwMjMwM0AxNTQwMDE1OTAz&v=cMLn6axaH6g&event=video_description

...course. Today, we will discuss mantra seven. Yesterday, we discussed mantra
six, which talked about equal vision. So let us look at this section first and
then we will go into the mantra. So this is the second section of the Isopanisad
which is talking about understand ishvara by spiritual vision. So in that,
mantras four and five, first talking about how through our normal vision and
normal level of consciousness, ishvara is inconceivable.

And then, before we can understand Ishvara, we need to develop spiritual vision
towards the things, people and events of this world. So, that is the second
section, six, seven, and with this spiritual vision, then we will be able to
apply spiritual vision towards the Supreme Lord. So, this is the last part,
seventh verse of the second subsection within the second section of the
Isopanisad. So let us look at the verse:

        yasmin sarvāṇi bhūtāny
        ātmaivābhūd vijānataḥ
        tatra ko mohaḥ kaḥ śoka
        ekatvam anupaśyataḥ

"yasmin", that person, so this is a continuation of the thread of thoughts from
the previous verse. "yasmin", that person was mentioned in the last verse also.
"sarvāṇi bhūtāny", all living beings, "ātmaivābhūd vijānataḥ", "vijānataḥ" means
to know, know systematically, especially, visesa, vi is the prefix "vijānataḥ",
how does the person know all living beings? "ātmaivābhūd", one sees them at a
spiritual platform, one sees all living beings as spiritual. Now, "tatra ko
mohaḥ kaḥ śoka", for such a person, what is the mohah? What is the soka? What is
the illusion? What is the lamentation? Why there is no, no mohah, lamentation,
because "ekatvam anupaśyataḥ", such a person sees oneness and "anupaśyataḥ", we
discussed the word "anupaśyataḥ" was there in the previous verse also.

        yas tu sarvāṇi bhūtāny
        ātmany evānupaśyati
        sarva-bhūteṣu cātmānaṁ
        tato na vijugupsate

So, "ātmany evānupaśyati", so in both these mantras, the emphasize is on seeing
with knowledge, "anupaśyataḥ". So let us look at the translation:

"One who always sees all living entities as spiritual sparks", "ātmaivābhūd",
now Srila Prabhupada explains what that "ātmaivābhūd", not only the purport, but
also in translation... in quality one with the Lord, becomes a true knower of
things. What, then, can be illusion or anxiety for him? "tatra ko mohaḥ kaḥ
śoka".

Now, the purport in, we divided into five distinct sections with the... The
whole purport is basically an elaboration on ekatvam. Because the word ekatvam
is like a feast for the impersonalist. And the Upanishads are generally
considered to be books that talk about impersonalism. And that is why
the impersonalists use them a lot, however, the Upanishads also talk about
personal features of the Absolute Truth, although they are not the emphasize,
they are talked about.

So, Srila Prabhupada is elaborating on the concept of ekatvam, based on the
broader understanding of the Vedic scriptures. Because here just the word
ekatvam comes, oneness. But what does oneness mean actually?

So, Srila Prabhupada will explain this, firstly, he talks about energy and
energetic, and he uses the example of fire, and heat and light. Then, he uses
that oneness, the energy and energetic are one, but entirely different also.
What is the difference? With respect to drop and ocean. The drop is one in
quality, but is different in quantity.

And then Srila Prabhupada uses the example of how the oneness is actually not
just in quality, but is also in interest. It is inclinations and desires, and
intentions. So he uses the example of family. Every member in the family is
different, but all of them are united in their interest. And in a country, every
citizen is individual, but at the same time, the nation is united as one
cohesive whole. So like that, oneness and interest. Now, when the family is
united together, then the family will be happy. But if every individual wants to
pursue his or her own interest and does not care for others, then the family
will be chaotic.

So, Prabhupada says, similarly, in the spiritual realm also, when everbody
becomes one in interest, then there is enjoyment. And then, that is the point
elaborated in the next paragraph. That is separate interests cause shoka and
moha because lamentation and illusion. And therefore the conclusion is that we
should become one in interest with God. We should do, make the will of God as
our own will.

Now, let us look at these themes one by one.

So, complete realisation of ekatvam has two aspects. First is that we realise
our oneness with the Absolute Truth in quality. Now, when that happens, it
brings detachment. Why? Because when I understand that I am not jarda tattva,
I am not matter, I am citkana, I am spirit, I am conscious beings, then I
understand that the dead matter cannot give me happiness, and temporary things
will only cause me misery because I am eternal. So, when I understand that I am
different from matter, because I am in quality one with the Absolute, aham
brahmasmi, at that time, I become detached from matter. Because now I
understand that matter cannot give me happiness because matter is unconscious,
matter is temporary. I am conscious. I am eternal. I should seek happiness at
the spiritual level, so therefore, realising that I am spiritual, I am in one
quality with the Absolute Truth is desirable, but it is not the complete
realisation.

One subordination in quantity to the Absolute Truth brings humility. So, if I
just think that I am spirit, that will bring pride, especially when I consider
that, oh, all the other people are attached, I am detached, that can bring
pride. But when I understand, yes, I am spirit, but there is a Supreme Spirit.
And I am tiny. I am amsa of that spirit. So subordination in quantity to the
Absolute Truth brings humility.

So, on the impersonal path, the oneness in quality is emphasized that aham
brahmasmi, aham brahmasmi, aham brahmasmi, whereas on the path of devotion, the
subordination in quantity is emphasized. Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Sanatan
Goswami "jivere swarup hoy, krishnera nitya das", that we are the servants of
Krishna is the primary emphasis of the devotees. The devotees also know that we
are not the body, we are the soul. But the soul is not just some formless
spirit. The soul has a real living relationship with the Absolute Truth, and
that relationship is based on love and service. So when we understand that God
is great and I am small, and my smallness is not just at the material level,
even at a spiritual level, I am small. That brings humility.

So, detachment and humility, both are important, but if detachment alone comes
first and that is the primary focus, if the exclusive focus, then the detachment
leads to pride. On other hand, if humility comes first, I am not the enjoyer, I
am the servant, and let me serve, then that service gives a higher taste. And
when that higher taste leads to detachment, that detachment does not bring
pride, because already, the foundation of humility has been established based on
the knowledge that I am the servant of God. We see in the Siksastakam, Caitanya
Mahaprabhu emphasizes this progression when he says in the third verse humility.

        tṛṇād api sunīcena
        taror api sahiṣṇunā
        amāninā mānadena
        kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

So be humbler than a blade of grass, be more tolerant than a tree. These are
examples of humility in classic sense. So he first recommends humility, exalts
humility, and then he talks about detachment.

        na dhanaḿ na janaḿ na sundarīḿ
        kavitāḿ vā jagad-īśa kāmaye
        mama janmani janmanīśvare
        bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi

So, the conclusion of both these verses is advance mean towards devotion. It is
third verse concludes with "kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ", which is advancing towards
the devotion, and fourth concludes with "ahaitukī tvayi".

So, both are talking about progress in devotion, but first humility, then
humility that it brings us closer to Krishna, gives us a higher taste by making
us fixed in our service to Krishna. Then that makes detachment easier. So, the
error of impersonalism is by focusing only on detachment, they become vulnerable
to pride, and the greatest of all pride is, I am God. We will discuss about this
particular aspect of impersonalism, which is called mayavad, later.

But here, our focus is ekatvam, is not in an absolute oneness sense. There are
gradations and there are subtleties over there. Let us look for this ekatvam.

Srila Prabhupada has given the example of fire. So, Jiva Goswami and his
sandharbas analyzes these examples further. So, we know fire and light.
Wherever, fire is there, heat and light will be there. So like that, the fire is
the organic whole, but the fire spreads its influence to heat and light.

Similarly, the Abs... the Supreme Absolute Truth is there, and the Absolute
Truth's influence spreads through heat and light. Now, when we want to talk
about the difference between energy and energetic, for example, yesteday, we
talked about fire illuminates, fire burns, now burning and fire are the
essentially, they are interconnected, but still they are different. Fire burns.
So, if now, in this we do not have the gradation of energies. Its understanding,
although energy and energetic are same, but if there are different distances
between the energies and the energetic, some energies closer, some energies
further, that cannot be understood through the example of fire, and heat or
light.

So Jiva Goswami uses another example to talk about energy and energetic, this
example of son. Now, normally, we use the example of Sun to talk about the three
aspects of the Absolute Truth, the brahman, paramatma and bhagavan, so the all
pervading effulgence is the brahmayoti, the localised or the reflection of the
Sun, different ana..., different places, the analogy is given differently, the
orbit of the Sun, the orb of the Sun, there are the, which were reflected in
many places and many reverse. There is the Sun, but its still reflection
expanded. So like that the Supersoul, one Supreme Lord manifests in many places.

And on the Sun planet, when we enter, and we see the Sun God, there there is
Bhagavan. So that is a normal example that we give. Here the Jiva Goswami is
giving the example not to explain the three aspects of the Absolute Truth, but
he is explaining the various energies of the Absolute Truth. So, let us look at
this example. When we took at the Sun, the Sun God is Krishna. So, now, the Sun
God is a predominating deity of the Sun, and from there onwards, there is
radiance around its orbs. That means the Sun is there, and the effulgence that
comes out, all around. This is very intense which is very close to it. That is
the svarupa shakti.

So, we know that there are, Krishna has three energies: antaranga shakti,
bahiranga shakti, and tatastha shakti. So, internal energy, external energy, and
marginal energy. So, internal energy is spiritual, the external energy is
material, and the marginal energy is also spiritual. All of us souls are the
marginal energy. But we can go towards the bahiranga or antaranga, because our
position is variable, so we are called as marginal energy.

So, now, Jiva Goswami is using the example of Sun to explain these three
energies and their relationship with the Absolute Truth. So that the Sun is
there, the effulgence around the Sun, just close around, not its distant Sun
rays that are going all around. Just around the Sun, there is a blazing
effulgence. That is the Svarupa Shakti.

And then the rays that shoot out from the Sun, and go far away, they are also
coming from the Sun, but they are spreading far. That is the tatastha shakti.

And then, the Sun may be reflected in a river or in a pot, and that is the
bahiranga shakti.

So here, the point of the example is that, although all these three, the
radiance around the Sun, the rays of the Sun, and the reflection, these all
three are, radiance, rays, reflection, all three are coming from the Sun. In
that sense, all three are the energies of the Sun. Although, all three are the
energies, all three do not manifest the Sun's power in the same degree. The
radiance is much much closer to the Sun, whereas the reflection is further away,
and the heat of the Sun, the blaze of the Sun will not be manifested in the
reflection.

So like that, the antaranga shakti is conscious. So the Supreme Consciousness of
the Supreme Absolute Truth is also manifested in antaranga shakti. The Sun ray
also has the heat and the illuminating capacity of the Sun, but that is less.
And as he Sun ray keeps going further and further and further away, then what
will happen is, eventually, it will become cold, and old, and it will perish.

So the potency of the atma to act spiritually becomes lesser and lesser when the
atma becomes more and more distant from the soul. So, that is the tatastha
shakti. Tatastha shakti is coming from the Supreme Lord, but it has a tendency
to go away, and the further it goes away, the more it becomes into material
influence, the less it shows its spiritual.

Now, the reflection in the water of the Sun is also coming from the Sun, but
actually, neither the heat, nor the illuminating capacity of the Sun will be
manifested through the reflection. So therefore here, the jeda tattva, the
matter is talked about. Now, matter also comes from the Absolute Truth, matter
is also energy of the Absolute Truth. Matter does not exhibit consciousness.
Matter is not eternal.

So in this way, the Lord is the source of all energies, yet there are gradations
in His energies. So here, the point is that not only are the energies
non-different from the Lord, but they are also different, not only are they
different from the Lord in one sense, but they are also different internally, 
there are different kindness of energies. So this acintya beda abeda is a very
profound concept, which explains the relationship of the Lord with the Absolute,
or with the world, with various components of the world, with the souls also.

So this is the nature of the Lord and his energies, so again, what are we
talking about over here? Exploring the concept ekatvam. So, there is oneness
because everything ultimately is dependent on the Sun, but still, within the
oneness, there is variety.

So, see the full picture of oneness. Oneness, many people, nowadays, it is a
popular slogan, unity in diversity. Just there, for example, there may be a
nation which has many people from different races, different religions,
different languages, different cultures, and they say, we should all be
united. We want national integration. So unity in diversity is a popular phrase.

And there is importance to unity in diversity, but at the same time, in the
spiritual reality, there is not just unity in diversity, there is also diversity
in unity. What does that mean? That actually, there is material variety, so
there is male, there is female, there is brahmana, there is sudra, there is
wealthy, there is poor, now all this variety is there at the material level. But
beyond that there is unity. Unity is that all of them are souls, and as souls,
all of them are equal. So, from the variety of this world, we come to the unity.
So this is the first step in spiritual realisation. However, beyond that unity,
there is diversity also. What is the diversity? That all those souls, they are
all souls, none of them are whatever their material bodies presently are. But as
souls, they are not entirely just xerox copies of each other, clones of each
other.

Every soul is an individual, and every soul is individually unique, and every
soul has a unique relationship with Krishna. So at the spiritual level, they are
all distinct. So now what is the unity if they are all distinct? They all love
Krishna. They all serve Krishna. And they delight in loving and serving Krishna.
So there is diversity in unity also. So bhakti takes us beyond unity in
diversity to diversity in unity. Let us understand this further.

Prabhupada uses the example of the rasa dance, in this particular purport. And
what is the principle of the rasa dance? All the gopis were united in the sense
that when Krishna called with His flute, all the gopis came to Krishna. They
were united in their love for Krishna. At the same time, every gopi is uniquely
individual and her love for Krishna is uniquely individual. In Krishna's
relationships, every gopi adds a special flavor that is not, that would not be
there if she had not been there. So, Krishna is rasa raja. He is the Lord of
all rasas, and he enjoys rasas in relationship with each gopi. So each gopi has
her own flavor of relationship. So now, for example, in the Tenth Canto, the
chapters 29 to 33 are called as the Rasa Panchadhyay, and they are considered to
be the climax of the Srimad Bhagavatam.

Actually, the Tenth Canto is the face of the Supreme Lord, and the Rasa
Panchadhyay is like the beautiful smile of the Supreme Lord. So, if the Rasa
Panchadgyay is like the smile, within that, the 31st chapter, which is the
gopis' prayers of separation, they are the most intense in their devotional
fervor. And those prayers are started by Sukadeva Goswami with a generic
describer, "sri gopya ucuhu". So uvaca is singular, ucuhu is plural. So, "sri
gopya ucuhu", so the gopis said. So now, is it that when all those prayers are
described, one of those prayers, the famous "tavakha tamrita tapta jivanam",
this is a very famous prayer which talks about how the devotees glorify the
Supreme Lord and they extinguish the blazing fire of material existence.

So, when the gopis are singing these prayers, starting form "jayati te 'dhikam
janmana vrajah". So like that, they recite various prayers. So are all the gopis
actually collectively singing these prayers? Have they all thought of it? Have
they done some rehearsal of all these prayers so that they can all recite in
chorus? No, actually speaking, Jiva Goswami in Gopala-campu, analyses each
prayer, and he describes, based on the knowledge, on the mentality, on the
attitude, the heart of each devotee, he says, this prayer is said by Lita Devi,
this prayer is said Vishaka Devi, this prayer is said by Radharani, this prayer
is said by Campaklata. So he describes that.

But the point is Sukadeva Goswami is describing all the gopis have one common
aspiration. They are all heartbroken in separation from Krishna, and they all
are longing for Krishna to come back, and all the gopis, whatever prayers they
are offering, they are intended to call Krishna back. So, there is that unity.
The unity is that they all love Krishna, they all want Krishna to reappear. But
at the same time, every gopi has her heart, and from her heart's longing comes
forth a prayer, a prayer that begs to Krishna, please come back. So this is a
symphony of love. What symphony? That they are all musical instruments, but
there is a main orchestrator and the, all the instruments come together and
produce a magnificent musical performance. So like that, all the gopis, they are
individuals. So, they are all different, but at the same time, they are one in
their desire to love Krishna, to call to Krishna to appear, and to serve Him and
please Him.

So this is how, in the spiritual realm, there is no just unity in diversity,
there is diversity in unity also. So the gopis are, there is ekatvam. In
what sense? They all love Krishna. They all want to please Krishna. But the
ekatvam is not a barren oneness. The ekatvam is a fertile reciprocation. It is a
rich reciprocation. That is what the Vedic sciptures ultimately lead to.

Now, we may say that where is this given in the Isopanisad? Actually, the
Upanishads are transitional literature. They take people from material forms to
spiritual forms. So, they will hint at the personal aspect. And we will see this
as we go in the last section of the Isopanisad, more clearly. There, we will see
from mantras fourteen to eighteen, how such a personal aspect of the Lord is
invoked, and the Absolute Truth is sought, please reveal your face.

        tat tvaṁ pūṣann apāvṛṇu
        satya-dharmāya dṛṣṭaye

So, "mukham", please show your face, please show your true nature, please remove
the covering. So, that is actually talking about something very deep. And what
is that deep thing being talked about? That is that the Lord has a personal
form. But that personal form is not talked about in the Upanishads. So, Srila
Prabhupada is giving us the full understanding of ekatvam, based on not just
what the Upanishads are talking about, but based on what the full body of Vedic
literatures are talking about. Now, let us move forward.

So, here Srila Prabhupada hints at the example of the river, the drop and the
ocean. So this, he says that the drop is one in quality. The drop is different
in quantity. So the impersonalists often take this example and they say that,
ok, there is, they take the ocean metaphor, and they use it normally for the
river. So when the river goes into the ocean, the river merges into the ocean,
and like that all of us have to go to the Absolute Truth and we merge into the
Absolute Truth.

So this is also a very visually evocative metaphor. We can imagine a river
rushing down and entering with the river flowing. So people think that this is
the goal of the, goal of spiritual life that we have to merge into the Absolute
Truth. However, this example of river going to the ocean, it does not just talk
about merging. It actually talks about meeting. So, there is an aspect of this
metaphor that is completely neglected by the impersonalists. And that aspect is
talked about in the Vedic literature repeatedly, especially in the bhakti
literature. That aspect is the flow aspect.

So the devotees talk about the let my heart flow towards Krishna. So, actually
this metaphor, the same river-ocean metaphor comes twice in the Srimad
Bhagavatam. Once it comes in 3.29.11, wherein the Lord is describing the
characteristics of His devotees. And second time, it comes in 1.8.42, where the
devotee is calling out to the Lord, and the devotee is praying to the Lord, my
dear Lord, please allow me to love you.

So let us look at these two metaphors, these two expressions. So this is
3.29.11. Here, Kapila Deva is instructing his mother Deva Huti and he is
describing the characteristics of his devotees, and he says:

        mad-guṇa-śruti-mātreṇa
        mayi sarva-guhāśaye
        mano-gatir avicchinnā
        yathā gaṅgāmbhaso ’mbudhau

So, "yathā gaṅgāmbhaso ’mbudhau", so "gaṅgāmbhaso", is a water of Ganga,
"’mbudhau", moves towards the ocean, similarly, when my devotees hear about my
glories, "mad-guṇa-śruti-mātreṇa mayi sarva-guhāśaye", they hear about me and I
am in their heart, so what happens? Their consciousness is drawn towards Me.
"mano-gatir avicchinnā", without any distraction, without any obstacles, just as
a river flows towards the ocean, what flows? They said that the mind of the
devotee flows. "mano-gatir avicchinnā", it is not that the devotee merges, so
Lord, Lord is saying, he is describing his pure devotees and glorifying them
that their consciousness flows towards Me, just as a river flows towards the ocean.

Now, the same example, this is from the Lord's perspective. Now, Kunti Maharani
also prays the same thing from her perspective.

    tvayi me 'nanya-viṣayā
    matir madhu-pate 'sakṛt
    ratim udvahatād addhā
    gaṅgevaugham udanvati

So 1.8.42, she says that, my dear Lord, let my consciousness flow towards you,
just as the Ganga flows towards the ocean. So now, in this 1.8.42 purport,
Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakur uses a very beautiful insight. He says that when
a river flows towards the ocean, two things happen that when the river flows
towards the ocean, the river holds nothing back and nothing holds the river
back. What does it mean? And he says, similarly, a devotee holds nothing back
and the nothing holds a devotee back.

So, a river holds nothing back means that when the river is flowing towards the
ocean, the river does not think, oh, I want to keep some water for myself. The
river lets all its water flow towards the ocean.

And similarly, when the river is flowing towards the ocean, nothing holds the
river back means there may be some obstacles, so the river will go down, below
the obstacle, around the obstacle to the right, around the obstacle to the left,
above the obstacle, the river will somehow or the other find its way beyond the
obstacle. Sometimes, it may just go right through the obstacle, pushing it
apart, eroding it, barrowing it, whatever way.

So, just as a river moves towards the ocean, similarly, the devotee, actually,
the devotee's mind goes towards Krishna, so a devotee holds nothing back, and
nothing holds a devotee back. So nothing holds a devotee back refers to external
obstacles on the path of devotional service, and the devotee holds nothing back
refers to the internal commitment to devotional service.

So nothing holds a devotee back mean no matter how difficult a situation may be,
the devotee finds some way to keep serving Krishna, some way to keep remembering
Krishna. So sometimes, a devotee may get some accident because of which, the
devotee may not be able to serve the Lord physically, the devotee will find some
other service. Even if I am not physically steady, let me find some other way by
which I can serve Krishna. Sometimes, a devotee may not be able to speak. The
throat may get spoiled. The devotee may not be able to chant. The devotee can
chant in the mind. The devotee can think of the deities, we can even do manas
puja, even if we are not able to physically do services, we can do manas puja,
and keep serving Krishna that way. So, nothing holds a devotee back.

There are many occasions when devotees were put in very difficult situations.
Because of their determination to practice devotional service, in places, where
the culture and the people were hostile to the practice of devotional service.
So once the devotees were distributing books in America and in a particular
city, there were the major and there was the sheriff. And the major had given
permission to the devotees to distribute books. But the major and sheriff had a
cross with each other. And the major had gone outstation. And the sheriff was
there. And when the police reported these devotees are dancing, and singing,
and they are creating a nuisance. Then the sheriff said arrest them. And the
devotees were arrested and put in jail just for distributing books.

And then when they were in the jail, actually, it was a Sunday morning, and they
were planning to go back to the temple and there was going to be Sunday feast.
And they were dancing, singing, and feasting and fast, all that was there. So,
what the devotees dis..., decided? That they were so crestful initially that we
will not be able to go back to the temple. We have been away from the temple for
so long. But then, one of them got the idea that actually, Krishna accepts manas
puja also. So, let us have a Sunday feast in the jail. We will have one manas
Sunday feast. So, all the devotees decided, they say, I will, I will cook puris.
I will cook pakoras. I will cook pulaba. I will cook halava. I will cook paneer
sabji. And all the devotees started, got busy cooking. And they were, became so
busy in their mind, they were planning, and preparing, and praying. Now, let
this cook, let this cook deliciously. And all of them were busy cooking and
then, they decided, in the jail itself, they had a real Sunday feast. A senior
devotee gave class over there. And after that, they had real kirtans, and then
when they sat down for feasting. So, all the devotees sat down, and some
devotees were serving. And when the devotees had Sunday feast over there. You
know, normally, the devotees, when we have Sunday feast, the the, items that we
like there are sometimes too less, or even if we like them, and there are a lot
also, we cannot eat them enough. So, devotees said this was the best Sunday
feast we have ever had. No item was in shortage and nobody suffered from
digestive problems. You just... So, now, the devotees were jubilantly doing this
sort of manas Sunday feast. And they were having and the guards present there
were watching. You know, what are these devotees doing? They look like crazy.
But actually, they are happy. He said, they are inside the jail. We are outside.
And we are not as happy as they are. What are they doing?

And then, as they were doing like this, the temple president of the temple
contacted the major, and got the per..., got the permission, and then they got a
letter. And the letter came, and the devotees were released from the jail. And
they came out of the jail. And they went to the Sunday programme. And they had a
real feast there also. So, the point is that a de..., nothing holds a devotee
back. A devotee can keep serving Krishna in any and every situation. Srila
Prabhupada, even when he was old, so old and so sickly that practically his
voice was not audible, but still his consciousness was clear. He was thinking of
Krishna, and the devotees were keeping a dictaphone right next to his lips. And
he was dictating. And the, he was giving his commentary on the Srimad
Bhagavatam. So, this is the glory of an exalted devotee. Nothing holds a devotee
back. And similarly, a devotee holds nothing back. That means, just as a river
does not hold any water back. All its water, it offers to the ocean. Similarly,
a devotee offers everything to Krishna. So, all the heart:

        tad-buddhayas tad-atmanas
        tan-nisthas tat-parayanah

In 5.17, in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna describes how one's "buddha", one's
faith, one's mind, one's goal, "tad-atmanas tan-nisthas tat-parayanah",
everything one who offers, then one moves swiftly and quickly on the path back
to Godhead. So, in this way, this is actually the essence of this river ocean
metaphor. It is not merging. But it is meeting. And meeting in a way that
nothing can stop. In fact, the same example of river and ocean, is used even by
the jnani brahman patnis. In the Tenth Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, in Chapter
Twenty-Three, the jnani brahman patnis, when they come to Krishna. And Krishna
tells them, please go back. I am happy that you have come, and you have offered
this food. I accept it. Now, you can go back.

So, Kavi Karnapura in Ananda Vrindavana Champu, has elaborated on this pastime
based on his divine realisations. And he says that the yajna brahman patnis
described to Krishna, Krishna, you, you are telling us to go back. How can we go
back? When a river leaves the mountain and comes to the ocean, how can the river
go back to the mountain? The river must stay with the mountain... the river must
stay with the ocean. The river cannot go back. And Krishna is mood by the
devotion. And He says, yes, you do not have to go back. Your hearts will always
be with me. You have come here. You have offered your hearts. You have offered
your whole being to me. I accept your hearts. But because you are already
married. Because you are brahman patnis, I request you that I have accepted your
hearts offering of love, but the way I want you to serve me is by going back and
doing your duties. So, actually, you are not going back. The river that has come
to the ocean, the meeting has happened. And the meeting is forever. Meeting of
the hearts is going to be forever. But as, because of social obligation, you go
and continue your duties. And I will be there with you in your heart.

So, the point is that "ekatvam" is not simplistic that we just go into the, the
river goes into the ocean, merges into the ocean and everything is finished. No,
the "ekatvam" is dynamic. It is constantly. The, it is not a merging, but a
meeting. The, when two people are in love. They are two, and yet they are one.
They are two in as individuals, but they are one in heart. They both want to
please each other. They both want to have a constant meeting of the hearts. So,
that is the essence of the "ekatvam" metaphor. And this is the meaning which is
revealed in the Srimad Bhagavatam and in the Puranas which actually clarify and
illuminate what is being taught in the Upanishad over here.

So, now, let us look at the verse further. So, the verse is essentially talking
about anupasyati. So what is anupasyati? So, 

        tatra ko mohaḥ kaḥ śoka
        ekatvam anupaśyataḥ

One per..., person sees oneness. So, what is that oneness? Yesterday, we
discussed about how oneness is with respect to the potentiality of the students.
Not the qualification of the teacher. So, now, this "anupaśyataḥ", so, actually,
if somebody just had to see "ekatvam", to see oneness is not difficult.
Prabhupada gives the example that when there is dark, we see no..., nothing, and
everything seems to be one at that time. You know, if there is a dark over here,
I would see nothing. And I would see everything as one. But when light comes,
then I see, oh. There is a wall here. There is a computer here. There is a chair
here. So, then, I understand, oh, there is variety also. So, actually, if one
just has to see oneness, that is possible at a spiritual level. That is actually
the preliminary spiritual vision. But "anupaśyataḥ" means one sees that there is
a variety within the oneness also. So, "ekatvam anupaśyataḥ", not just "ekatvam
paśyataḥ", "ekatvam anupaśyataḥ".

So, now, we will look at the way, diff..., there can be different objects, and
there can be different visions towards that object. And this brings about
different consequences. So, let us look at this. So, there is the, object, which
will be material or spiritual. There is vision, which will be material or
spiritual. And depending on the particular combination, there will be a
particular consequence and we will give example of that. So, firstly, the object
is material and the vision is material. Then, the consequences that there is
bondage. So, for example:

        pomsahastria mituni bhavametam

A man sees a woman and he sees not a soul, but he sees just to, good-looking
form. A woman sees a man, and she does not see a soul. She just sees a male
form. To, then what happens in such situations? A man sees a woman as a sex
machine. A woman sees a man as an ATM machine. And both of them are material
visions. So what it leads to is, "tudaja granti mahu", it leads to bondage. So,
people get attracted to sense objects. So, with the material object and the
material vision, that leads to bondage. And that is what is predominantly there
for most people.

Now, the second possibility is that, the object is material and we have a
spiritual vision to that. And then with such a vision, there is purification.
Utility is the principle. So, for example, now, we have a laptop here. We have a
projector. We have various technological devices. The technological devices
themselves are material. But we see them as the energy of Krishna. And we see
them as meant for Krishna's service. So, when the object is spiritual. Object is
seen with a spiritual vision, then it can be engaged in Krishna's service. And
by engaging it in Krishna's service, there is purification that happens. So,
underlying point is, utility is the principle for this. So, Srila Prabhupada
demonstrated this in a very graphic way. You know, Srila Prabhupada started the
first ISKCON center in New York. And then, he went to San Francisco. And Srila
Prabhupada was always thinking of newer and newer ways to engage devotees in
Krishna's service. Srila Prabhupada writes in one purport that actually, this
Krishna Consciousness movement was practically invi..., invented by me. Invented
means what? Not that he, he wrote the Bhagavad Gita. No. The Bhagavad Gita was
there. The Vedic scriptures were there. But how to get people to practice
devotional service. How to engage them practically. Rupa Goswami says that:

        yena kena prakarena manah Krishna nivesayet

Somehow or the other, think of Krishna. That is, the Padma Purana also says. But
how to get the, people who have been, whose only regulative principle was to
break the regulative principles? So, how to get such people to actually start
practicing devotional service, to think of Krishna? So, it is not easy. So, for
such people, Prabhupada taught of many ways. And one of the ways was the
brilliant Ratha Yatra festival that he came up with. So, Ratha Yatra festival
became immensely popular. Because the hippies at that time, they liked to dance
and sing, and do wild things. And their, the wildest of all things was to dance
in front of a st..., dance on the right in a public street, and they were just
pulling a chart, and pulling a chariot, and having fun.

So, earlier, they would have done, they would have been arrested. But when Srila
Prabhupada started Ratha Yatra, the hippies were dancing and singing on the
streets, and they were escorted by the police. Cause it was a cultural festival
coming from an ancient tradition. So, this was Srila Prabhupada's genius. But
how did the Ratha Yatra festival start? You know, one day, in San Francisco, in
the balcony of the temple, quarter where he was staying, Srila Prabhupada was
chanting and walking along, and he saw a truck, a flatbed truck. So, all of us
have seen flatbed trucks many time. But Srila Prabhupada saw the flatbed truck
and he saw that as a pedestal for putting Jagannath, Baladeva, Subhadra. And he
thought if you put Jagannath, Baladeva, Subhadra here, and then tire and leget
people to pull it. And that way, we can have a Ratha, festi..., Ratha Yatra
festival. And then from that time onwards, that is how Jagannath fes..., Ratha
Yatra festival started. So, this is a material object, but Srila Prabhupada
said, saw it with a spiritual vision. And that led to the purification for so
many people like that.

Now, third possibility is that there is a spiritual object and there is a
material vision to that. So, this, if this happens, then there is aparadha.
There is offense. So:

        arche vishnu siladi

There is a famous verse in the Padma Purana, which says that if we see the
deity to be stone, then that is naraki buddhi. That is hellish mentality.
That is offensive. It will lead to suffering. So, actually speaking, what
happens when we see the deity as material. Somebody may say that, but the deity
is made of material elements. How can I not see the deity as material? Yes, the
deity is ma..., made of material elements, but the deity is no longer material.
Because Krishna has manifested over there. So, here, the point is, to redu...,
to not see the transcendental element at all, and to reduce that which is
transcendental to the material platform, that is an offensive vision. So,
because of this offensive vision, many people get misled. And when they get
misled, they commit aparadha and they suffer. So, to see the deity materially,
is to miss out on the enormous spiritual potential that is available for
spiri..., devotional advancement, which can be got by worshiping the deity.

So, essential..., the essence of offense, to see something, is to see something
spiritual materially. So, for example, some people may say that actually, my
spiritual master is more advanced. Why? Because my spiritual master was born
from a brahman family. And your spiritual master was born in a, a low caste
family. Now, this is an offensive vision. "vaishnave jati buddhi", we should not
see the jati of a vaishnava. Actually, devotees, especially the, advanced
devotees, who have now become advanced enough to be spiritual masters, they
ac..., practice devotional service for decades, and to consider them as lower or
higher just based on their background, which was long long time ago, that is
an erroneous vision, seriously erroneous vision. So, we are not, yes, they may
have skin of a particular color. They may have come from a particular
background. But that is only the externel shell. The heart is a heart that has
been sold out to Krishna for decades. And if we do not see that devotional side.
When we just see the external material side, then we are committing a serious
mistake.

So, to not see the material, to not see the spiritual, to see the material, and
to highlight the material to the exclusion of the spiritual, that is offensive.
So, by offense, at best, we miss out on spiritual ad..., advancement. So, if I
do not see the deity as spiritual, what will happen? I will not pray to the
deity. I will not get the blessings of the deity to same extent. And then I will
miss out on spiritual advancement. At worst, if I see the deity as material, I
can commit grievances. And that will lead to further suffering.

So, actually, the spiritual objects should be seen with spiritual vision. So,
that means, when we look at the deity, we see the deity as Krishna. So, now,
what will happen by this? This will also lead to purification. And it will even
lead to ecstasy. So, for us, in the initial stages of bhakti, it leads to
purification. And in the advanced stages, it leads to ecstasy. That means, so,
if we move forward, purification means, say, for example, when you go and take
darshan of the deities. So, when we take darshan of the deities, it is said that
we should offer obeisances. Actually, for the advanced devotees, we do not have
the ru..., rule that they should offer obeisances. Because when their, my
beloved Lord is appearing, and as soon as the Lord a..., appears, the curtain
opens because of their love for Krishna, they faint in ecstasy and fold on. That
is the extent of their love. Just the beholding of the deity, which
non-different from Krishna, causes them to faint in ecstasy. So for us, we do
not f..., faint and fall, but at least, we should fall ourselves, at least bow
down to the deity. So, the idea is that for us, by seeing the spiritual objects
spiritually, we will be able to make spiritual advancement. We will get, become
purified.

So, now, when we say, there is, there is spiritual and there is material. There
is the spiritual vision towards both. So, is the deity material? No, the deity
is not material. The deity is actually spiritual. Because Krishna has manifested
through the deity. And we see the spiritual object spiritually. Then, we lead
to, that leads to, there is so much spiritual potency in that. And we make
s..., rapid spiritual advancement by this.

So  "anupaśyataḥ", "ekatvam anupaśyataḥ" means what? To see everything
spiritually. To see everything spiritually means, now, if we look at this table,
we will see that the material vision creates problems. The material vision
towards material objects creates bondage because we think they are for my
enjoyment. And material vision towards spiritual objects also creates problems,
creates suffering because we commit aparadha. That means we see that this is
just material, and we disrespect it. So, in both cases, the material vision
creates problems. So, it is the spiritual vision that is recommended. And the
spiritual vision towards material objects and spiritual vision towards spiritual
objects leads to purification, leads to elevation. So, now, spiritual vision
towards spiritual objects does not mean a simplistic whitewash of everything as
spiritual. You know, it is not that we get everything as spiritual. No. The
philosophy begins first with differentiating. This is matter. This is spirit. I
am not the body. I am the soul.

Before Srila Prabhupada went to America, there were many spiritual teachers who
went. And they often emphasized "aham brahmasmi". And even among the hippies,
"aham brahmasmi" was a popular saying. "aham brahmasmi". "aham brahmasmi". I am
spirit. I am spirit. I am spirit. But Srila Prabhupada was the first spiritual
teacher who categorically emphasized the practical application of "aham
brahmasmi". So, he says "aham brahmasmi" means you are not the body. And
therefore, give up sense gratification. This was something which practically
nobody else told. You know, I am a soul, that is fine. But how will I realise
that I am the soul? If I am still enjoying bodily pleasures. I am caught up with
material desires, then I will stay in bodily consciousness. And if I stay in
bodily consciousness, my repetition of "aham brahmasmi" is not going to lead to
much benefit for me.

So, the practical application for "aham brahmasmi" is, you are not the body,
therefore minimise sense gratification. Give up sense gratification as much as
possible. So, Srila Prabhupada helped us to apply spiritual principles
practically. So, we cannot whitewash everything as spiritual. I cannot say the
body is spiritual. So, I have to discriminate. This is prasad. This is not
prasad. I cannot say all food is spiritual. No. There, so, the ABC of spiritual
life, is to def..., dis..., discriminate based on knowledge. That this is, this
is material. This is spiritual. When we advance further, then we also see in the
material the potential to be engaged in the service of the supreme spiritual
reality, that is Krishna. So, that is what we mean by to see it with spiritual
vision. So, we do not reject technology. Because technology can be used in
Krishna's service. Some impersonalists reject money. But Srila Prabhupada said
no. Money is Lakshmi Devi. And Lakshmi Devi is meant for Narayan. Or, actually,
Hanuman did not reject Sita thinking that she was material. He went and found
Sita and brought Sita back to Rama, brought Sita's messenger back to Rama, and
then fought a war so that Sita could be united with Rama.

Similarly, a devotee does not reject this material energy. The, especially the
material energy, and those material things that can be used in Krishna's
service. A devotee works actively to engage them in Krishna's service. So, we
have to find out what among the material things are useful, are usable in
Krishna's service, and use those in Krishna's service. Now, not everything
material may be usable. You know, prasad is food that we can take. If there is
poison. Poison is also material energy. But if I take poison, that will not be
anukul to my bhakti. So, I cannot use that in Krishna's service. So, then I do
not use it. So, when we say, see everything with spiritual vision. That means
see in everything the potential to be used in Krishna's service. And then use it
appropriately. So, how different things can be used in Krishna's service. That
will vary depending on our s..., our spiritual advancement, our specific
service, our circumstances. We may be able to engage certain things in Krishna's
service. We may not be able to engage certain things in Krishna's service. But
spiritual vision is "ekatvam" is what? Srila Prabhupada saw the whole world as
"ekatvam". What is that "ekatvam"? The whole world is filled with potential
devotees. Everybody is a soul, who is actually a devotee of Krishna. Just there
is some covering. And when that covering is removed, then everybody will become
a devotee.

So, this was Srila Prabhupada's "ekatvam" vision. You know, many of the other
devotees, Srila Prabhupada's godbrothers, they were also in many ways advanced
devotees, but when they went abroad, they went to Europe, and they did, they got
some success in meeting with, delight people, and getting the photographs
clicked, and giving some discourses which were very much appreciated. But as far
as transforming the hearts of people were concerned, they were not very
successful. And then they came back and told their spiritual master,
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur, that these weste..., these Europeans, they
cannot be changed. They are, they are s..., too much rooted in their culture. We
cannot change them. So, when Srila Prabhupada went to America, what did he see?
In the Jaladuta, when he was there in the last few days, they came to Boston
harbor, he wrote the song, "Markine Bhagavata-Dharma", and there for an Indian
who is going to America, America is the land of dreams for most Indians. And
this was excited. I will see so many things. And there will be so much
enjoyment. But Prabhupada did not see wealthy, prosperous, happy Americans. He
saw forgetful, suffering souls being pulled by the modes of passion, ignorance.
And he said, my dear Lord, please give me the words that will be understandable
to them. That will enable them to understand your message and become happy.

So, this was the "ekatvam" vision. Srila Prabhupada did not see those people as
Americans. He did not think I am an Indian. They are Americans. He saw their,
their cultural situation, their social, so..., so..., situation. How that was
keeping them away from Krishna. But he saw beyond that. He saw beyond the social
cultural conditioning to their souls. And he prayed to Krishna. Please let my
message reach their souls and elevate them. So, the "ekatvam" of a s..., of a
s..., true seer is not whitewashing everything as spiritual. It is seeing the
spiritual beyond the material. That the material is there, and the material has
to be dealt with. But beyond the material side, there is the spiritual side. And
that spiritual side has to be elevated, engaged in the best possible way. And
Srila Prabhupada was expert in that. That is how he was able to get thousands
and thousands of people who knew nothing about Krishna, just a few of weeks ago.
A few weeks later, they had given up everything, and dedicated their lives to
Krishna. This happened because Srila Prabhupada saw the spiritual vision, saw
with spiritual vision the spiritual potential, and he kindled that spiritual
potential. And that spark, it just blazed. And then that spread Krishna
Consciousness so dramatically, miraculously all over the world. This was real
"ekatvam" that we aspire for rather than see external conditionings o..., of
people. We s..., focus on their essence.

When we go on book distribution, when go for outreach. We do not focus on how
people look. Yes, we want to distribute Krishna Consciousness to everyone, and
if anybody has some spark of interest, we try to guide those people to come to
Krishna in the best possible way that is there for them, in that situation. This
is "ekatvam". See the whole world as filled with the potential to be engaged in
Krishna's service. See all souls as potentially Krishna's devotees. Just waiting
for their spark of devotion to be triggered. We fueled and fanned by some
devotee who comes fortunately into their lives.

So, I will summarise. We started by discussing about primarily the whole class
is about "ekatvam", about oneness. So, let us go over the pi..., pity ones. So,
we discussed first about how this purport is talking about oneness between
energy and energetic. And, in this way, we discussed the fire example. So,
first, we discussed about how oneness in quality with Absolute Truth brings
detachment. But subordination in quantity to Absolute Truth brings humility. So,
we discussed about Siksastakam, first there is "trinad api suni cena", then there
is "nadhanam najanam sundari". So, bhaktas emphasize humility more than
detachment.

And then Bhagavan and his shakti, we discussed the fire and light example, which
talks about how energy and energetic are related. They are different, yet
non-different. And then, for the s..., for the concept of difference between
the energies, Jiva Goswami gives the example of S..., Sun God, and the Sun's
radiance, Sun's rays, and Sun's reflection, referring to the antaranga shakti,
the tatastha shakti, and the bahiranga shakti.

And then we discussed about how the complete oneness is not just unity in
diversity, but diversity in unity also. All the gopis, they are united in their
love for Krishna. But each of them are individual and unique. And the oneness of
the river ocean metaphor is not the oneness of merging, but the oneness of
meeting. Just as a river always flows towards ocean, similarly a devotee's heart
always flows towards Krishna. Nothing holds a devotee back. A devotee holds
nothing back.

And lastly, we discussed elaborately about seeing everything with a spiritual
vision. So, if we see material objects with material vision, that causes
bondage. If we see material objects with spiritual vision, then we can become
purified by engaging those objects in devotional service. If we see spiritual
objects with material vision, we commit aparadhas. If we see spiritual objects
with spiritual vision at the sadhaka stage, it will bring about purification.
And as we become more advanced, it will bring about, bring ecstasy.

And lastly, we discussed seeing with spiritual vision does not mean whitewashing
everything as spiritual, but it means seeing everything as potent..., having the
potential to be engaged in Krishna's service. Seeing everyone as potentially
becoming Kri..., Krishna's devotees, and then engaging them appropriately.

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanishad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakta vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande hari haribol. Thank you.
