Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ZuUGE24y3E
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=8ZuUGE24y3E&event=video_description&redir_token=jCUia2Va3WVx431_tki4cHLhI5h8MTU0MDEwMjY1MkAxNTQwMDE2MjUy&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_019_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_15_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Isopanisad course. Now, we come to the last section of
the Isopanisad, wherein there are prayers. Until now, it has been more of a
description based on a mystical vision, or a deep insight. Now that the
description is reaching its conclusion. Now, there is an appeal to the Supreme
Reality. Towards him the whole discussion was pushing that please help me. So,
let us look at the overview of the Isopanisad to understand how this section
comes up.

So, first was, section invocation, the three is. Live in harmony with Ishvara.
Then, if you want to live in harmony with the Ishvara, we have to know the
Ishvara. So, for that, we have to acquire spiritual vision. That was the next
section. And how do we acquire spiritual vision? By right vidya and right
upasana. So, what is the right vidya, the balance between vidya and avidya? The
balance between worship, of sambhuti and living through the vinasya, the
temporary. That was discussed in those sections, nine to eleven and twelwe to
fourteen. Now, after one has got knowledge. After, one has done worship. Still,
after that also, there is another. That is the mercy. So, knowle..., when we
want to make spiritual advancement, at that time, we need knowledge. I am not
the body. I am the soul. There is Supreme Being. And then we have to offer our
heart to God. So, we have to intellectually understand God. Then, we have to
offer our heart to God. And then, after that, God has to bestow His mercy on us.
And then, we make spiritual advancement. We ultimately return back to God. So,
in Damodar lila, there were two fingers that were short. One, it is said is
Yashoda Maya's endeavor. Second is Krishna's mercy. So, the endeavor involves
cultivating knowledge as well as doing worship. Now, cultivating knowledge is
not necessarily jnana-marga. It is also part of bhakti. And doing worship. So,
chanting Hare Krishna and trying to be attentive while chant is a part of our
endeavor. And seeking Krishna's mercy. And gaining Krishna's mercy, that comi..,
that descent of Krishna's mercy is His part. So, now, the Isopanisad is moving
foward to focusing on beseeching the mercy of the Absolute Truth. So, this is
the last section, prayers to Ishvara to reveal Himself. We want to live in
harmony with Him. That is not just based on fear that I will be punished. It is
based on attraction to the Ishvara. So for that, let the Ishvara reveal Himself.
And herein, we see the last past, last section's brief summary, overview.

So, there are four verse, mantras in it. So, fifteen, sixteen, are basically
talking about "Take me beyond the white light to the Supreme Brahman". So, this
is a request. This is an appeal to take beyond Brahman to Bhagavan. And then
seventeen, eighteen, he is saying even more personal prayer. Now, that we
perceived the Supreme Person. We know that that Supreme Person is supremely
merciful. Let me need the mercy. So, I have facing so many obstacles because of
my own past conditionings, because of the way my mind and senses are dragging me
here and there. And I need help. So, take me through all the obstacles of
conditioned life to you. That is the last section. So, actually, the last two
mantras in that purport are intensely devotional. And Srila Prabhupada's
analysis is very hope-giving as far as jna..., helping sadhakas to face the
battles that they have. And overcome the conditionings that are there inevitably
for all of us. So, let us start with the fifteenth mantra. Basically, this is a
prayer beseeching the Lord's grace so that we can behold his beautiful form.
This is often quoted verse, mantra by our acharyas.

        hiraṇmayena pātreṇa
        satyasyāpihitaṁ mukham
        tat tvaṁ pūṣann apāvṛṇu
        satya-dharmāya dṛṣṭaye

So, "hiraṇmayena pātreṇa", "hiraṇmayena" is golden effulgence. "pātre" is
covering. "satyasyāpihitaṁ mukham", of that Absolute Truth, "āpihitaṁ" is
covered. "mukham" is the face. So, the face of that Absolute Truth is covered by
dazzling effulgence. "tat tvaṁ pūṣann apāvṛṇu", "pūṣann", means you are the
maintainer oh Lord. Due, one who does "pūṣann". One who does maintenance is
"pūṣann". "apāvṛṇu", "apāvṛṇu" means please remove, please reveal. And
"satya-dharmāya dṛṣṭaye", by which your "satya-dharmā", "dharmā" is like nature.
So, "dharmā" of sugar is sweetness. "dharmā" of the living entity is serve the
Lord. There is very essential nature. So, unto the devotee, so, the one who is
living according to the "dharmā". Our "dharmā" is to love and serve. So, Srila
Prabhupada translates it at, unto the devotee. "satya-dharmāya dṛṣṭaye", for
revealing, for exhibiting. So, one who lives according to dharma, is referred to
here as "dharmāya". Now, what is the translation as Srila Prabhupada gives us?

"O my Lord, sustainer of all that lives,"

This is "pūṣann".

"Your real face is covered by Your dazzling effulgence."

        hiraṇmayena pātreṇa
        satyasyāpihitaṁ mukham

It is covered. So:

"Kindly remove that covering"

        tat tvaṁ pūṣann apāvṛṇu

"and exhibit Yourself to Your pure devotee."

        satya-dharmāya dṛṣṭaye

So, this is one of the most important verses in the Isopanisad for talking about
the personal aspect of the Absolute Truth being a higher reality than the
impersonal. So, thi..., there is a dazzling effulgence. There is no doubt about
it. And that is acknowledged even by the Vaishnava acharyas. But the Vaishnava
acharyas say that that dazzling effulgence, which is all-pervading, that is not
the ultimate reality. There is a reality beyond that. And that reality is the
reality of the Supreme Person, who has a "mukham", who has a face. It is that
face that is to be longed to be seen, and desires to see it over here. So, let
us look at the purport that Srila Prabhupada has given us and see the overview
of that purport. So, Srila Prabhupada's purport is remarkably insightful. And
first point is Pushann. Normally, we would consider the word Pushann, one who
does maintenance to refer to the Lord who provides heat, light, air, water, and
that is correct. But Srila Prabhupada takes the discussion much deeper. And he
says that Krishna is the basis of Brahman and Paramatma. Krishna is as Bhagavan.

And then, "satya-dharmāya dṛṣṭaye", that how Krishna reveals himself beyond the
Brahman. So, the idea of the verse is that there is a reality beyond Brahman.
Beyond the light, there is a higher reality which needs to be seen. And that
reality is Krishna Himself. Krishna reveals Himself beyond the Brahman. And
then, this paragraph six to teen are talking about how the ultimate revelation
of Bhagavan comes only by bhakti. So, although there are many aspects of the
Absolute Truth. Brahman, Paramatma, Bha..., but if you want, and they can be
accessed by various yogic methods. If one wants to access Bhagavan aspect, then
one has to apply the process of bhakti. Let us look at all these points one by
one now.

So, Srila Prabhupada gives a very profound analysis in this purport. And what he
essentially describes is how Bhagavan is the ultimate revelation of everything.
The ultimate revelation means that Bhagavan contains whatever is there in other
pot..., other aspects of the Absolute Truth, but there is something higher that
is also there in Bhagavan. So, let us look at this. Now, how Bhagavan is the
ultimate revelation. In Sankhya, you know there are various processes. Sankhya,
Jnana, Yoga and Bhakti. Now, Sankhya and Yo..., Jnana can be slightly related.
But there is some difference. What is Sankhya? Sankhya, Sankhya comes from the
word "sankhya". "sankhya" means to count. So, on, on one side of the table, we
see the process. On another side, we see the level of God realisation that can
be achieved through that process if that process is followed alone without
integrating it in, with, into bhakti. So, "sankhya", in, "san" refers to
counting.  That is what it is in Hindi and some of the vernacular languages
also. So, in "sankhya" basically, the spiritu..., the spiritual seeker starts
analysing the material world around, and starts thinking, what is this material
world ultimately made of? Is there any reality? I see beautiful forms. I see
beautiful taste, beautiful fragran..., delicious taste, captivating fragrances.
So, what is the reality beyond all this? Is there some unifying reality? Now, at
this stage, the seeker is not necessarily looking for a spirituality reality. He
is just looking for a reality beyond the appearances. So, in this case, the
seeker moves towards the fundamental elements. So, for example, when we see a
very attractive looking puri. Its figure, I can eat it now. It is so delicious.
It is nicely puffed up. And it is rounded shape. And it just looks eager to eat.
Now, if we look backwards. What would happen is that puri is made of some atha.
And it is made of some oil. Now, if somebody puts a, put that atha in front of
us. Our mouth will not water. Somebody put that oil in front of us. Our mouth
will not water. But if that atha, and if that flour, flour, and that oil is put,
is blended together, is cooked together nicely and is made into puri or a pakora.
Pakora will also mouth..., things, sabjis and other things. But whatever, when a
combination is made, it becomes so attractive. But whereas, if you go to the
original elements, the attraction is not so much there. Now, whatever is looking
attractive is made of certain elements. A gulab jamun will be yummy, it will be
about atery. But if you go back to its ingredients, they themselves may not attract
us so much. So, even at a material level, we can look for an underlying reality
beyond the appearances.

So, in Sankhya, rather than getting caught up with the forms, and the taste, and
the fragrances of the world, the seeker tries to look beyond. He says, so, ok,
what is this ultimately made of? What is this ultimately made of? So then,
fina..., ok, everything that is there is made of earth, water, fire, air, ether.
And then there is of course mind, intelligence, ego. And there is the five sense
objects. And there is the variety of elements like that. And once one starts
thinking about it, you know, attractive form, if I think it is just made of
earth, water, fire, air, ether, when none of those individually will very
attractive me to anyone. And it is not that people are, if they see earth,
water, fire, air, e..., they are, nobody is going to sing a love songs for any
of these elements. So, by going towards the deeper aspects of even material
nature, one can become detached from the good looking and seducing appearances.
And that is the pursuit of sankhya.

Now, sankhya, there can atheistic sankhya and theistic sankhya. So our acharyas
had explained that atheistic sankhya is unbonafide. That is not actually the
Vedic teaching. It is a deviant teaching which has come from an u..., un...,
unauthorised kapila. The authorised kapila is Lord Kapila from the f..., Third
Canto who gives theistic sankhya. So, normally when the Abs..., when, in
sankhya, the analysis goes backward, backward, backward and one thinks that, ok,
what is the ultimate reality beyond all these appearances? The fundamental
elements of the material world, they are the ultimate reality. And that is how a
person goes forward. So, Srila Prabhupada is quoting here based on Jiva
Goswami's Sandharba analysis. And he explains that actually in sankhya by
analysis to this a..., essence of material, material things, one can s...,
conc..., one can arrive at the conclusion the Absolute Truth is just matter.
That is the elements of the material world.

When Sankhya raises further, one's vision goes to seeking the spiritual beyond
the material. And then at that one t..., level, one starts doing the process of
jnana. Jnana and Sankhya are in a continuum. In this particular analysis, they
are separated by whether one is perceiving spiritual reality or only material
reality. So, when by the process of intellection. Intellection means
intellectual analysis and contemplation. When one comes to the conclusion of
matter as the ultimate reality, then that is Sankhya. So, many of the scientists
and researchers will be today in some way Sankhyates. Now, Jnana means one goes
beyond matter to consciousness, to spirit. At that point, one realises matter is
changing. But underlying that, there is a spirit that is unchanging. So, at that
time, one realises the Absolute Truth to be spirit, to be eternal spirit. So,
at that time, one has realised in the sat-cit-ananda features of the Absolute
Truth, one has realised the "sat" aspect. "sat" is eternity aspect. So, this
eternal aspect is actually the realisation of Brahman. So, now, the Absolute
Truth is one. Like we discussed right in the beginning of the course and the
invocation that Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan are the same Absolute Truth.
They are all Advaita Tattva. They are all non-dual, non-different from each
other. Although they are non-different from each other, although they are
advaita tattva, still, they are referred to by these specific names because they
also correspond with specific levels of realisation. C..., so, when a person,
seeker, has realised the "sat" aspect alone, then the conception of the Absolute
Truth is the Brahman conception, or the all-pervading eternal light. When the
Absolute Truth has been perceived as "sat" and "cit", as all-pervading and as
conscious being, who is perceiving things. Then at that time, that is a
Paramatma aspect. And then when sat-cit-ananda, one who just not perceives, but
relishes, one who reciprocates pastime, love is, performs pastimes, then one has
perceived the Bhagavan aspect. So, remember we discussed, say, the example of a
pako..., of a gulab jamun. So, when I get the fragrance, then that is one level
perception. Second is the sight. That is second level perception. And third is
the taste. So, now, when I get the fragrance, it is the same gulab jamun that is
being perceived. But only one part. Oh, there is some delicious item there. When
there is a fragrance and the f..., the ta..., and the sight, then there is one
more level of perception. That is like, the Brahman aspect perception is like
just of perception of the fragrance of the gulab jamun, the perception of the
Brahman, and the, of the fragrance as well as the sight, the sight. That is the
Brahman. From the Brahman one moves to Paramatma. When one perceives "sat" and
"cit". And one has fragrance, sight, and taste. Then, there is the perception
sat-cit-ananda. That is the Bhagavan aspect. So, now, here, we have discussed
this.

Here, Srila Prabhupada is taking that process deeper. And he is talking about
the various processes that gi..., give that realisation. And how much is the
realisation of the Absolute Truth complete or incomplete. Not point to point,
from the point of view sat-cit-ananda. But from the point of view of potencies.
The Absolute Truth is shakti maan and the Absolute Truth is shaktis.

        parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

The Upanishads say this. The Shruti says this, "parāsya śaktir". That is
Absolu..., Absolute Truth is shakti. "vividhaiva", many of them. And so:

        sva-bhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca

They act naturally. So, "sva-bhaviki". What is that? "jnana" is there. "bala" is
there. And "kriya" is there. So, there is knowledge acquisition. There is
strength of execution. And then there is the actual activity of execution.
So, all these are the potencies of, this is one way of looking at the potency of
the Absolute Truth. So, in Jnana aspect, one perceives the Absolute Truth
without potencies. That means the Absolute Truth is just pure consciousness.
There is, now when we use the word pure consciousness, that is used, we often
use it in a different sense from which the impersonalists use it. When we use
the word pure consciousness, we mean to say that the consciousness is not
contaminated by lust, anger, greed, envy, pride, illusion. No selfishness. Pure
consciousness. That means there is simply the desire to serve, the desire to
love Krishna. That is pure consciousness.

But whereas when the impersonalists use the word pure consciousness, they use it
in the sense that there is nothing except consciousness. So, we discussed this
earlier. Say, if, right now, I am looking at you. So, I am the conscious
pers..., observer. You are the observed. And there is the act of observation.
So, there is a, there is a subject of consciousness. That means the person who
is perceiving. There is consciousness as a stream of awareness flowing. And
there is the subject of p..., there is the object of consciousness. There is
subject. There is stream. And there is object. These three are involved in the
act of conscious perception. We u..., when you are seeing, you are the subject
of consciousness. The, your consciousness flowing towards me. That is the stream
of consciousness. And then I am the object of consciousness for you. So, when
the impersonalists consider, when the, at the jnana level of realisation, they
consider pure consciousness, they have the idea that there is no subject. And
there is no object. There is only consciousness. That is all that exists.
Nothing else. So, nothing else means that, so their idea of pure consciousness
is there is neither subject, nor object. That is what they call as pure
consciousness. But the problem with this idea is that consciousness alone, it,
how from that consciousness any subject or object, the illusion will ever come.
If that is all that Brahman is, where does Maya co..., where does illusion come
from? And how does illusion overcome that consciousness? So, but anyway, the
idea here is, this consciousness simply exists. This consciousness actually is
not even in a sense conscious. Because there is nothing to be conscious of. And
there is no one to be conscious. Nothing to be conscious means there is no
object of consciousness. And no one to be conscious means there is no subject
of consciousness. So, actually, the whole idea of just consciousness without any
subject, without any object is just an abstract intellectual conceptualisation.
The, so, such a consciousness has no potencies. No..., there is no pur..., so,
for example, if I see a room on fire. Then I am sitting here. So then, I see
that there is a room over there and it has caught fire. So, there is the object
of consciousness. There is fire over there. And the subject of consciousness,
oh, it has caught fire, I i..., I immediately look for fire extinguisher. I
c..., I call out to people. I look for water. And I try to do something. So,
when there is an object of consciousness. And there is subject. Then, there is,
then, there is a realease of energy. And there is action happening. But when
there is no subject. There is no object. There is no action. So, there is
practically no potency. Potency is experienced through action.

When we say this person is very strong. How do we know that person is very
strong? That person does something which is exhibiting a lot of strength. So,
here, at the Brahman perceives the Absolute Truth without any potencies. And
that perception is achieved through the process of jnana. So, the analysis which
Srila Prabhupada is drawing over here is that we gradually move from Brahman to
Paramatma, towards Bhagavan. And how Bhagavan is the highest realisation. Now,
we all know the preliminary example of the Sun, the, the Sun God, the Sun
planet, and then the Sun rays. The Sun rays are the Brahman. The Sun planet, Sun
disk or Sun planet is the Paramatma. And the Sun God, the predominating deity
over there is Bhagavan. So, that is one way of analysing the hierarchy of
Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Here, Srila Prabhupada is giving us a much
deeper way of analysing. And we are trying to u..., understand this. And both
ways, the conclusion is that Bhagavan is the highest reality.

Now, beyond that, then there is through the path of Yoga. So, the path of Jnana,
one comes to Brahman realisation. Through the path of Yoga, one can cu.., come
to the Paramatma realisation. So, what is the Paramatma realisation? There is
"sat" aspect and "cit" aspect. That means the Absolute Truth is
"sat-cit-ananda". But at the yogic, by through the yogic path, at the Paramatma
level of realisation, one has not pursued "ananda" aspect. One has pursued "sat"
and "cit". The gulab jamun has fragrance, shape and taste. But right now, one
has s..., s..., smelt the fragrance and seen the shape. But one has not yet
relished the taste. That is Paramatma realisation. There is "sat". And there is
"cit". Now, interestingly, Jiva Goswami, and based on him, Srila Prabhupada says
that this refers to the Absolute Truth with only material potencies. Now, why
would we consider the Paramatma as the Absolute Truth with material potencies?
Because the Paramatma is supervising the material world. And to supervise the
material world requires potencies. It requires in facts phenomenal potencies.
You know, if we came to know that there is a per..., there is a factory which
has ten thousand employees. And there is a person who is a supervisor of that.
You know, you say, you would, you would understand that, oh, this person was
very powerful. To be able to supervise a, thousand people, ten thousand people,
a large number of people like that requires power. So, the Paramatma is
envisioned as the governing being of the whole of material existence.

    upadraṣṭānumantā ca
    bhartā bhoktā maheśvaraḥ
    paramātmeti cāpy ukto
    dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ

So, in 13.23 in the Bhagavad Gita, Lord Krishna describes "upadraṣṭānumantā ca",
"upadraṣṭā" is the overseer. "ānumantā ca", He is a permitter. "bhartā bhoktā
maheśvaraḥ". "bhartā" is the maintainer. "bhoktā" is the enjoyer. "maheśvaraḥ",
is a supreme "eśvaraḥ". And who is this? "paramātmeti cāpy ukto". This is
"paramā". This Supreme Lord is known as Paramatma. And what is the, what is the
nature of that Absolute Truth? Where is situated? "dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ".
This is the transcendental person situated in the body. So, prior to this verse,
Krishna has said about how that is an Purusah, who is caught up in the body.
That is 13.22.

    puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi
    bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān
    kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya
    sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

So, Krishna says the "puruṣaḥ" is "prakṛti-stho hi". This "pu...", puruṣaḥ" is
not "prakṛti", "dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ". He is not transcendental. He is
caught up in "prakṛti" right now. And because of that, there is "sad",
"sad-asad-yoni-janmasu". There is the entanglement with good and evil in this
world in various species.

So, our point here is that for the Supersoul to be able to function as the
supervisor of the material world requires enormous potencies. No, imagine, if
the rains are falling, and at that time, suddenly, we decide that we do not want
rains here because there is already en..., enough water over here. But fifty
kilometers away, there is a village where there are droughts. And suppose we
could have some technology, by which suddenly we could get heavy winds to blow.
And all the clouds along with the rains just start, as they are pouring the so,
there, mood side. And then the rain falls in the drought affected area. It would
require tremendous power, isn't it? To be able to do that. So, that is actually
the power of Indra, Vayu and other devatas. But all their power is insignificant
as compared to the power of the Paramatma. And Lord Vishnu, he is the God of all
the Gods. So, he has phenomenal material potencies. Now, why material potencies
alone? Because all the potencies are used to control the material world. They
are not used to control the spiritual world. The, right now, the whole
conception of spiritual reality is not there at all. Right now, the conception
is, there is the material world, and there is a conscious being in charge of the
material world. So, this is higher because, as higher than the Brahman
realisation. Because a, the Brahman realisation, the idea was that there is just
pure consciousness. But now the understanding is that there is no just our
con..., pure, there is not just consciousness in terms of our consciousness is
impure because according to Bra.., impersonalist idea, that we think of duality
as impure. So, we think that I and you are different. That is, that is impure.
Because the pure idea is that you and I are one. We are both one. That is the
idea. And so they say, dua..., they see dualities as impure. But, there, here is
the understanding is there that apart from our contaminated consciousness, there
is a transcendental consciousness. There is a consciousness of, of the Supreme
Being, who perceives all the material world and He oversees it. So, this is
a higher perception because one has under..., recognised the reality beyond the
reality of one's own consciousness. That, the, the reality of the Supreme
Consciousness. And that, that is why it is "sat" and "cit". So, "cit" means
there is an object of consciousness. That is the material world. There is a
subject of consciousness. That is the Supreme Being. And then there is stream
consciousness. That:

        cakṣur yasya na riṣyati

The same mano who is in a mystical vision revealing the Isopanisad to us is also
the speaker of the prayers in the Eigth Canto, First Chapter. And there also,
you know, when, where the prayer starts, similarly to the Isopanisad, the, the
first over there is, here it is:

        īśāvāsyam idam sarvaṁ

There it was:

        ātmāvāsyam idaṁ viśvaṁ
        

        yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat
        tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā
        mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam

So, here it was "īśāvāsyam". There it was "ātmāvāsyam". And both of these are
actually the same reality. They, they are referring to same reality. Just slight
differences are there depending on time, place, circumstance. So, the..., there
he is saying that what is the nature of the Absolute Truth?

        cakṣur yasya na riṣyati

That the eyes never blink. The eyes are always unblinking, always beholding the
events of this world, eager to help the conditioned soul. So:

        cakṣur yasya na riṣyati

So, point is, the e..., at that level of the Paramatma realisation, there is the
Supreme Being who is the subject of consciousness. There is a whole world which
is the object of consciousness. And then there is a stream of consciousness through
which awareness takes place. However, at this devel of realisation, there is no
understanding of the spiritual direction for Consciousness. And in spiritually
also, there is subject of consciousness. And there is object of consciousness.
There is Krishna and there are gopis. So, Krishna is beholding the gopis. And
the gopis are beholding Krishna. Both of them are spiritual beings. So, Krishna
is in the ca..., Krishna is beholding the gopis, At that time. Krishna is
subject of consciousness. The gopis are the object of consciousness. And there
is a stream of consciousness between them. But the, everything here is
transcendental. It is all eternal. So, the concept of spiritual reciprocations
and pastimes at the spiritual level is not yet understood through the path of
Yoga. In Yoga, one f..., one ba..., basis oneself on just passive contemplation
on the Absolute Truth.

    dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa pasyanti yam yogino

"dhyanavasthita", when the yogis get situated in "dhyana". "tad-gatena manasa",
so with, with the inne..., with the mind, with the inner eye of the mind.
"pasyanti yam yogino", the yogis perceive that person. But they perceive, do not
perceive that person completely. Who is that person? 

        yasyantam na viduh surasura-gana devaya tasmai namah

"yasyantam na viduh", whose end is not known by anyone. "surasura-gana", that
the s..., that the suras, not the asuras, know the end of this person. So, that
is the Absolute Truth who is perceived by the yogis during "dhyana". That is not
the complete perception at the Paramatma level.

The complete perception is at the Bhagavan level. So, what is the Bhagavan
level? It is the Absolute Truth with material and spiritual potencies. So, that
is the Bhagavan realisation. At the level of Bhagavan realisation, one focuses
on understanding the Absolute Truth as not only having the three potencies, as
capa..., capable of controlling material nature, but as also having a
transcendental personality and having transcendental reciprocations with
material and spiritual potencies. That is Bhagavan. So, here one understands
"sat-cit-ananda". And this aspect of the Absolute Truth is perceived only
through bhakti. So, how does Krishna have material and spiritual potencies? 

        hlādinī karāya kṛṣṇe ānandāsvādana
        hlādinīra dvārā kare bhaktera poṣaṇa

So, when describing the various of the energies of the Absolute Truth, Caitanya
Caritamrta describes that "hlādinī" from, "hlādinī shakti" performs two
functions. What are the function? "hlādinī karāya kṛṣṇe ānandāsvādana".
"hlādinī" enables Krishna to experience joy. "ānandāsvādana", and then along
with that, "hlādinīra dvārā kare", by "hlādinī", Krishna also does "bhaktera
poṣaṇa". Krishna nourishes his devotees. So, Krishna is the Supreme Being. And
"hlādinī shakti", man..., who is manifest as Radharani is His energy. So, of
course, the Absolute Truth has many energies. But here we are talking the
spiritual realm. She is internal energy. You know, this is, there is, this is
"sat-cit-ananda" is there over here, of, of the "sat-cit-ananda" of features
of the Absolute Truth are there. So, like that, actually, the Absolute Truth has
many spiritual energies. And there is some, with "hlādinī" Radharani, that is
entirely different subject for us. We cannot explore it riht now. But suffice it
to say that the spiritual potencies enable the Lord to recpirocate love. Just
like yoga-maya, what does it do? It conceals Krishna's divinity so that various
can have appropriate rasa for their respective relationship with Him. So,
Mother Yashoda cannot love Krishna as a child if, as she beholds Krishna as the
Absolute Truth, as the God of all Gods. As the master of Brahma and Shiva. So,
in order for her to reciprocate love with Krishna, seeing Him as her son, what
is required to do that? She be able to forget the divinity of Krishna. And how
does it happen? That happens by yoga-maya. What is yoga-maya? Now, this word
yoga-maya is like an oxymoron. You remember what we, we discussed earlier?
What is the oxymoron? That there are, there are two opposite senses, wo...,
words with two opposite meaning which are combined together. Like, if I say,
that person is a courageous coward. Now, how can somebody be a courageous
coward? If that, we are this courageous or one is cowardly. So, there are
opposite sense which are brought together. So, actually, yoga-maya is like that.
Yoga is that which connects us with the Absolute Truth. Maya is that which
disconnects us from the Absolute Truth. You know, when we say a person is going
to maya, that means that person is forgetting his reality, and getting into
illusion. Person is practicing yoga, that is to come to reality. So, what is the
whole idea of yoga-maya?

So, yoga-maya is a divine energy. That, it, it is the maya that deepens yoga.
Normally, maya takes one away from yoga. But this is the maya that increases
yoga. How does this maya increase yoga? Because this is the maya which
encoura..., which enables the devotee to feel greater and greater attraction of
a, the Supreme Lord. So, here the Lord, if he had no spiritual potencies, then
he would always be the majestic Lord. And everything that, anything that people
could do with Him is, oh, you are our master. We bow down to You forever, and
ever, and ever. Now, the Lord will just exhibiting his cosmic majesty throughout
all of eternity. You know, the kingdom of God would not be particularly exciting
place. Of course, the Lord is so attractive. Of course, the Lord is so
attractice that even bowing to Him for all of eternity would be attractive. But
still, when the Lord covers His potency, covers His majesty, His Supreme
Majesty, and then acts as if he were a small child or a charming yough. Then,
the devotees can relish various rasas with Him. So, yoga-maya is an example of
the Lord's energy which enables pastimes to happen at the spiritual level. So,
understanding all this, how the Supreme Being has spiritual energies. And
through the spiritual energies, spiritual activities are performed. You know, if
there were no spiritual energy, Yashoda Mayi could not possibly chastise Krishna
or tie up Krisna. Who can tie up the Absolute Truth? That is not possible. The
Absolute Truth is infinite. The Absolute Truth is supreme. So, the only person
who can tie up the Absolute Truth is a person who forgets the Absolute Truth is
the Absolute Truth. And how will somebody forget the person, Absolute Truth is
Absolute Truth. One is, if that person is in illusion. Second is, if that person
is in illusion. But the two are different kinds of illusion. One is v...,
conditioned souls may be in illusion. And they may think that this is not God.
And there may be exalted devotees, like Yashoda Mayi, who are in a different
kind of illusion. That, it is a maya that increases yoga. And by that, she
thinks that, oh, this is my child. He is becoming mischievous. If he becomes
mischievous, then he will get a bad name for himself. He will get a re...,
reputation of being a thief, of being a stealer of butter. And if he gets a bad
reputation of being a stealer of butter, then nobody will give their daughter in
marriage to him. And if he does not get married, then that will be disastrous.
So, therefore, for his good, I must discipline him. And to discipline him, I
must tie him. So, this kind of thinking about the Absolute Truth, is based, it
comes only because of a divine illusion. So, this is a, one example of how the
Absolute Truth has spiritual energies. So, this is the Bhagavan realisation. And
this comes by bhakti.

So, now, we will discuss this a little bit more from another perspective is how
the Bhagavad Gita talks about this. We will be discussing this more when we
study the Bhagavad Gita, later on during our course. But right now, let us focus
on understanding in another way, based on the Gita, how, Bhagavad Gita, how
Bhagavan is the highest realisation. So, now, if you remember in Sankhya, one
conc..., one goes beyond the a..., material appearances to the material
substances. So, the material appearances are, there are are good-looking forms,
good-looking shapes, good-looking tastes, n..., n..., nice, nice-smelling,
whatever, you know. Appealing tastes, shapes and fragrances are there. Smells
are there. So, one gi..., goes beyond them to the elements. You know, in the
Bhagavad Gita, Krishna describes that the elements are actually His energies.
So, 7.4, f..., and 5 describe that:

    bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ
    khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca
    ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me
    bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

So, "bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ", earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind,
intelligence, ego. These are My energies. So, what does this verse demonstrate?
In Sankhya, one has perceived beyond the appearances to the material substances.
So, the material substances, they are, they are not just independent realities.
They are dependent realities because they are the energies of Krishna. So, in
Sankhya, one is not able to see them as energies of Krishna. One often sees them
as independent realities. Just like scientists, they see the material world, and
they analyse the material world sometimes with phenomenal expertise. And they
try to go beyond to see, ok, this is, this particular color, this, this is the
element. And this is combination of this element. This chemical is forming. And
then this element is made up of these many items. And, or this item has these
many electrons and protons. And the level of intricacy in analysis is
phenomenal. But often, this whole analisys is done in a non-theistic context.
The connection with God is not seen. In the past, most scientists could see the
connection with God. For example, Lord Kelvin says that actually one thinks 
deeply enough one will be forced by science to believe in God. Max Bone says
that I studied the atom and in a..., in atom, I saw the glory of the creator.
There are big big scientists who are able to see material nature and see there
the connection of material nature with the creator, with the Supreme Being. But
just like many Sankhyates, they just see the material nature, but they do not
know what beyond it, to see the connection of the c..., creator. Similarly, when
here also in modern science, many scientists are unable to make the link between
the glory, the magnificence of nature, and the magnificence of the master of
nature. But Krishna here, He is, takes the Sankhya typology. He takes the
Sankhya framework of analysis, and then he shows how that is integrated into a
theistic world view. Yes, earth, water, fire, ai..., air, ether, these are the
fundamental material elements, gross material elements. But where are they
coming from? They are ultimately coming from the Absolute Truth. They are the
energies of the Absolute Truth. So, in Sankhya, if one actually analyses the
material elements, and then one practices, you know, seeing them in connection
with the Absolute Truth, then even the perception of material elements can lead
to bhakti. So, this is what is talked about in Second Chanto of Srimad
Bhagavatam through the Virata rupa. And similar, Third Canto, Kapila Deva also
shows how Sanhya ultimately leads to Bhakti. And the same is talked about in the
Eighteen Chapter also in the Bhagavad Gita.

Now, how Jnana also will lead to Bhagavan. Krishna describes this in the Bhagavad
Gita, in 7.19. When a person becomes truly Jnana man, such a person surrenders
to me:

    bahūnāṁ janmanām ante
    jñānavān māṁ prapadyate
    vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti
    sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ.

So, "bahūnāṁ janmanām ante", after many life times of philosophical searching, a
person becomes "jñānavān". And then "jñānavān" does "māṁ prapadyate". Such a
person surrenders unto me. Why does such a person surrender? Prabhupada quotes
in this purport also, "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti". Such a person understands that
Vasudeva is the Absolute Truth. There is no truth higher than Vasudeva. "sa
mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ", such a "mahātmā" is extremely rare.

Now, similarly, when we talk about the process of Jnana, essentially, one is
perceiving the Absolute Truth as Brahman. But when one moves forward beyond
that, one will come to Bhagavan. So, this happens by the grace of the Absolute
Truth. We see in the Bhagavatam several striking examples, two of them, one is
Sukadeva Goswami and the other is of the Kumaras. Both of them were attracted to
the all-pervading impersonal Brahman. But when they came to know about the
Supreme Being, they became attracted to Him. So, that is the wonder of
the Bhagavatam.

    ātmārāmāś ca munayo
     nirgranthā apy urukrame
    kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim
     ittham-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ

So, "ātmārāmāś ca munayo", there are great souls who are not attracted to
anything. They are just self-satisfied. Bha..., and they have no material
attachments. They are "nirgranthā apy urukrame". They are "nirgranthā". They are
completely detached. But "urukrame", the Lord performs such wonderful pastimes.
"kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim", that they perform "ahaitukīṁ bhaktim", unmotivated
devotion to Him. "ittham-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ", such are the wonderful qualities of
Lord Hari.

So, imagine that there is a person who is so, this is a diff.., this is
different example from material context, I will explain how it relates with the
spiritual context. But imagine there is a person who is fabulously wealthy. And
whatever anybody may aspire for in this world, that person has got that. And
such a person, who because of possessing everything is satisfied, is suddenly,
we may find, that person is running after something, you know, running
frantically for something. What will we understand? That means what that person
is running for, is something so special, so precious that, that person, whatever
is right now there with that person, he, that is not valuable, not as valuable
as what is being perceived, you know, and what is therefore being pursued. So,
w..., we may not know what is that that is being pursued. And we may not know
how valuable that is. But the very fact that such a wealthy person is chasing
after that indicates that, that must be something very precious, something so
precious that with all the wealth that the person has, that person cannot have
it, or does not have it. That person wants it.

Similarly, in a different context. Here the person, we would not expect the
person to chase after anything because that person has so much. But here the
example of "ātmārāmāś ca munayo" is that the person is so utterly detached that
the person needs nothing. "nirgranthā", there are no attachments. The more we
have attachments, the more we need things. You know, if I am ad..., addicted,
attached to alcohol, then I cannot live without alcohol. I am attached to tea,
I cannot live without tea. But these people are "nirgranthā", so they not need
anything. And they are "ātmārāmā". They are satisfied in them..., in themselves.
Still, they perform bhakti to Lord Acutya. "urukrame", to the Supreme Lord who
performs wonderful pastimes, they perform bhakti. So, why? Because they, that
Supreme Lord must be possessing something which nobody else possesses, which
nothing in the world can compare with. So, in this way, one can by logical
inference, understand that the Supreme Lord's attr..., qualities are not
something similar to that in the material world. Because those who are attrac...
no..., not attracted to anything in the material world, are attracted to Him.
That means whatever it is in Him that attracts them is not material. Because
nothing material is capable of attracting them. So, in this way, we can
understand, that this, that, the Jnanis, when they become attracted to
Supreme Lord, His qualities are transcendental and their attraction is also
transcendental to Him. So, Sukadeva Goswami was like that. He was completely
detached from everything material. And yet, he became captivated when he heard
through a disciple of Vasudeva the glories of the Supreme Lord. He immediately
wanted to hear more. And he came back to Vasudeva and he heard. And then he
became exalted mahabhagavat.

Similarly, we have the story of Kumaras. The Kumaras, the four celibate sons of
Brahmaji. They were attracted to the impersonal effulgence. But they had heard
from the Supreme Lord about. They had heard from their father about the Supreme,
who li..., Vishnu who lived in Vaikuntha. Now, they did not exactly kn...,
understand, what, what, what is Vaishnu's position. Was he the Supreme Being? Or
was the Brahman higher, lower? They had no, no biased agendas when they went to
the abode of Vaikuntha. They are just exploring. They are Brahmavadis. And when
they beheld the form of Vishnu. And f..., the fragrant tulsi from His lotus feet
entered into their ear:

        tasyāravinda-nayanasya padāravinda-

So, "tasyāravinda-nayanasya", that Absolute Truth "āravinda-nayana", beautiful
lotus eyes. "padāravinda-", from His, from He was lotus eyes, He has lotus eyes
also.

        kiñjalka-miśra-tulasī-makaranda-vāyuḥ

So, "kiñjalka-miśra-tulasī", so with the lotus feet from the lotus feet, that
Tulsi Devi was there. The air that came from those lotus feet, which carried the
fragrance of his lotus feet as well as the fragrance of the Tulsi. When it
entered into their noise, then it agitated them. They, you could not be agitated
by anything material, were agitated by the Lord's beauty. 

         saṅkṣobham akṣara-juṣām api citta-tanvoḥ

" saṅkṣobham akṣara-juṣām", they were agitated this. "saṅkṣobham", from their
attraction to the impersonal. And they were elevated. So, this is the:

        vasudevah sarvam iti sa

So, the, from the Jnana stage also, one can come to Bhagavan through Bhakti. So,
what was the bhakti? That attraction to Supreme Lord based on what they had heard
from Brahmaji. So, through, so, Sukadeva Goswami, it was his attraction to
Supreme Lord based on what he heard from Vyasadeva who was a devotee. Now,
similarly, the process of yoga can lead to Bhakti. That means in the process of
Yoga, one focuses on the, on beha..., beholding the Supersoul in the heart. But
over a period of time, one understand that actually that Supersoul is not just a
conscious being, is there a conscious reciprocal being, who performs pastimes.
So, in 6.29 in the Bhagavad Gita, Lord Krishna says how the yogic perceives the
Supersoul.

    sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ
    sarva-bhūtāni cātmani
    īkṣate yoga-yuktātmā
    sarvatra sama-darśanaḥ

Such a person sees everywhere equally because one sees the Absolute Truth. So,
this is referring to Paramatma realisation. But the next verse immediately, what
does it say?

    yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra
    sarvaṁ ca mayi paśyati
    tasyāhaṁ na praṇaśyāmi
    sa ca me na praṇaśyati

He says that one who sees Me everywhere, and sees everything in Me, such a
person has never lost me, nor am I lost to him. So, now, these are in
continuity. And the next verse is, the actual is to be realisation the same.
6.31 says:

    sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ yo māṁ
    bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥ
    sarvathā vartamāno ’pi
    sa yogī mayi vartate

So, it says that, actually that Me who is situated in the heart of all living
beings, and me, one who understands, both of them are same, such a yogi is never
lost. So, essentially, this verse is describing a progression from Paramatma
realisation to Bhagavan realisation. And this happens by the process of Bhakti.

So, similarly, from Karma also, one comes to Bhakti. In 3.30, Krishna describes
that by the practice of bhakti-yoga, one will come to, when one offers the
fruits of karma to Krishna, then one slowly comes from karma towards bhakti. So,
here, Krishna is talking about the process by which one rises up.

        mayi sarvani karmani
        sannyasyadhyatma-cetasa
        nirasir nirmamo bhutva
        yudhyasva vigata-jvarah

So, "mayi sarvani karmani sannyasya". So, "sarvani karmani sannyasya" is karma
yoga. But when "mayi" comes before that. Not just give up the fruits of all,
the fruits of all the work. But give up the fruits of all the work and offer
those fruits to Me. When "mayi" comes up, then there is a higher level over
there. And that higher level is the rise towards bhakti. So, essentially, the
other processes, they will keep us tuck to a particular level of realisation if
one does not rise higher. But if one rises higher through the process of bhakti,
then one will come to Bhagavan realisation. In this way, Bhagavan is the
ultimate realisation. And Srila Prabhupada in the purport quotes from various
sources. He quotes 14.26 from the Bhagavad Gita.

        brahmano hi pratisthaham

That Brahman is subordinate reality. Bhagavan is the highest reality. Brahman is
supported by me, Krishna says. Similarly, when the Isopanisad, in the Brahma
Samhita:

        yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti-

That the "prabha" is coming from that Absolute Being. And at that Absolute Being
is Govinda. "govindam adi-purusham tam aham bhajami". I offer my obeisances to
that Govinda. Though, that Govinda in whose effulgence, there are innumerable
universes floating.

So, like that, there are various referenes which substantiate the point made in
this verse that beyond the Brahman realisation is the Bhagavan realisation. So,
normally, we consider that darkness blinds. But there are t..., there are times
when even brightness blinds. How is that possible? You know, when people are
traveling in a car, especially at night, then often, accidents offer, o..., 
occur because there is a glare. You know, the road is dark. And suddenly a truck
comes from the opposite side. And the truck suddenly increases the glare of its
light. Then, in the darkness when one suddenly is exposed to a bright light.
That also leads to blindness. That also leads to a temporary blinding effect. So
darkness blinds. But blind, brightness can also blind at times. So, in the
material world, there is darkness. Because one cannot see the spiritual truth.

        tamaso mā jyotir 

That is the Upanishad saying that go from darkness to light. But when one moves
from darkness to light, when suddenly from darkness one actually comes to light,
the light is so bright that one gets blinded. Sometimes, we experience that,
when, when power has gone off. And we are just cropping our way around. And if
power has gone off for a long time, we are struggling to s..., find our way and
do things in darkness. Suddenly, lights come, and suddenly all lights come at
one mo..., moment. Now, so, because of the lights themselves, one cannot see.

So, like that, when one moves from material reality towards spiritual reality,
at that time, material reality is filled with darkness, one cannot see. But when
comes to, one comes to spiritual reality, there is a blinding effect. Because
the Lard's, Lord's effulgence is blinding. So, brightness can also blind.  Just
as darkness can blind, brightness can also blind. So, this mantra is basically a
prayer to the Absolute Truth to ru..., take one beyond the blindness caused by
brightness. So, there is the blazing effulgence. "hiraṇmayena pātreṇa".
The "apāvṛṇu", please remove that. So, in this way, the verses asks us to go
beyond not just the darkness that blinds, but also the brightness that blinds to
that Supreme Being who is the source of that brightness. That is the
all attrative Supreme Person, Sri Krishna. And He is the ultimate revelation of
the Upanishads. He is the ultimate revelation of not just the whole body of
Vedic literature, but He is the ultimate revelation of all the theistic
traditions of the world. He is the ultimate aspiration of all hearts of all
living beings. And it is this Supreme Being who is so wonderfully revealed to
us by the Vedic literature as explained by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Srila
Prabhupada. He is the, as Srila Prabhupada says, a last word in transcendence.
There is no reality higher than Him. And it is through that reality, that the
process of Krishna Consciousness ultimately takes us.

So, to summarise, we st..., our discussion today basically focused on how
Bhagavan realisation is the highest realisation. So, in that, we discussed,
started with the verse of how, one, one is to be taken beyond the darkness,
beyond the blindness that is caused by the blazing effulgence towards the f...,
f..., face of the Absolute Truth. "mukham", "apāvṛṇu". I want to see the face.

And in that, we discussed basically Srila Prabhupada's purports. How in Sankhya,
one goes beyond material appearances to material substances. One sees the
Absolute Truth as the material elements. In Jnana, one go..., perceives the
Absolute Truth as not material substances, but as a spiritual substance.
A spiritual substance without any potencies, material or spiritual, just
consciousness. Then, in Yoga, with one level higher, one sees the Absolute Truth
as spiritual substance with consciousness and energies to control the material
nature. In Bhakti, one sees the Absolute Truth as spiritual substance with
material and spiritual potencies. And th..., this is the realisation that comes
at Bhakti. The other processes give us intermediate realisation. Sankhya takes
us up to Absolute Truth with material elements. Jnana takes us to Absolute Truth
with, without any potencies. So, Absolute Truth as spiritual substance without
any potencies. Yoga takes us to Absolute Truth as spiritual substance, only
material potencies. But it is Bhakti which takes us to the realisation of
Abs..., Absolute Truth with material and spiritual potencies. And the other
processes also, if one does them, you know, under the rubric of Bhakti, with
integrates them with Bhakti, then gradually, you know, Bhakti will predominate.
And can get the highest realisation even if one has started with the other
processes. In this way, one comes to the realisation that Bhagavan is the
ultimate revelation, the highest manifestation of the Absolute Truth.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
bhakti 

