Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2MmmMJDu3S4
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=GC7b9za1RD8rUqc4lPPj8dEfkwt8MTU0MDEwMjQ5NUAxNTQwMDE2MDk1&v=2MmmMJDu3S4&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_014_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_12_part_1_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

So, today, we begin with the next section of the Isopanisad. That is the fourth
section. In the last section, we discussed about vidya and avidya. That was
mantras nine, ten, and eleven. Now, the next section is in structure and in
analysis similar to the previous action. That was a three mantra section. This
is also a three mantra section. And there also the structure is using similar
fo..., methods, but only instead of vidya and avidya, here, there is sambhuti
and asambhuti. So, let us look at this.

So, the first mantra says, just twelfth mantra, it says asambhuti takes to
darkness, and sambhuti to, takes to greater darkness. So, actually here,
asambhuti, what it refers to, basicaly it refers to something non-eternal.
Sambhuti refers to something eternal. So, the meanings of these we will discuss.
Now, specifically, it is, the worship of asambhuti takes to darkness, and
worship of sambhuti ta..., greater darkness. To keep it short, we are using
sambhuti and asambhuti.

Now, the next mantra says asambhuti gives one result. Sambhuti gives another
result. So, now, there is an obvious contradiction if you just go by linearly.
Because twelfth is saying that both asambhuti and sambhuti take one to darkness
only. So, here asambhuti and sambhuti mean something different in thirteen as
compared to twelwe.

And then fourteen, it is said that asambhuti and sambhuti together grant
immortality. So, like the previous set of mantras. Look at, look at, let us look
at the meanings which Srila Prabhupada explains.

So, asambhuti refers to the demigods. So, worship of the demigods leads to
darkness. And sambhuti here is, just like earlier it was so called knowledge.
So, here is so called understanding of the Absolute Truth. So, that is
Impersonal Absolute. And the worship of the Impersonal Absolute leads to greater
darkness. That is mantra twelwe. We will see what this darkness refers to and
how demigod worship or impersonal worship can lead to darkness.

But for now, then there is sambhuti gives one result. Asambhuti gives another
result. So, in mantra thirteen, asambhuti refers to anything other than the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. So, we get one result by that and by worshipping
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we get another result.

And then last mantra was saying that both sambhuti and asambhuti together grant
eternity. So that means, it refers to, we need to know the material world to be
able to navigate through the material world. And we need to know the Supreme
Lord to attain the Supreme Lord. So, there, asambhuti refers to knowledge of the
material world. And asam..., and sambhuti refers to the knowledge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

So, for understanding the meanings, we need to see the text and the context. If
we just look at the text, we will get completely confused. So, the meanings of
the words are not just told in a dictionary. Meanings, semantics, is a profound
branch of knowledge. And in general, in semantics, the primary focus is often on
the science of meanings. How words' meanings are. So, some people have the idea
that a meaning of a word is, this is the dictionary. And this is the meaning.
So, are meanings something which is told in the dictionary? And are words simply
carriers of meaning, like say, there is electric wire and then electricity is
injected from here. Electricity is taken out from there? So, are words simply
conveyors of meaning? So, the meaning is f..., f..., something which is there in
the minds of people. And words are tools by the mean..., which the meanings are
conveyed. Or are the meanings intrinsic to the words? So, actually, it is a
combination of both. Words have certain meanings. But people use the words in
certain contexts. And in accordingly also, the meaning gets changed. So, the
way, the words are used, have to be understood based on both their text and
their context. That means what is that means, what is the literal meaning of the
word. And context is, what is the situation surrounding in which the word is
used, surrounding in which the word is used. So, if we look at both these
things, what we will understand is that there is a necessity for a holistic
understanding. Now, let us look at this particular verse.

        andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti
        ye 'sambhūtim upāsate
        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u sambhūtyām ratāḥ

So, "andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti", they enter into darkness. Those who "'sambhūtim
upāsate", those who worship the "'sambhūtim". And "tato bhūya iva te tamo", into
greater darkness go those, "ya u sambhūtyām ratāḥ". So, earlier was "vidyāyām
ratāḥ". So, Srila Prabhupada translates this as:

"Those who are engaged in the worship of demigods enter into the darkest region
of ignorance, and still more so do the worshipers of the impersonal Absolute."

In this way, this verse talks about two primary ways by which the religious,
those are within the Vedic path, or in general, in the spiritual path, they get
deviated from the Supreme Lord. They get deviated. And the destinations of those
people who get deviated on the path of religion, but away from the Supreme Lord,
that is talked about. So, let us look at an overview of this purport. So, Srila
Prabhupada basically talks about three main themes.

The first point he makes is that even the demigods and rishis misunderstand the
Absolute to be, Truth to be impersonal. That he talks in paragraphs one to
three. Then, paragrpahs four to seven, he mentions demigod worshippers stay in
the dark material world. And after that, in the last paragraph, Srila Prabhupada
mentions that impersonalists who mislead people go to the darkest regions of
hell. So, let us look at these one by one.

Now, the demigods and rishis misunderstand the Supreme Absolute Truth. This is
mentioned repeatedly in the scriptures. The Absolute Truth, the Supreme Lord, is
so great that it is not easy for Him to be understood. In the Bhagavad Gita:

    na me viduh sura-ganah
    prabhavam na maharsayah
    aham adir hi devanam
    maharsinam ca sarvasah

So, Krishna says in 10.2, in the Bhagavad Gita, "na me viduh". I am not known.
"sura-ganah". The devatas do not me. "maharsayah", even the rishis do not me, do
not know me. Why? Because I am their source. And the same point, after Krishna
finishes the Catur Sloki Bhagavad Gita from 10.8 to 11, then when Arjuna is
giving his understanding, then he says in 10.14 that:

        na hi te bhagavan vyaktim
        vidur deva na danavah

He says that, oh, Bhagavan, you are "vyaktim". But what kind of "vyaktim" you
are? What kind of person you are? You know, "vid...", "vidur deva na danavah",
neither the Gods, nor the demons, they understand. So, it is complex. Similarly,
the Bhagavatam says:

        muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ

In the first verse itself, it says that by the, that Absolute Truth, even the
suras are bewildered. And the conclusion of the Bhagavatam, one of the last
verses:

        yasyantam na viduh surasura-gana devaya tasmai namah

"yasyantam", who is "anta"? "na viduh", people do not know. Who do not know?
"surasura-gana". So, not only the asuras, even the suras do not know. "devaya
tasmai namah", so they cannot understand that Absolute Truth. They can simply
offer obeisances to that Absolute Truth.

So, the theme that the Absolute Truth is not easy to understand, even from the,
for the Gods is well-reiterated in the scriptures. Now, the question comes, if
they do not understand Him, what does it mean? They obviously go and pray to
Vishnu whenever they are in danger. And they know there is some higher being.
But what is their conception? Srila Prabhupada tells that when we do not have an
understanding, often we get a misunderstanding. So, they know, they have to go
to Vishnu and pray to him for help, whenever they are in trouble. And they do
that. But they tend to think that actually, beyond Vishnu is some light. And
that is the ultimate truth. So, they misunderstand the Absolute Truth to be
impersonal. So, if the demigods also misunderstand, then what to speak of all of
us? So, we have to be very careful in how we understand. Even Brahmaji, it is
said that in Bhagavatam, Second Canto that first time when he heard the Vedic
literature, he thought that the import of the Vedic literature was karma, the
path of karma, doing fruitive activity according to religious rituals. That is
an import, the essential meaning of the Vedic literature. Second time, he heard
it, he thought that the meaning is jnana. That it is impersonal specula...,
perso..., speculation so that one can attain impersonal view. And then third
time he heard the Vedas, then he understood actually he conclusion is bhakti.
So, that was the conclusive understanding, the correct understanding. So, this
is an evolution. It takes time even for Brahmaji to understand the correct
conclusion of the Vedic literature, what to speak of others. So, this is a theme
that is there. Absolute Truth is not very easy to understand. So, now, the
people in this world, when they have some religious inclination, they conceive
the Absolute Truth, as a multiplicity of beings. They say, oh, there are many
Gods. Different Gods for different departments. And they worship those Gods. Or
they may consider the Absolute Truth as some impersonal light.

So, let us look at these. Now, "andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti", they enter into
darkness. What does it mean here? It simply means that the demigod worshippers
stay in the dark material world. They continue to stay in this material world,
just as we discussed earlier that those who co..., pursue sense gratification,
they continue on in dark material world. Now, demigod worshippers may not get
degraded. But they do not get substantially elevated. F..., Srila Prabhupada
gives the example that when a person is in a jail, whether that person is tied
by iron shackles or golden shackles, it really does not make a lot of
difference. Because they are shackles either way. So, even if the demigod
worshippers get some material benefits, but still, they are staying in ignorance
of spiritual truth. And as long as they are ignorance of spiritual truth, they
have to continue on going round and round of the cycle of birth and death. So, if
they continue to go on the cycle of birth and death, that means, they are s...,
they are staying in darkness. And that is what is, is being regretted over here,
"andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti". So, the Upanishads, their focus is to elevate people
to the highest goal. And for elevating them to the highest goal, all other
goals, even if they are higher than the present goal, are not encouraged. You
know, so, so that people can focus simply on the highest goal. Everything else
is put aside. So, as we say often, the good is the worst enemy of the best. So,
there is the best thing that we can do, but the good thing is also not bad. So,
often we do the good thing, and miss out on the chance to do the best thing. So,
the demigod worship is not necessarily bad. It is good. It is pious. It is
religious. But it is often the worst enemy of the best. And the same applies to
the impersonal worship also. So, now, when the good is misunderstood to be the
best, then it becomes a far more serious problem. It is one thing to choose the
good instead of the best. But it is quite another thing to declare the good to
be the best and to declare the best to be the lower. So, let us see how this
happens. Before that, we will look at what is the logic of demigod worship.

So, if demigod worship is ultimately condemned, then why is it talked about in
the Vedic literature? What is the purpose of the Vedic literature giving the
system of demigod worship? The whole purpose is to enable people to get
gradually elevated. Different people have different natures. And depending on
their nature, they cannot get elevated directly. So, if they are enabled to be
attracted to Supreme Lord, then an alternative is provided in the form of
intermediaries. So, the Lord is here. The conditioned souls are here. If they
cannot worship the Supreme Lord, then, then intermediaries are provided in the
form of demigods. Let us understand this with an example. So, in the Bible,
there is the famous story of the prodigal son. So, there was a wealthy father
and his son wanted to have his own share of the inheritance. And he took it
insistently, and went, squandered away all the wealth, and then beca..., fell
into poverty, and then had to live under an abusive master. And finally, he
g..., becoming frustrated, he decided, you know, still fearful whether I can go
bac to my father, what face will I show to my father, but still, he decided to
go back. And when he returned back, at that time, his father welcomed him
happily. So, this is a story of how God loves us selflessly. That although we
turn away from Him, although we squander away whatever He has given us, still
when we want to come back to Him, He welcomes us. So, this is a story which
talks about the selflessness of God's love. And it is wonderful. But the Vedic
scriptures describe that God's love is much more than this. God's love is far
greater and far deeper. That means God not only welcomes us back, when we turn
to Him. But He also strives to get us back. He strives multifariously to get us
back. And one such extraordinary o..., effort of His is the system of demigod
worship. So, to understand this, let us look at the system of demigod worship
from a perspective of the Vedic literature.

So, the great sage Yajnavalkya is asked the question "kati devah". How many
devas are there? So, his answer progresses from three thousand and three, three
hundred and three, thirty-three, six, three, two, and finally one. And he
answers as if there is no contradiction inherent in the various answers. So,
now, we, how many Gods are there? So, he describes that there are many and there
is one only. How is that? Because just like there is one king and he has many
ministers. So, all the ministers are goverment authorities. And how many
government authorites are there? Ok, there are twenty-five government
authorities. There are fifty government authorities. But ultimately, how many
government authorities are there? Ok, there are five major departments. Ok. How
many government authorities are there? Ultimately, one authority, there is the
king. So, like that, "kati devah", this is a, this is a sequence that is
ascending upwards. And the purpose of the ascending sequence is to illustrate
the point that it is not that all the Gods are the same. But all the Gods are
part of the same system of demigod wor..., of arrangement by the Supreme Lord,
by which people can get elevated and eventually liberated. Now, when people have
to turn back to the Supreme Lord, what is primarily required for that is some
arrangement by which they can come to Him. So, what is that arrangement? That
arrangement is demigod worship. Let us look at this now.

So, here, this may seem a little complicated chart, but I will k..., try to keep
things simple. First, let us look at the king. So, there is the wealthy, there
is the wealthy father and his son. He comes back home. Now, he is not ready to
come back home. That is the way we are extending the story. So, the father wants
the son to come back. So, the father has initially gone away from, the son has
fa..., gone away from the father's home, gone away from the father's kingdom,
has gone to some other place, and he is serving some other master who is
exploiting that person, making, making the son work very hard and giving him
only a pittance. So, then, the father knows that his, my son has some inimical
feelings towards me. So, even if I wel..., invite him back, he will not come.
So, the father decides to send his own minister. He says go and invite him back.
Now, when he invites him back. Minister says, ok, you are being paid over here,
I will pay, why don't you come and work with me? Now, the son may know, may not
know that this minister is working for my father only. Ok, how much will you
give me? Ok, you will pay me that much. I will take good care of you. Better
than what you have over here. Ok, come back. So, now, when the son agrees, the
son has now come back to the kingdom of the father. Although, he has not come
back to the home of the father. He has come back to the kingdom of the father.
For what purpose? He has come back to the wh..., kingdom of the father not to be
reunited with this father, but just because he felt that there are better
mate..., there are better material facilities available over here. I am being
paid better. I will be taken care of better. But indirectly, through the
minister, the father has arranged for taking better care of the son. And the
father has got the son back into the kingdom. The king has brought back his
prince within his jurisdiction. Now, as the princess serving the minister,
gradually, he sees that the minister is paying me, but this minister is also
serving someone. Who is he serving? And if I understand, the minister is serving
the king. And who is the king? He comes to know that this person is the king. It
is my father only. He may not want to serve his father. But he thinks that it,
this minister is serving the king. If I serve the king, will he pay me better?
Then he approaches the king. He says, will you, will you employ me? He says, you
are my son. Why do I have to e..., why do I have to employ you? Come and stay
with me. My kingdom is you..., my whole palace is yours. Come and stay. He says,
no, no, no. I do not want that. Will you accept, if I work for you, how much will
you pay me? So, ok, whatever you want. I will pay you. Father wants the son to
come closer to him. So, at least, instead of working in the minister, minister's
ministry, he can work directly with him. So, he offers him a race and invites
him. Then, gradually, the fa..., son starts seeing, the prince starts seeing
that my father, the king is really a kind-hearted person. Why did I ever leave
and go away? And gradually, by serving him, by seeing him, by associating with
him, his affection awakens. And then he says, father, can I come back home?
Welcome my dear son, I was just waiting for you to come back. And that is how
the father and the son get reunited.

So, similarly, there is a progression by which the demigod worship helps the
souls come back to Krishna. So, when the souls have turned away from Krishna and
are living materialistically, the demigod worsh..., demigods are ministers of
Krishna. Krishna is the prime minister. Demigods are the ministers who have been
allocated different departments in the universe and cabinet. And these demigods,
they tell Krishna, they offer to their worshippers, or their potential
worshippers, the opportunity to get material benefits, but within a religious
context. So, even the people start coming to the demigod worshipper, demigod
worship. They are not coming for any selfless motive. They are coming for
material motives only. But what is happening? Because the demigods are the
representatives of Krishna. So, they are coming in the house of the Vedas. And
when they come in the house of the Vedas, that is safer. They are. Srila
Prabhupada was asked, who is better? A person who is worshipping a devata within
the Vedic tradition. Or a person who is worshipping God in some other religious
tradition, in one of the Abrahamic religions. Prabhupada said that the demigod
worshipper is better because he is in the house of the Vedas. Of course, we also
have to see if that person who is worshipping God in the Abrahamic religion has
a very advanced level of devotion to God, then, things may be different. But on
an average religious level, to be in the house of the Vedas is safer. So, what
has happened is people have come closer, closer to the Vedic, to the Supreme
Lord, through the arrangement of demigod worship. So, now, after they worship
the demigods, gradually they start, demigods, they come to know through the
Vedic literature demigods are also servants of the Supreme Lord. And they come
to the Supreme Lord. But initially, when they come to Supreme Lord, they are not
coming out of love. They think, you know, this demigod is giving me some material
results. Will Go.., will you also give me results? They tell Krishna. Yes,
Krishna will surely, whatever you want. But then, Krishna purifies them. By that
contact with Krishna elevates them. And they develop, their love for Krishna
awakens. And then they become pure devotees. And they return back to Krishna.

So, let us look at this now. So, essentially, what this table is saying is, so,
the first table, first column is talking about what the prince is doing. The
second column is talking about what the conditioned soul is doing. The third
column is talking about what the motive is for the prince to do that. And from
the philosophical point of view, when somebody is doing it, what is the
religious level. So, when the, like when the prince has gone. And he starts
solving, serving some other lord outside. So, like that, souls are serving some
other people in this world. So, those people, they are semi-gods. Say Me God. I
am God. Obey me. My way or the high way. So, every boss, whatever, ever he is,
thinks that I am God, in a small sense. I am the God of the office. I am the God
of this house. I am the God of this company. So, people are serving. What is
their motive? It is wealth. So, this is materialism.

Now, when the prince comes back, comes to the father's kingdom and starts
serving the minister. That is like the soul coming and serving the devata. Just
as the prince's motive is wealth. Similarly, devatas, theconditioned soul's
motive is also material. So, this is karma kanda. That is religious materialism.
Then, when the Sun starts, the prince starts serving the king. That is like
conditioned soul comes to Krishna. But still, the prince's motive is just to
earn from the king. Similarly, the conditioned soul's motive is to simply worship
Krishna for material gain. So, this is, but because it is directed towards
Krishna. It is sakama bhakti now. And then, when the prince gets reunited with
the father and starts serving Him with love. That is, that is similar to the
conditioned soul starts loving Krishna and starts practicing suddha bhakti. So,
this is the slow steady way by which the system of demigod worship is meant to
elevate people.

So, now, is demigod worship good or bad? What is the purpose of demigod worship?
It is actually in one sense very good because it ac..., is accommodating. So,
this Vedic system of multilevel worship. Multilevel worship means that if you
cannot worship the Supreme Lord, worship some intermediary representative of the
Supreme Lord. It bears testimony to a unique cor..., concern for the
individuality of the worshipper. You know, every per..., worshipper is
individual. That individual may not be ready to worship the Supreme Lord. So,
other religions say there is only one true God. All other Gods are false. You
have to reject all the other Gods and worship that one Supreme God. So, then, if
people are not ready to worship that Supreme God, then there is no way for them
to advance. But Krishna is so kind that, ok, you cannot worship me because of
your conditionings, your nature, you are not able to worship me, fine, you can
worship some representatives of mine. So, Krishna accommodates the individuality
of the worshipper. Along with that, the system of mul..., the multilevel worship
also, it bears testimony to unparallel flexibility of the worshipper,
worshipable in making himself accessible. That means Krishna is making Himself
accessible over here. And just like the father, he says, even if you do not want
to serve me my dear son, still, you know, I am available for you through my
minister. If you come in the kingdom, I will take care of you through my
minister. So, like that, Krishna makes himself accessible, makes a connection to
himself available through the demigod worship. So, here, we see that, the
demigod worship is a manifestation of Krishna's compassion. In fact, Krishna's
non-enviousness. That how can the same Supreme Lord, He is so eager to reach out
to people, that He does not even care whether they are worshipping Him or not.
Does not care in the sense that, He does not, even if they worship some of His
representatives, it is fine. At least, they are getting elevated. And then
eventually, when they are elevated enough, Krishna guides them to the higher
understanding. So, now, when we look at the system of demigod worship. The,
whether it is good or bad, that has to be understood based on the level of a
person. So, here, if a person is at a particular level, the demigod worship
system may be good. If the person is not at that level, the demigod worship
system may not be good. So, let us look at this logic of demigod worship.

So, if there is a student who has got sixty percent marks. If the score, what,
what is sixty percent? Good or bad? It will depend on what was the previous
level of the student. If the per..., student was getting eighty percent. Then,
coming to sixty percent is bad. If the student was getting fourty percent, then
sixty percent is good. So, envision there are two, two sons of a father. And
both of them have got the results. And both of them have got sixty percent. And
one of them used to get fourty percent. The father, the son says, father I got
sixty percent. Father pats his back. Shavas. Well-done, my boy. I am proud of
you. And then other son used to get eighty percent. And he comes to his father,
and says, father, I got sixty percent, slaps his back. Padmas. What have you
done? You disgraced me. Why have you got such poor marks? Now, second son said,
both of us got sixty percent. He was praised. I was chastised. Why? That is
because your level is different. So, similarly, is demigod worship good or bad?
It will depend on the level that the person is at. If the person is just living
materialistically, that is like at forty percent marks. Then, to come to sixty
percent level is progress. So, to come from godless materialism to religious
materialism is progress. But if somebody can worship, directly come to the
worship of Krishna, somebody with that, that level of intellectual understanding
and spiritual evolution, by which one can worship Krishna, then for such a
person to worship the devatas, it is like a step down. It is going down from
eighty percent to sixty percent. So, Krishna will tell in the Bhagavad Gita that
"alba medasah", those who worship the demigods are less intelligent.

So, it is going back to the analo..., a..., a..., analogy, if the prince is
staying in the father's house, and he is happy, is ready to serve the father and
be happy there. The prince will instead go and serve the minister. So, it is not
required. You are my son. You stay with me. You serve me. And you will be happy
with me. You will love me. So, what will be, what is good or bad, depends on the
level at which a person is. So, the demigod worship system is good for those who
are at the level of godless materialism, but is undesirable for those who are at
a higher level of devo..., understanding and spiritual evolution. Now, the
Upanishads, es..., Isopanisad points us towards the highest Absolute Truth. So,
those who can come to eighty percent, for them, sixty percent is undesirable.
So, like that, from that perspective, the sixty percent is the elevation of
sixty, forty percent, but sixty percent is still in the material world. And that
is why the demigod worship system is not spoken of highly over here. They, it
keeps people in the cycle of birth and death. So, before discussing the problem,
let us look further how, in some cases, the system can elevate people. So, there
are many cases in history. For example, there is the story of Vallabhacharya.
Now, Vallabhacharya was a devotee, worshipper of both Shiva and Vishnu. So, one
time he had some great reversal in his life. So, he went to a Shiva temple and
started offering fervent prayers. And when he offered those prayers, at that
time, Lord Shiva appeared in front of him. And Lord Shiva asked him. What do you
want? I am pleased with you. So, Vallabhacharya, you know, he said. My dear
Lord, whatever you wish to give me, whatever is most dear to you, please give it
to me. So, Lord Shiva smiled brightly. And then he was given a deity of Lord
Krishna. This is my dearmost object of love. And then he went on and became a
devotee of Krishna. So, here, we see demigod worshipper, or person who did
demigod worship being elevated to devotional understanding. Similarly, there is
in Caitanya Caritamrta, the story of Keshav Kashmiri. You know, Keshav Kashmiri
was a great worshipper of Sarasvati Devi. And when he was worshipping Sarasvati
Devi, at that time, he, she had given a blessing that you will defeat all other
scholars. Nobody will be able to defeat you. So, here, gone around, defeating
everyone else, and having a victory sheet, a jaypatra, where everybody would
have signed that I have been defeated by Keshav Kashmiri. So, when he came to
Mayapur, and met, into Navadvip, and he met Caitanya Mahaprabhu over there. He
was Nimai. Caitanya Mahaprabhu was smaller at that time, comparatively speaking.
He was called Nimai Pandit. So, Nimai Pandit had an informal discussion with him
in which he was completely flummoxed, he has become tongue ti..., tongue tied,
and did not know what to do. So, he came, Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not humiliate
him, but told him please go. Think about it. Study your books. Come back
tomorrow. And we will continue the discussion. So, when he came back at his
place, he was hea..., devastated. His ego was shattered in many ways. And he
came forward and fell at the feet of his Sarasvati deity and begged her. He
says, what is this? You have promised me I will never be defeated. How did you
forsake me like this? Have I offended you? Please, tell me what happened. And,
as he was praying like this, he fell asleep in his morrowsness. And then
Sarasvati Devi came and he, he said, why did, why did you forsake me? You told me
that I would never be defeated by anyone of, anyone in the world. She said, I did
not forsake you. I promised for that you will not be defeated by anyone in this
world, but the person whom you met was not from this world. He is the Supreme
Lord. He is the Lord of, he is the Lord of my Lord. My Lord is Brahma. And
Brahma's master, Brahma's ultimate master is Lord Krishna. "govindam âdi
purusham". Caitanya Mahaprabhu is non-different from Krishna. So, when she told
him like this, at that time, he, he realised the Absolute Truth. He said that
my g..., she told him that my greatest blessing is not that you are made a world
champion scholar. My greatest blessing is that you attain the lotus feet of the
Supreme Lord. Please go and surrender to him. And then Caitanya Mahaprabhu did
that. And, sorry, Keshav Kashmiri did that. So, here, Sarasvati Devi guided him
to Vishnu.

Similarly, there is story of Chandidas. Chandidas was a great worshipper of
Chandi as the name suggests. Now, when he was a worsh..., worshipping Chandi. He
had a lot, quite, good amount of prosperity through his worship to Chandi. And
he has, had a brother who was a Vaishnava, devotee of Lord Vishnu. So, his
brother ha..., had a shaligram deity of his own, shaligram shila. And Chandridas
had a big garden in which he would have flowers for worshipping Chandi. So, one
time, he, you know, his brother woke up early in the morning. And he saw there
are so many beautiful flowers. So, he asked his, he asked Chandidas, Chandidas'
brother asked Chandidas. See, you have so many flowers. Can I take some flowers?
Even one flower? And he says, I use it for my worship of my saligram sila.
Chandidas said, no, think doing. So, all the flowers are meant only for Chandi.
You cannot take even one. So, his brother felt bad. But he was respectful. He
went away. And then later, he came back. And when he was just passing while he
saw these beautiful flowers, he thought in his mind, if I could just offer these
flowers to saligram sila, it will be so nice. So, when he thought like this in
mind, his attitude was so devotional and his intention was so sincere and pure
to offer the flo..., flowers to the Lord, that that became manas puja. And those
flowers were offered in the mind. So, when these flowers were offered in the
mind, they became uchishta. They became prasad in a sense. Then, his, Chandidas
came. And he took the same flowers, and offered them to Chandi. You know, when
he offered them to Chandi, at that time, you know, Chandi appeared as it was
reciting the verse of Chandi. So, I am pleased with you. Please, tell me what do
you want. He says, surprises. I will ta..., I will ask later. But first tell me,
how is it that you became pleased with me. I have been worshipping you si...,
the same way for so long. And you have never become pleased with me, he says.
Chandi said, today, you have given me the prasad the Lord of my Lord. That is
why I am pleased with you. What do you mean? Then, Chandidas told the, told the
whole story by Chandidevi. And Chandidas asked, you meant to say worshipping
Vishnu is better than worshipping you? Of course. He said, my Lord is Shiva. And
Shiva's Lord is Vishnu. So, he is the Lord of my Lord. Chandidas said, why
didn't you tell me this? He says Chandidas, you have never asked me this. You
were so busy asking me give me this, give me that, give me that. I am just
giving you whatever you ask me for, and came for worshipping me. Something I
gave that to you. But today, because you did extra service. You offered the
mahaprasad of my Lord, of my ultimate Lord, therefore, I have given you this
revelation. Worship Lord Vishnu. Worshipping Him is the ultimate goal of life.
So, eventually, Chandidas became a great Vaishnava. He would, he would write
beautiful songs glorifying Lord Krishna's intimate pastimes. And he still kept
the name Chandidas because he considered Chandidevi to be his guru. She had
guided him to Krishna. And that is why she kept that name. But he did not
worship Chandi per say. He would, he was the worshipper of the Supreme Lord.

So, in this way, we see that the system of demigod worship can work. And those
who sincerely, purely, those who under some circumstances happen to worship the
demigods in a proper way, they will be elevated upwards to the worship of the
Supreme Lord from the demigod worship. But at the same time, 37:01
