Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZAWbjbDuWY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=PZAWbjbDuWY&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_021_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_17_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=Rh14IxJsIIZbpVo3phgj61Mb2Xt8MTU0MDEwMjcxN0AxNTQwMDE2MzE3

Hare Krishna.

Today, we start with the penultimate verse of the Isopanisad. It is mantra
seventeen. It is the last section in which prayers are being offered to the
Supreme Absolute Truth, the Isa about whom this Isopanisad is for help in
passing through the perilous journey of life as we struggle to return back to
the Supreme Lord. So, here, the prayer becomes more intense. And the longing is
that this material world is filled with so much danger. So, let me just end my
life and let me return back to you. So, let us, it, look at the mantra. And then
we will look at the purport.

    vāyur anilam amṛtam
    athedaṁ bhasmāntaṁ śarīram
    oṁ krato smara kṛtaṁ smara
    krato smara kṛtaṁ smara

So, "vāyur anilam amṛtam". So, there is air in the body. Let the life air mix
into the total reservoir of air. And "bhasmāntaṁ śarīram". So, let this body
die. Let the corpse get burnt. And at that time, "oṁ", O Absolute Truth, "krato
smara kṛtaṁ smara". Please remember what I have done for you. "krato smara kṛtaṁ
smara". Please remember. It is a repetit..., repetition. So, "krato" is,
"kratoho" is one of the words used to describe Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita. So,
"krato" is for whom things are done. Prabhupada translates as supreme
beneficiary. So, "kṛtaṁ " is that which is done by me. So, "oṁ krato smara kṛtaṁ
smara". O Lord, for whom there are so many things have been done. Please
remember what has been done. So, let this, the, the translation is:

"Let this temporary body be burnt to ashes, and let the air of life be merged
with the totality of air. Now, O my Lord, please remember all my sacrifices, and
because You are the ultimate beneficiary, please remember all that I have done
for You."

Now, two distinct thoughts may strike us when we look at a mantra like this.
Firstly, it is a very intense sort of emotion that when we are going to die and
we see that death is going to come, at that time, what happens? At that time,
there is a desperate longing. Let the body fall. So, religion and spirituality
are not just causal pursuits as social cosmetics in our public life. No. People
want to look good. And that is fine. I have a car. I have a house. I have a dog.
I have a guru also. And I go to the temple also. They are not casual pursuits.
Actually, they are going to be of supreme importance in determining our
postmortem destiny. What will happen to us after death will be determined by how
we have related with God in this life, what we have done in this life. So, this
gravity comes out. When it is, let this body fall. Let everything end. Let me,
now, it is no explicit prayer. Let me return to you. But the mood here is what?
O Lord, I want to come back to you. And I hope, and I pray to you that reme...,
you remember what I have done for you. Srila Prabhupada will explain in the
purport the, and answer, elaboration that will address the second thought that
may come in our mind. You know, do we need to tell the Lord to remember? The,
the Lord already remembers. So, why do we need to tell the Lord to remember? So,
actually, this is, the acharyas described that the Upanishads do not necessarily
always talk at the pure devotional level. So, here, this full prayer is a
fervent call for mercy. You know, at the same time, it is not a call that is at
a pure devotional level. At a pure devotional level, we may just call out,
please my dear Lord, let me serve you. Come what may. As we see Vitara Svarup
praying. As we see, Kunti Maharani praying. Even dangers. So, you know, just
because this may not be a s..., a prayer the same level should, should not mean
that we look down at the prayer. The fact that a person is so soberly preparing
for death and thinking of death so gravely itself is instructive for us. We
rarely think about death with such seriousness. And even when we think about
death, often, our thoughts are fleeting. When we see some, death somewhere,
either in the society, or in the news, or more consequently when we see it in
our family, then we think about it for some time. But then life draws the wheels
of illusion around us. And we forget our mortality. So, the very fact that
someone is preparing for death and recognising that, what will happen to me
after death is not in my hands. It is in the hands of a Supreme Being on whom I
am dependent. So, naturally, what is praying, have mercy on me. So, here we can
focus more on the aspect of the gravity of the moment of death, and the
seriousness with which one has to prepare for it. And as a part of the
preparation, one is begging to the Lord, O Lord, please remember all that I have
done for you.

Let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport. It has six sections in its. As we
said, discuss, these later purports become a little longer. So, first point is
Srila Prabhupada makes is the material body is a foreign dress. That must be
given up. This purport, what is it, mantra is talking about? About the give up
the body. So, Prabhupada says: why do you want to give up the body? Because the
body is foreign to the soul. Then, how, it, how should it be given up? Everybody
is going to die. But that is not enough. The best way to give up body is by
surrendering to the Lord, not by going to the brahmajyoti. So, all of us will
give up the body, we will get another body. The jnanis will go to brahmajyoti,
but the bhaktas alone will go back to Bhagavan. So, that is the best way to give
up the body. And now, if we want to give up the body, in that way, what is
required? What, it is, the last thought, that, what we think about at the time
of death will be of defining, decisive importance. Then, Srila Prabhupada
addresses the point that Krishna never forgets our service to Him. So, we may
not be able to remember at the time of death. But Krishna will remember our
service. And therefore, we should always service Him. And here, the prayer is
being offered to Lord to have mercy. But Krishna is always ready to g..., shower
His mercy on us. And Krishna's mercy is ever-available through devotional
service. And then what is that process of devotional service? So, this is a
devotional prayer. And Srila Prabhupada takes this opportunity to explain more
about devotion, and immediately connects it with Bhagavatam. Bhagavatam
elaborates this verse and all of the verses. And he talks about the various
exemplary characters from the Bhagavatam who are models of devotional service.
And then he says, prepare for death by devotional practice. So, we have to
practice in this life if we want to attain perfection at the end of our lives.

So, let us look at the first point. The material body is a foreign dre..., f...,
dress that must be given up. So, basically, people can have three distinct
attitudes towards the body. In Karma, in the path of karma, there is a path of
material enjoyment. One romanticises the body. In Jnana, one demonises the body.
And in Bhakti, one utilises the body. So, what does it mean to romanticise the
body? One thinks that the body is the source of great pleasure. And people dream
about their own body, how good-looking it is. And they t..., fantasize about
someone else's body. And they think that when two bodies will come together,
there will be so much pleasure. So, the idea is the body is a source of enormous
pleasure. And bodily serves pleasure is not just the greatest fantasy, but many
people think that it is the very purpose of existence. Krishna talks about this
mentality in the sixteenth chapter when he talks about the demoniac people. And
He tells that, what is their attitude? In 16.11, He says:

        kāmopabhoga-paramā
        etāvad iti niścitāḥ

Such people have, they feel that there is no doubt about this. The absolute
certainty is what? "kāmopabhoga-paramā", the supreme goal of life is sense
gratification. Srila Prabhupada translates this as:

"They have ascertained that the prime necessity of life is sense gratification."

If you let, nobody can live without this. And this is the purpose for which we
are all meant to live. So, in the path of karma, the body is romanticised as if
it is the ultimate goal of life, if to enjoy the body's pleasures. And the body
is like a wealth of pleasure, from which one just has to draw out and enjoy.
However, a little experience of life in the world also shows us that this is not
a realistic picture of bodily pleasure. The body's pleasure capacity is not like
that of a well, which has unending resource of water. The body's pleasure
goi..., capacity is more like a sponge that is filled with water. You know,
sponge is pressed, water comes out. Initally, just little touch and water comes
out. After that, we may press it, water comes out. After that, we squeeze it,
water comes out. And after some time, we squeeze it, squeeze it, and then all
that we get is the pain of pressing the sponge, and no water comes out. So, like
that, the body's capacity to enjoy is limited. And it is permanently,
irreversibly, unchangebly limited. So, therefore, we cannot, although we may in
our fantasies romanticise the body, we cannot actually live that fantasy.
Because the body's capacity is limited. And the body appears to be like a road
to pleasure. But the very road turns into a road block. So, imagine this
picture, if I am going along a road, and sometimes, some road block comes along.
That some trees have fallen. Or some other vehicle has fallen. So that they
breeze there. Then, we can remove the road block. But imagine the road itself
turns into a road block. Then, there is nowhere a person can go. So, body is
like a road to pleasure, that turns into a road block to pleasure. And no, we
cannot do anything about it. No matter, what we try. So, then, if a person, you
know, becomes somewhat philosophically astute. Then, the person understands that
actually the body is a trap. And all the senses that are there in the body, they
are going to drag us down. They are going to drag us down to sin. They are going
to drag us down to suffering. And this body is what makes us forgetful of our
true spiritual identity. And not only does it make it forgetful of our true
spiritual identity, but it makes us also a..., filled with sin, materialistic
desires that perpetuate our illusion. So, it is one thing to be blind. And it is
quite another thing to be blind about our blindness. That means if I do not have
eyes, then, at least, I know that I am blind. And then I am, when I am walk
carefully with a stake, or may ask somebody else please show me the way. But if
I am blind and not even aware that I am blind. Then, I just walk along and bang,
I may hit into a wall. And I may c..., break my noise, crack my head. So,
actually, the body makes us blind. It makes us forgetful of our spiritual
identity. But it makes us forgetful about our forgetfulness also. That it makes
us forget that we have forgotten our spiritual identity. It makes us think that
I am the body. And it, as if, and makes us think that bodily existence is
normal. And therefore, it is a trap. So, that is why Bhaktivinoda Thakur says,
"śarīra abidyā-jāl", it is not only avidya. It not only puts us in ignorance.
But it traps us in ignorance. It, it is a trap, jail. It is a net. So, what is
the cords of the net that drags us deeper and deeper? That is the bodily
desires.

So, in the path of Jnana, the body is demonised. What is this body that you are
attracted to? It is filled with stool and urine, and this, and that. And what is
the attraction to the body? So, cannot you see?

        tvaṅ-māṁsa-rudhira-snāyu-
         medo-majjāsthi-saṁhatau
        viṇ-mūtra-pūye ramatāṁ
         kṛmīṇāṁ kiyad antaram

So, in the Aila-gita, in the Eleventh Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam. Aila-gita is
the l..., song of lamentation sung by Purūravā after he has been ditched by
Urvaśī and he comes to his senses. So, he is telling that what was the
attraction to the body. What is this body? "tvaṅ-māṁsa-rudhira-snāyu-", this,
"tvaṅ-māṁsa-rudhira-snāyu-". There is flesh. There is, there are bones. There is
blood. There is skin. And then what is? That is the covering of the body. And
"viṇ-mūtra-pūye ramatāṁ", and is filled with stool, urine, pus. And I am trying
to enjoy such a body. So, if I am trying to enjoy body that is made of such
substances. "kṛmīṇāṁ kiyad antaram", what is the difference between me and a
worm? A worm is in the stool and is enjoying in the stool. And I am enjoying a
body that is inside nothing, but stool. Externally, it just looks attractive.
What is the difference between me? So, this is an attitude of extreme rejection
of the body, and where the body is demonised. So, now, you know, on the path of
bhakti, the focus is on utilising the body. So, yes, as Srila Prabhu..., we
discussed earlier, the body is a bad bargain. But we have to make the best of a
bad bargain, cannot, cannot just reject the body. We have to have, we have the
body now, so we have to utilise the body. So, how do we utilise the body? For
that, the example is given in the Srimad Bhagavatam of Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, how he
engaged all the senses in the service of the Lord.

        sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor
         vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane

So, he describes all the senses. He, with his mind, he thought of the Lord. With
his tongue, he, he spoke the glories of the Lord. With his hands, he touched the
lotus feet of the great devotees. And then

    pādau hareḥ kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe
     śiro hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane

So:

    karau harer mandira-mārjanādiṣu

So, he, with his hands, with his body, he touched the body, limbs of devotees.
With his hands, he cleaned the temple of the Lord. With his feet, he went to
the, you know, holy places. With his head, he bowed down. So, now, these are all
devotional activities. And there are varieties of devotional activities that we
can do with the body. And for doing these activities, we do need the body. So,
the mood of a bhakta is to utilise the body. And Srila Prabhupada was also quite
categorical about this. He said if devotees do not take care of their health,
there is a letter of Srila Prabhupada where he is telling to devotees, if you do
not take care of your health now, in the future, even if you are very
enthusiastic, you will not be able to serve Krishna. Of course, we can serve
Krishna even with our body. We can serve Krishna just by thinking about Krishna,
hearing about Him, chanting his holy names. But devotional service has so many
more opportunities to render service in exciting and fulfilling ways, which
require the body. So, therefore, a devotee utilises the body. Now, we may wonder
that Bhaktivinoda Thakur is a bhakta. And Urur..., Puru..., U..., Purūravā is
also a bhakta. Then, why are they talking about making statements which seem to
demonise the body? So, are, so, these are essentially counters for the default
romanticisation of our body the mind does. That means, for most of us, the body,
think, we think the body gives so, so much pleasure. So, because our, so, these
are the three positions of a pendulum. Romanticizing is one extreme. Demonising
is other extreme. And utilising is a normal point. So because all of us have a
romanticising conception of the body, so, often, the scriptures contain
statements which, tuck, which forcefully push the pendulum from this extreme to
that extreme. So, this body, we think, is a source of enjoyment. What is it made
about? Substance, false dwelling substances. Boom. Push the body from here to
there. But then what happens is, this is not the steady state, the attitude with
which, we can live in the body and serve with the body. So, the normal attitude
is to utilise the body. That does not mean we love the body. But whatever
Krishna has given us for our service, we take care of it. So, if we have a
computer, we will take care of the computer. If we have a co..., vehicle, we
will take care of a vehicle. Similarly, the body is also vehicle for the soul.
It is important vehicle, so it has to be taken care of. But when we have to take
care of also, it has to be understood that I am not the body. The bo..., and the
body is a foreign dress. Prabhupada uses such precise words. Foreign dress
means that it is different from me. And it is alien to my nature. I am
sat-cit-ananda. The body is asit, acit, and nirananda. And it is amazing we
discussed earlier how everybody has to die, and still, nobody wants to die.
Everybody wants to live. How do the people want to live actually? How means,
what are the ways in which we can see the, the desperate, I will try everything
and anything to try to live and all living beings. So, ho..., where does this
desire come from? It comes not from the body, but from the soul.

Similarly, "cit", everybody wants to expand their knowledge. You know, some
people want to know what is happening in the neighborhood, so they may gossip.
Some people want to know what is happening all over the world, so they may read
news on the internet, or on the, watch news on the television. Some other people
may want to know what is happening in the farthest reaches of the galaxy, so
they may be going to science and do the research. But everybody wants to know.
And experiments have shown that, you know, if monkeys are put in a box with the
wall on one side. Then, there is food on this side. But then the monkeys a...,
monkeys, their curiosity arouses, and they are ready to climb up the wall,
risk for around the wall, just to go another side of the wall to see what is
there on the other side. So, it is said curiosity kills the cat. So, the,
actually, this curiosity, this eagerness to know, it is there in everyone. Now,
matter is unconscious, but where does it ma..., where does this urge to know
come from? It comes from the atma, which is conscious. And then ananda, we all
want happiness. But actually, matter is dead. Matter can experience nothing.
When we put a Gulab Jamun on our tongue. The Gulab Jamun does not think I am
delicious. So, actually, it is we who experience the sweetness of the Gulab
Jamun. Then, we say delicious. So, where does this happiness taking propensity
come from? The Gulab Jamun is not taking happiness, otherwise the Gulab Jamun
will automatically become sweet. It does not become automatically sweet. It just
stays as it is. So, we have to cook it and sweeten it properly. So, this
"sat-cit-ananda" tendency comes from the atma, which is "sat-cit-ananda". And
that is why when we look at the nature of the body, and look at the nature of
the soul, we can understand the body is a foreign dress. It is a foreign. And it
is a dress. So, I have to give it up. So, now, it is said that we are dressed
for and dressed by our desires. We are dressed by our desires means that
whatever kind of desires we have, that is the kind of body we will get in the
future. So, person wants to eat meat, then they will get animal body. So, we are
dressed by our desires. Whatever desires I have, then I get a body. And when I
am in lion's body, then I am dressed for my desires. So, I had a desire to
enjoy, to eating meat, and now, I am dressed for my desire. Some..., sometimes,
we say people as dressed for party. Person is dressed for playing sport. That
means what? Whatever is required for that, this is, you are dr..., dressed for
s..., swimming. You are dressed for the sport, for going for a hike. You know,
whatever is required for doing that activity, that is there. So, similarly, when
you say we are dressed for our desires means, an animal, we see a lion or a
tiger, it is a soul who had the desire to eat meat. And now that soul has been
dressed for its desires. So, we are dressed for and dressed by our desires. So,
when we understand this, but actually, although I may seem to identify very
closely with my body, but I and my body are different. And the body has been
given to me because of my past desires. And now, depending on how I cultivate my
desires, accordingly, I get a body in the future. So, as devotees, we want to
utilise the body, neither romanticise, nor demonise. Though it is helpful, to
con..., contemplate on those sections of the Bhagavatam, where the body is
demonised. When periodic contemplation on such sections helps to bring the m...,
mind back from its romanticised notion. So, where, the mind often tends to go
because of the cultural event where the body is glamorised and displayed, and we
are always exalted with images of the pleasure that the body can give. So, as
devotees, we want to utilise the body.

Now, a, after we, how do we utilise the body? That means we serve, practice
devotional service, and ultimately, we have to leave the body. So, what is the
art of leaving the body? So, i..., at the time of death, the body will give us
up. But we will not give up the body. It is by the force of time, the body will
give us up. We will become separate from the body. But psychologically,
mentally, emotionally, we will not give up the body. We will still have bodily
attachments. And the roa..., real way to give up the body, is to give up the
attachment to the body. Then, only when our subtle body becomes purified, when
we are no longer desiring material enjoyment, then we become detached from the
body. So, Shankaracharya describes that:

        Angam Galitam Palitam Mundam

"Angam Galitam", you know, all the limbs have become weak. "Palitam Mundam", so
one's hair has fallen off. We cannot therefore live.

        Vrddho yati Grahitva Dandam

So, because one has become old, one has to use a walking stick.

        Dasanavihinam Jatam Tundam

All the tooth from the body are fallen off, but still:

        Tadapi Na Muncaty asapindam

This "pindam", the body that is there, "Tadapi Na Muncaty", even then "Na
Muncaty", does not give up. What? The desire. The desire to enjoy, even then
does not go away. So, really, if you want to give up the body, what that means
is, we have to give up the desire to enjoy the body. The body will give us up,
but we will not give up the body. Because we have, still have the desire to
enjoy the body. So, we will get another body. This specific body will go away.
But the body, and what it represents, the field, the ksetra through which we
will enjoy the world, that will never g..., that will not g..., go away from us
as long as we have the desire to enjoy. So, the whole process of spiritual life
is to purify the subtle body of the material desires that what we have.
Actually, when the subtle body is purified, when the subtle body no longer
contains the desires to enjoy the physical body, then, eventually, when that
physical body falls off, then the subtle body does not, along with the soul and
the Supersoul, does not go to next body. Which is that person be..., gets
purified, being puri..., that person being purified, then the person goes out of
the material exisence. Then, the subtle body merges with the subtle elements
that are there in the coverings of the universe. And the soul returns back to
the spiritual world. So, the whole process of bhakti is the process of purifying
the subtle body. And the art of leaving the body is, to a..., the art of giving
up the attachment to enjoying the body while we are here. So, how do we give
that up? That is through the process of bhakti.

Now, Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport that, that the path of
impersonalism is difficult and it is unstable. That is why one is not sure of
any eternal attainment by that. And the preferred method is the practice of
bhakti. Now, in the purport, Srila Prabhupada explains how this whole art of
leaving the body can be practiced only in the human form. All, and all living
beings will die by the cause of nature. But they cannot purify themselves. They
do not have the intelligence to perceive some higher reality. You know, if a cat
sees a rat, the cat cannot think, oh, today is ekadasi, I should fast. The cat
does not have that intelligence. It is simply driven by instincts. But human
beings can have a higher intelligence, where they can perceive some reality
beyond the bodily reality. And they can pursue some happiness, higher than the
happiness of the bodily demands, eating, sleeping, mating and defending. So, in
the human form alone, we can rise to a higher level of consciousness. So, Srila
Prabhupada talks about how the living being goes through various species and
then eventually, he comes to human form, where the person has the opportunity to
become freed from the bodily entanglement. So, here, what Srila Prabhupada says
me at first glance, it seem to support the idea of evolution. But Srila
Prabhupada is not talking about the bodily forms changing. The idea of evolution
is that the souls, you know, go from a lower specy to a higher specy. That is
spiritual evolution. But the scientific conception of evolution is that the
bodily forms themselves change. That, however, is, that is not correct. So, what
Srila Prabhupada is talking about after the prologue at the end of one mantra,
when the Universe is covered with water. Then, the souls, that are there at that
time, are having aquatic forms, and gradually, other forms also come. And they
start populating. So, the human form is a precious opportunity.

Now, that is why the moment of death is very important. What, what happens at
the moments of death. You know, the, always, scriptures tell us we have to
remember the Lord at the time of death. But w..., actually, we have to
understand that at the moment of death, we will remember that in which we have
sought shelter, the most during our life. That means if throughout my life,
whenever I have had any trouble. Whenever I had any trouble, my idea of getting
relief from the trouble was, oh, let me just turn on the TV and watch a cricket
match. My favorite moments of the cricket match may be when Indian team hit the
match winning sixor and then they have lifted up the world cup. Oh, that is my
dream, you know. That is when dream tru..., come true. So, whatever it may be.
So, we, the so, if the greatest relief, the greatest shelter I have always
sought saying watching cricket. Then, at the moment of death, the moment of
death is so dramatic that often, you know, conscious coherent thought is
difficult. And at that time, subconsciously, our mind will gravitate towards
that in which, we have found the greatest shelter, or we have sought the
greatest shelter. We may or may not have found it. Actually, we find the shelter
only in Krishna. But still, we seek shelter in various things. So, w..., if
somebody has found shelter in alcohol, then even if the person becomes very
determined and decides to give up alcohol, but there is always the chance of
relapse. Why relapse? Not because the desire for alcohol will be so strong. That
will go away after some time. The physical withdrawal and the physical urge for
alcohol or drugs will go away. But after that comes the management of one's
emotions. So, whenever there is a reversal, whenever there is depression.
Whenever there is frustration. Then immediately, the mind's default tendency
will be there is no problem so big that alcohol cannot solve it. There is no
problem so s..., big that, tuck, one shot of a drug cannot solve it. So, that is
the default instinct of the mind to seek relief in something which it has been
habituated to. So, similarly, all of us, you know, we all have our own pseudo
shelters. The true shelter is Krishna. All other shelters are pseudo shelters.
They are false shelters. Even after becoming devotees, we still often keep
taking the she..., taking shelter of the pseudo, pseudo shelters. So, even if
we do not entirely become pure devotees, at the very least, if we train
ourselves to not take shelter of the pseudo shelters, when we are troubled by
life's inevitable problems. But instead, we consciously seek the shelter of
Krishna. Then, at the moment of death also, the mind will gravitate towards
Krishna. So, gravitate means just like if I keep object here, by the force of
gravity, tuck, the object will fall. Nothing has to be done. The object just has
to be left, lifted and it will fall. So, like that, whatever are our attachments,
our mind will gravitate towards those attachments.

Now, what are our attachments? How can we know? We do not necessarily have to do
this experiment to find out. But actually, when we do nothing, we come to know
a lot of things about ourselves. You know, as soon as we leave the mind idle,
then what happens? Immediately, the mind goes s..., to wherever we think
pleasure is available. So, wherever the mind imagines pleasure is available. And
that is where our attachments are. Now, we should not keep ourselves idle to
think, let me observe where the mind goes. Because the mind is so seductive
that it will not keep us as observer. It will make us the actor. You know, we
sit as observer, where did my mind go? And after some time, what am I doing? I
am not supposed to do this. So, we do not have to observe this. Anyway, also, we
can see our mind going in so many wrong directions. But the point here is that
we have to consciously retrain our mind. So that instead of going towards
bodily things for shelter, the mind goes towards Krishna for shelter. So, it is
not just some coincidental, magical feet. At, at the moment of death, we
remember Krishna, everything is alright. We will go back to God. Sometimes,
some people ask, oh, if it, all that I have to do is remember Krishna at the
time of death, then I will enjoy as much as I want throughout my life, and when
I have enough of enjoyment, then I will just take out a pistol, put the pistol
on my head, Hare Krishna, tuck. So, will I go back to Godhead? I will not go
back to Godhead. I will go back to ghost head. You know. Why? If I commit
suicide, then that is what was my destination. Why is that? Actually, Krishna is
also very care, clear. Krishna says:

        anta-kale ca mam eva
        smaran muktva kalevaram

He does not just say, you know, "ketan muktva". It is not just uttering the
word. It is "smaran". It is remembering. So, if I have been enjoying the body,
naturally, then I have been attached to the body. Then, if I am attached to the
body, somehow, physi..., verbally, even if I utter the holy name, will I be
thinking of Krishna at that time? Very unlikely. And we cannot, we cannot cheat
our way back to Godhead. You know, Krishna says:

        dyutam chalayatam asmi

Among all cheaters, I am the greatest cheater. So, we have to honestly redirect
our desires to Krishna. The last thought will be determined by the thought that
we have held uppermost in our life, throughout our life. And that is what Srila
Prabhupada talks about. That now the point is, we may worry, somehow, I may
practice throughout my life also. But still what will, what if I am not able to
remember at the time of death? So, what if suddenly accident happens, what if
suddenly heart attack occurs? What if I die in my sleep only? There are so many
possibilities. Now, we have to understand, you know, practicing bhakti and
surrendering our life to Krishna, is not a matter of some chance game, where
everything is determined by some arbitrary factors? If we have served Krishna
through our life, then even if at the moment of death, we are not in a position
to remember Krishna, Krishna will remember us. He will remember us. So, in the
Vishnu Sahasranama, there are thousand names of Lord Vishnu which are used to
glorify his different attributes, and the various acharyas have given many
meanings of each of these names. So, Baladeva Vidyabhushana has written a
beautiful commentary on the, on the Vishnu Sahasranama. And there he describes a
names, meanings of each name of Vishnu. And there he describes two paradoxical
attributes. So:

        guruh gurutamah dhaama
        satyah satya-paraakramah
        nimishah animishah sragvee
        vaachaspatir-udaara-dheeh

So, he describes two contradictory attributes, "animishah" and "nimishah".
"animishah" means one who never blinks his eyes. And "nimishah" means one who
blinks his eyes, closes eyes, "nimishah", blink. So, now, it is, can the Lord be
both? How can He be "animishah" and "nimishah" also? Baladeva, Baladeva
Vidyabhushana explains that actually "animishah" means when the devotee renders
service to the Lord, the Lord keeps the eyes unblinkingly open so that the
devotee can render, the, the, the Lord will, Lord notices the service the
devotee is doing. And "nimishah" means, whenever the L..., devotee commits some
accidental mistake, the Lord closes eyes and overlooks the mistakes. So, the
Lord is not there to catch us committing mistakes. The Lord loves us. And He
wants to elevate us. Krishna's inner presence is not that not to catch us. It is
to coach us. He wants to coach us. This is right. This is wrong. Now, when a
coach is there, and coach is helping athlete. The ath..., coach is also aware,
ok, the athlete is doing this wrong, you know, if the batsman is, say, moving
the ha..., moving the legs too fast or too slow while batting, the coach
observes that. And the coach points all that also. But the whole f..., purpose
of the coach is not to find the faults. The purpose of the coach is to focus on
the potential of the athlete, and help bring out the potential, and help remove
whatever faults are there, which are preventing that potential from coming out.
So, similarly, Krishna's inner presence is not to catch us. You know, you are
doing this wrong. You are doing that wrong. You are doing that wrong. His inner
presence is to coach us. So, He sees our spiritual potential. And He wants to
bring that out. That is why "nimishah animishah sragvee". "animishah" means
whenever He sees anything good that we are doing, He notices unblinkingly, keeps
eyes always open to ourselves. And "nimishah" means, He closes His eyes. So,
whenever committing mistakes, He closes eyes and overlooks it. And the example
for this is of course Putana and Draupadi. You know, we know that, in the
Mahabharat, there is a story that Draupadi once came. And Krishna and Arjuna
were in a room. And she brought some fruits. And now, she, so, they were talking
intimately. So, she just left and with a knife. And she went away. So, Krishna
started picking up the knife and peeling the fruits. And as He was peeling the
fruits, the knife slipped from his hands. And when knife slipped, actually it
c..., cut His finger. And blood started coming out. You know, when Draupadi saw
blood coming out, she just without looking anybody, she ripped a piece of her
saari. She started bandaging His finger. And as she was bandaging the finger,
Krishna looked at Draupadi. Now, Draupadi was concerned with, Krishna was
peaceful, joyful. He says, Oh, Draupadi, I will, I remember this service. And I
will repay you for this. So, Krishna repaid her at the time of the Vastraharan.
Small piece of saari, she offered. Krishna gave her unlimited saari in return.

So, Krishna notes even the smallest service that is being done. Krishna's body
is transcendental, and no blood comes out from it because there is no blood in
that. But for the sake of lila, whatever is required, Krishna manifests. So, the
devotee does not think that, oh, nothing has happened to Krishna. Krishna is
transcendental. So, the devotee is concerned to take care of Krishna. And to
enable for the reciprocation and emotion as a part of lila, Krishna lets
whatever is required manifest from His body. So, even the blood that comes out,
it is, it is not material blood. It is transcendental. Just to enhance the rasa
of the pastime. Then, similarly, "animishah", when the devotee commits some
mistake, the Lord overlooks that. So, when Putana came to kill Krishna, Krishna
closed His eyes. Why? Because Putana had inimical mentality. She wanted to
poison and kill Krishna. At the same time, she had come as a nurse. And in the
previous life also, she had a maternal attitu..., desires, affection towards
Krishna when He had come as Vamanadeva. So, she was the sister of Bali Maharaja.
And she initially had maternal feelings towards Him. But when she saw Him take a
giant form, the maternal feelings changed. So, she still had some maternal
feelings. And Krishna closed His eyes. He focused only on the maternal feelings.
And her malevolent feelings of wanting to kill, He overlooked them. And He
purified her. And He eleva..., even let her become a nurse. So, the malevolent
fo..., feelings went away and the mal..., m..., and the maternal feelings were
highlighted. So, Krishna closed His eyes to overlook the faults of Putana. So,
this is Krishna. So, Krishna always remembers our service. And as devotees, we
need, we k..., we need to be sure that whatever service we are doing, even if
nobody, no, other devotees do not notice it, our spiritual master does not
notice it, our counsellor does not notice it, does not matter. Krishna is
noticing. And Krishna will reward us for every single service that we do. And it
is not that we want rewards for our service. We love Krishna. That is why we
want to serve Him. But we want reciprocation. We can try to have reciprocation
with other devotees also. And we should, even the healthy relationship. There is
reciprocation with devotees also. But even when there is no reciprocation,
because of certain circumstances, we should know that Krishna is watching and
Krishna will surely reward every single service that we do. So, this is Krishna.

So, Srila Prabhupada is using this point to say that Krishna never forgets the
service that we do for Him. In fact, Krishna is so concerned. What to speak of
forgetting our service? You know, He does not even forget us when we have
completely forgotten Him. And so Krishna's love is unfailing for us. Krishna's
love is unfailing in the sense that it is ever-waiting, ever-willing, and
ever-working. Krishna is ever-waiting. He is in our heart as the Supersoul. And
he is waiting for us to turn back to Him. When will this soul come to me?
Suppose we go to meet someone. And that person keeps us waiting for five
minutes, ten minutes, one hour, two hours, three hours, five hour, we feel
irritated. How long should I wait? And, and if the person does not come, then we
just go away, forget it. Now, sometimes, if we need that person, then we will
wait for six hours, ten hours, also. You may go two, three, four, five days. But
suppose, say, you are a, you are a coach. And you are going to coach a student.
You are doing that as a favor to that person. And then, that person does not
come on time. And that person keeps you waiting. Then what will happen? He says,
oh, if I, if you do not come on time, I do not need you. You need me. Get lost.
We just walk away. So, actually, Krishna is like that. You know, Krishna comes
for us. And He is in our heart. He is waiting for us. And it is not He who needs
us. It is we who need Him. He is happy in the spiritual world with His
innumerable devotees. But without Him, we may think that temporarily we are
enjoying. But actually, eventually, we suffer. So, Krishna has come for us to
coach us. But we turn away from Him. But no matter how much we turn away from
Him, Krishna is ever-waiting. He keeps waiting for us, as a Paramatma, life
after life after life, He comes along. And Krishna never gets upset with us. He
says, you neglected me for so much time, you know, I will not care for you.

Sometimes, even when two friends have a tiff, and then one friend turns away.
You know, after some time, that one, that friend comes to the senses also, and
the friend says, come on, let us be friends. No, I will not be friends with you.
So, Krishna is not like that. Krishna is ever-waiting. Krishna is ever-willing.
Even when we, not only turn away from Him, we turn against Him. Turn away from
Him means go away from Him. But turn against Him means, means blame Him only.
So, we may become atheistic. We may become offensive. But even then, Krishna
keeps waiting. You know, there is nothing that anyone can do that can ever stop
Krishna from loving us. You know, no sin, no offense, nothing that we can do
that can ever stop Krishna from loving us. Sometimes, we may do such things by
which we may not be able to perceive Krishna's love, just like nothing that I
can do, can stop the Sun from sho..., giving its light. But I can close my eyes.
And I will not see the Sun. But the S..., just the, even if I insult the Sun,
the Sun will not stop giving light. Similarly, no matter what we do, even if we
bla..., become atheist and blaspheme Krishna, Krishna still stays in the heart,
even of the atheist. And Krishna does not stop loving them. Krishna always keeps
loving them. But the more they become atheistic, the more they are closing their
eyes to the Sun. They cannot perceive Krishna's love. So, but Krishna is
ever-willing, ever-waiting, ever-willing. And not just ever-willing. Krishna is
ever-working, ever-working.

        mādṛk prapanna-paśu-pāśa-vimokṣaṇāya
         muktāya bhūri-karuṇāya namo ’layāya

So, Gajendra prays to the Lord, when he is caught in the jols of crocodile, my
dear Lord, please, "prapanna", I surrender unto you. "paśu-pāśa-vimokṣaṇāya",
please liberate me from this "paśu-pāśa". This animal coil that has caught me.
So, this "paśu-pāśa" has two meanings. It is not just the crocodile which has,
which is a "paśu", which has become a "pāśa". But it is also the body, the bodily
conception, which is also like a "paśu-pāśa". And why should you liberate me?
"muktāya". You are liberated, so, you are capable of lift up, liberating me?
Yes? But why should I liberate you? I am liberated. You are very merciful.
"bhūri-karuṇāya", you are, you are very merciful, my dear Lord. Please have
mercy on me. But Lord may say, I had so much mercy on you. I tried so many
times. You never came to me. So, He says, "muktāya bhūri-karuṇāya namo ’layāya",
"namo ’layāya", oh Lord, You are "’layāya". "’layāya" means, you never get
tired. Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport, and Chakravartipad also writes
that actually, the Lord is constantly striving to get us back to Him. And He
never ever gets tired. When the mother gives some medicine to the child. And
the child just as soon as the mother brings the medicine, child just catches,
tuck, throws it away. And the medicine gets spilled. The glass gets cracked.
What does the mother do? The mother again brings the medicine. Let us take it.
Again it cracks. So, how many times will ordinary mother do? A few times, after
that, she will get angry. But Krishna, she, Krishna, He keeps trying to give us
the medicine of spirituality, again, and again, and again. So, Krishna is
ever-waiting. Krishna is ever-willing. Krishna is ever-working. And whatever
little work we have to do in our devotional service to turn towards Him,
actually, that is very tiny as compared to what Krishna has done for us, for so
many life times, He has been accompanying us. And that is why the Bhagavatam
says that, you know, the, how much, when the soul becomes awakened to the glory
and infinity of Krishna's love, the soul feels as if, you know, what c..., what
to speak of repaying the Lord for what he has done. I cannot even say enough
thank you. You know, even if I express my gratitude for the Lord, to the Lord,
for a lifespan as long as Brahmaji's, still that will not be enough. So, say,
why?

        yo anthar bhahista navutam asupam vichyam vivam
        acharya cheto pusat svagatim vinakti

That Lord internally and externally, He has been working to purify me.
Externally, he has been sending Guru, Sadhu, Shastra in my life. Internally, as
a Caityaguru. He is guiding. Do this. Do not do this. As a voice of conscious.
He is speaking to me, constantly guiding me. So, this is Krishna's love. And
meditating on Krishna's love enables us to put aside the false loves of this
world, the temporary loves of this world. That we do not let ourselves be
allured and distracted by those loves. You know, those loves can also be
connected with our spiritual love for Krishna. That is wonderful. But we do not
let those loves become substitutes for Krishna's love. So, in this way:

        Om krato smara kritam smara

We can pray to the Lord, please remember me. But more important is that we pray
that, we remember how much the Lord loves us. We just keep remembering that how
much the Lord loves us. Then, we will not let ourselves get tempted by the
things of this world. So, ultimately, we want to go back to Godhead. Srila
Prabhupada says that the examples are given in Bhagavatam. So, Parikshit
Maharaja, what he did at the time of death? So, Srila Prabhupada uses all the
nine processes of devotional service, and he gives example of how the devotees
practiced each of the limbs of devotional service, one-one limb, each of them.
And they attained perfection by practicing that limb. So, Pariksit Maharaja
heard Sukadeva Goswami spoke. Then, like that, different devotees, have rem...,
have done, perfection, ishvara, in limb of devotional service:

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
         smaraṇaṁ

"smaraṇaṁ" is Prahlada Maharaja. so:

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
         smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

"pāda-sevanam", Lakṣmīdevī.

        arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

So, "arcanaṁ" is Pṛthu Maharaja. "vandanaṁ" is Akrūra when he went to the
Vrin..., A..., went to Vrindavan, offered wonderful prayers. "dāsyaṁ", that is
Hanuman. "sakhyam", that is Arjuna. And "ātma-nivedanam", that is Bali Maharaja,
sorry, err, yeah, Bali Maharaja. He offered himself completely to Vamana Deva.
So, now, it is not that these devotees have alone practiced these limbs of
bhakti. There are many other devotees who have practiced. And these devotees may
have also practiced other limbs of bhakti. But the prominent thing that they did
was the defining attribute of the devotional life was, their renditio...,
rendering of this service. And that is highlighted in the Srimad Bhagavatam. And
they are, they are the models for that form of that devotional service. And
Srila Prabhupada says that if he want to practice this, that, he want to attain
success at the time of death, then the model for that is in the Bhagavatam. In
the Bhagavatam, we see that there is the example of how people remember Krishna.
And they strive to remember Krishna. They are from different background. But
still, they somehow come together, and remember Krishna, and return back to him.

So, now, actually, the time for practicing is now. When should we start
practicing devotional service? Now. Srila Prabhupada says we have to render
devotional service now so that we can be prepared at the time of death. The
present is all that we have and all that we will ever have. What does this
mean? The prese..., you know, our mind often goes into a zone. But we are
thinking about the past. Oh, that went wrong. And from that, that will happen.
It will be so nice. On, the future, oh, when that happens, that will be so good.
If that happens, I do not know what I will do. So, me..., so our mind keeps
going towards the past and the future. So, because of this, we often do not
utilise the present. And often, we think of the present as if it is a practice
run for next time. You know, sometimes, when, when players are playing, say,
cr..., sport stars are, cricketers are playing, you know, s..., some sport
stars are playing, so then they are having some net practice. Now, net practice,
some of them may take it seriously. Some of them may not take it seriously. So,
it is just practice. It is not the real thing. So, we often treat life, we treat
the present as if it is a practice run for next time. Ok, what is going right
now is not very important. You know, tomorrow, what is going to happen, that is
very important. But then what happens is, when we have a lack of desigual in
different uncaring attitude towards the present, then it is not only the present
that we lose by that. We lose also the future. Because that attitude which we
allow to sink into us. That attitude, we carry from the present to the future
also. So, whenever the future is going to come in our life, the future is going
to become the present. And then we see the present also for us the practice run
for next time. Oh, tomorrow, something will happen. Day after tomorrow,
something will happen. So, we all expect that in the future, something will
happen. Then, I will become serious in devotional service. We may think that,
oh, my spiritual master will come and maybe touch his hand on my head, and
then some electric current will pass through my body and then I will become a
pure devotee. No, no. Such things are not going to happen. Actually, we have to
purify ourselves. And the moment for purifying ourselves is now. Now is the best
time for purifying ourselves. Why? Because now is all that we have. We may say,
no, I have this problem, that problem, that anxiety. Yes, we have those. But we
will similarly have distractions throughout our life. Some, at some moments,
there will be more, at some moments, there will be less. But distractions will
always be there. So, the present is all that we have, and the present is all
that we will ever have.

So, if we have to do some material responsibility in the present, fine. We will
do that material responsibility. We will do that wholeheartedly. If we have to
do some, do some devotional activity, then we do that wholeheartedly. Because
this is the only time we have to do it. So, keeping this in mind brings a sense
of urgency and immediacy to our spiritual life. Because when we understand that,
it is not that there will be some rosy future when I will be able to peacefully
chant Hare Krishna. When I will be able to peacefully practice devotional
service. Is, if we can make arrangements by which we can be more peaceful, our
spiritual life, our circumstances can be more conducive for practicing spiritual
life, that is excellent. But we should not postpone the practice of our
spiritual life for a future, for a more comfortable future. At a basic level, we
keep practicing our spiritual life even now. And we work towards a creating a
future when we can practice it more. Because spiritual life can be practiced,
not just when we have time. But spiritual life can be practiced when we have the
attitude to practice spiritual life. When we have the attitude that I want to
commit myself to Krishna. And that attitude has to be cultivated now. So, in the
future, even when I get time, if I have not cultivated the attitude of
committing myself to Krishna, then when I have time, I will find that so many
other engagements will come up. So, it is said that, you know, work expands to
occupy the time that is available for it. So, that which I can do in one hour,
often, if I give six hours for it, it will consume all the six hours. So, like
that, if we have not develo..., if we habituate our mind to doing material
things, we not really habituate ourselves doing our spiritual things, then even
we have the time to do spiritual things, we will take up some material thing,
and that will expand our..., itself so much that we will have no time for
spiritual life. Because the problem was not the lack of time. The problem was
the lack of the attitude. So, the, if that attitude has to change, it has to
change now. That means what? This is the moment when I, I want to offer myself
to Krishna. So, in the future, if the circumstances are better, I may be able to
offer myself better to Krishna. Fine. But right now, whatever I have, let me
offer myself to Krishna. So, what I have, most important is the present moment.
And when we practice devotional service with this urgent attitude, then we will
find that, not only will we make spiritual advancement, but our devotional life
will become so much deeper and richer. We will, we will start getting little
realisations. We will start percei..., relishing Krishna Consciousness. And
then, when we start practicing the spiritual life with seriousness, when the
moment of death will come, we will have remembered Krishna throughout our life,
naturally, we will remember Him at the time of death. And then, we will return
back to Him to live forever with Him in love and in eternal happiness.

So, to summarise, today, we discussed about firstly how the body is a foreign
dress. So, to understand this, we discussed the three attitudes towards the
body. The karma, where the body is romanticised. Jnana, where the body is
demonised. And Bhakti, where the body is utilised. So, even in the bhakti
scripture, sometimes the body is demonised to drag our mind away from the
roman..., its default romantic conception of the body. But at the steady state,
we have to utilise the body. And we take care of it as a vehicle given by
Krishna to serve Him.

Then, we discussed about how this, everybody is going to die. So, bewi..., the
body will give us up. But we will not give up the body until we actually
remember Krishna, sorry, until we become purified and we remember Krishna, until
we, our subtle body becomes purified. So, the essence of spiritual life is not
just giving up the body. It is turning our attachments, purifying our subtle
body, so that instead of being attracted to the world, we are attracted to
Krishna. And that can be done only in the human form. So, in the human form, we
have the intelligence to perceive spiritual reality and the advanced
consciousness to seek that spiritual reality. So, we, how do we perceive that
spiritual reality? Perceive and pursue. Perceive means to see. And pursue means
go after. That all happens through various spiritual processes. But the best
among them is the process of bhakti yoga.

And to remember Krishna at the time of death, which is very important so that we
can go back to Him, we have to practice remembering Him throughout our life.

And in-between, we discussed before that how, what, how we will get the
motivation to remember Krishna at the time of death. Let us say, it can, I am
going to die. There is a great danger. That is the fear-based model, which is
important. But a love-based motivation is to remember how much Krishna loves us.

So, we discussed how Krishna is, in a, present in our heart not to catch us, but
to coach us. You know, He closes His eyes. He blinks His eyes whenever He sees
any mistakes. And He opens His wide, eyes wide to see every service that we do
for Him.

So, Krishna is ever-willing. Krishna is ever-working, Kri..., is ever-waiting
and ever-working. There is nothing that we can do that can stop Krishna from
loving us.

So, when we meditate on Krishna's love, that is a positive love-based
motivation. When we remember death, that is a negative, fear-based motivation.
And both can be used at different times to remind us of the urgency. The present
is what I have, is all that I have and all that I will ever have. So, let me
offered those present moment to Krishna.

Thank you very much. Sri Isopanisad ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura
bhakti vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande hari haribol.
