UNIT 5

Questions for Closed Book Assessment

Introduction

1. What is the meaning of the word veda?

1. So the word Veda, Srila Prabhupada uses in his purport in the most expansive
sense. He uses it to refer to all knowledge. So, the word Veda literally means
knowledge. So, in fact, all knowledge that anybody has can be accepted as Veda.
So in the expansive sense of the word, it refers to all knowledge.

2. And in average sense of the word, we use Vedic and non-Vedic. So, for
example, we may say Islam, Christianity are non-Vedic religions because they do
not accept the authority of the Vedas. So in the average sense, we refer to the
Vedas as the Vedic literature.

3. And then there are some scholars who use the term Veda in a very restrictive
narrow sense and they say, Veda refers to only the four Vedas. So they consider
even the Smritis, the Puranas, Itihasas to be non-Vedic. So, that is the use of
the word Veda in a very restrictive sense.

So the term can be used in broad senses. In general, Srila Prabhupada uses it
Veda in the average sense to refer to the Vedic literature. Here, he uses it to
refer to the Vedic, Vedas referring to all knowledge.


2. List four defects of a conditioned soul.

        1. Limited senses (Karnapato) 2. Committing Mistakes (Brahma) 3.
Illusion (Pramad) 4. Cheating propensity (Vipralipa)


3. List three pramanas.


4. Give reasons why çabda-pramäëa is a superior means of acquiring knowledge.


5. List the two systems of knowledge in the material world.


6. What are the two qualifications of a bona fide guru?




Mantra 1

7. Give the English meaning of the terms:

a. isavasya

Everything belongs to the Lord, Ishvara. We need to see everything being
perfect; living in harmony with it refers to the principle, the isavasya
principle, the underlying unifying principle of the Isopanisad. we should live
in harmony with Ishvara, with the isavasya principle that centers on the
Ishvara.

b. parä and aparä prakrti

prakrti means energy, but also, material nature is called prakrti. Apara means
inferior, param means superior. So para prakrti refers to the superior energy,
    the living entities, the soul, whereas apara prakrti refers to the inferior
    energies, earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego.
    From Bhagavad Gita 7.5:

"Here it is clearly mentioned that living entities belong to the superior nature
(or energy) of the Supreme Lord. The inferior energy is matter manifested in
different elements, namely earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence
and false ego. Both forms of material nature, namely gross (earth, etc.) and
subtle (mind, etc.), are products of the inferior energy. The living entities,
       who are exploiting these inferior energies for different purposes, are
       the superior energy of the Supreme Lord, and it is due to this energy
       that the entire material world functions."

c. Bhägavata communism

Everything belongs to God; nothing belongs to us. Srila Prabhupada would say
spiritual communism where everything belongs to not to the state, but to God, is
the perfection of communism. So one can utilize God's property as much as he
requires, not more than that. Then he will be thief, he will be punishable. Just
like father's property. Each and every son has got the right to live at the
father's protection. That is spiritual communism.

d. apauruñeya

Transcendental. Srila Prabhupada mentions in the purport that we have four
defects and that is why we need apauruseya source of knowledge, we need
transcendental source of knowledge.



Mantra 2

8. Define karma, akarma and vikarma.

Karma

There are three types of activities, three types of karma. So now, the word
karma can have four different meanings, and this itself, you will see, the karma
is used in two different senses, so for example karma can mean action of any
kind, where any action can be called karma.

Sometimes, when we are suffering, oh, I am suffering because of my karma. There
what we are referring to is not karma, but the reaction of karma. So the word
karma can refer to our actions, the word karma can refer to our reactions, or we
say that the law of karma is inescapeable. Here we are referring to the system
of action and reaction. That can also be called as karma, and beyond that the
fourth meaning of the word karma is what is given over here.

So within the generic word karma, there are three kinds of activities, one of
them is also called as karma, so this can also be called sukarma, good karma.
Prabhupada explains in the purport as actions which are performed in terms of
one's prescribed duties as mentioned in the revealed scriptures. So, we get
good, we do good karma when we act according to scripture. We act morally,
    responsibly, good activities. That is karma. That is sukarma or good action.

Akarma

Human life offers liberation through akarma. We, when we come to the human form
of life, then we can perceive a higher reality, we can perceive the eternal
beyond the temporary. We can perceive the spiritual beyond the material. And we
can realise that by doing akarma.

Now, akarma does not mean inaction. It means action which brings no reaction. So
the 'a' prefix is not directly modifying karma in the first sense of action, it
is modifying karma in the sense of reaction. So akarma means action that
produces no reaction. So actions, as Prabhupada says, which free one from the
cycle of birth and death. So how does that happen? That we will discuss later,
but essentially, akarma means when we act for the pleasure of Krishna, then we
do not have to suffer any reactions, because Krishna is working for our
purification and elevation. He is staying in our heart and he wants to liberate
us.

So when we start working for him, it is like the patient cooperating with the
doctor. When the patient starts cooperating with the doctor, naturally the
patient's recovery is smoother, quicker and better. So like that, when we start
cooperating with Krishna, by doing akarma, then we can be liberated from the
material existence. So going back earlier to the movie example, akarma means the
person decides, no I do not want to watch the movie anymore. So, I just want to
come out of the theater. Then, whatever suffering is going in the movie, that
will not affect the person. Because that person understood now that I do not
want to watch the movie, I am not interested in whether it is good or bad on it.
It is illusion, let me get out. So akarma is that kind of activity.

So let us move back now and we will see that, human life offers liberation
through akarma. So how exactly do we perform akarma? Srila Prabhupada explains
that akarma essentially means doing activities on behalf of God. So for example,
if I am working in the army, and while working in the army, I shoot an enemy
soldier. At that time, because I am working on the behalf of the army, I am not
held responsible. In fact, if I shoot many enemy soldiers, I may even get a mild
honor from the government because I have served the government in a very
important way in a particular battle. So on the other hand, if I come back and I
shoot a neighbour over an argument, then I will be punished because I am doing
that on my account. So when we act on our own account, we become bound, when we
act on behalf of Krishna, we become unbound, we become liberated.

So the whole purpose of the Vedic literature is ultimately to teach akarma. So
akarma refers to those activities which bring liberation. Now Srila Prabhupada
writes that such a liberating work is described here in the pages of Sri
Isopanisad.

Vikarma

Then the opposite of that is vikarma. Vikarma is bad action. Actions which are
performed by the misuse of one's freedom, which direct one to the lower life
forms. So when people say eat abominable food stuffs, eat meat, then nature may
give them the body of a lion or a tiger because that is more suited for eating
meat. So that is vikarma.
