OPEN BOOK ASSESSMENT

The following questions, or a selection of them, will be allocated by your course facilitator.

Your responses should be no more than approximately 250 words. Some questions may require shorter answers. Questions marked with asterisks are mandatory. A minimum grade of 65% is required for an overall pass. You will receive a report of your assessment from your facilitator.




CLOSED BOOK ASSESSMENT

Alternatively, your facilitator may administer a closed book multiple choice style test. The questions will be based upon the open book questions listed below. A minimum grade of 70% is required for an overall pass.

Successful graduates will receive an ISKCON Disciple Course Certificate authorized by the G.B.C. Guru Services Committee.




UNIT 1 INTRODUCTION , THEORY AND CONTEXT

Guru-tattva and Parampara (Lesson 2)

1. Explain the similarities and differences between the two main categories of guru.
2. Give at least four arguments to refute Ritvikvada philosophy. Give appropriate reference to sastra in your reply.

Gurupadasraya in ISKCON (Lessons 3, 5 & 8)

3. Explain Gurupadasraya in ISKCON.*
4. Explain how Srila Prabhupada functions as the preeminent siksa-guru and Founder Acarya of ISKCON.*
5. Why is it important that Srila Prabhupada remains the preeminent siksa-guru of ISKCON for future generations? *
6. Briefly describe, with reference to current ISKCON Law, appropriate methods of worship for Srila Prabhupada and ISKCON current and future gurus.

ISKCON Gurus (Lesson 4)

7. Describe the appropriate attitude for an ISKCON guru in regard to the teachings of Srila Prabhupada and the authority structure within ISKCON. *
8. Why should one accept dékñä and çikñä gurus only within ISKCON and not from outside ISKCON?
9. Describe the appropriate attitude, for an ISKCON disciple, toward gurus in other Gaudiya Vaisnava parampara and organizations.




UNITS TWO & THREE: ESTABLISHING AND ACTING IN RELATIONSHIP WITH G URU

Selection of Guru & Initiation Vows (Lesson 6 & 7)

10. Explain the importance of initiation vows with reference to comments from Srila Prabhupada.
11. List some qualifications of guru that you consider important, with reference to sastra and the ‘Mandatory Qualifications of Dékñä-guru in ISKCON’ (Appendix 3).
12. Discuss appropriate and inappropriate methods and reasons for selecting guru. Give appropriate reference to sastra and current ISKCON Law in your reply. * Guru- sev (Lessons 9 & 10)
13. Discuss, with examples, the relationship between guru-seva and service to the mission of ISKCON? Explain the importance of a balanced approach to these two. *
14. What is guru vapu and guru vani-seva? Which is more important and why?
15. Give at least four examples of appropriate and inappropriate subjects on which to seek advice from guru. Give appropriate reference to sastra in your reply.
16. Discuss how a disciple should behave toward ones guru’s godbrothers/godsisters.  Give appropriate reference to sastra in your reply.




UNIT FOUR: CO-OPERATIVELY FULFILLING THE RELATIONSHIP

Presenting One’s Guru (Lesson 12 & Lesson 5)

17. Describe what you consider to be the appropriate attitude and behavior, for an ISKCON disciple, in regard to promoting one’s guru in public and within the society of Vaisnavas. Give reference to relevant sastra, and current ISKCON laws in your response. Why is it important for ISKCON disciples to develop an appropriate
attitude in this regard?*
18. Why is it important to publicly promote Srila Prabhupada as the Founder-acarya and preeminent siksa-guru in ISKCON for the present and future?*


Relationships within ISKCON (Lesson 13)

19. Discuss inappropriate attitudes and behavior, for an ISKCON disciple, in regard to favoritism or bias on the basis of one’s dékñä guru. Why is it important for ISKCON disciples to develop an appropriate attitude in this regard? *
20. Describe practical ways of developing and maintaining cooperative relationships with all ISKCON Vaiñëavas without inappropriate discrimination on the basis of guru.  *

