Relationships within ISKCON

1. Discrimination on the Basis of Guru
2. Developing Cooperative Relationships

Hare Krishna.

Now, Chapter 13.

Relationships within ISKCON

In this chapter, we will discuss inappropriate attitudes and behavior, where an
ISKCON disciple tends to show favoritism on the basis of his own siksa and
diksa-gurus, and his own godbrothers.

Also, we will learn about practical ways of developing and maintaining
cooperative relationships within all ISKCON Vaishnavas.

Here is a dictionary definition of discrimination:

        The perceiving, noting, or making a distinction or difference between things.
        Oxford English Dictionary 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press

Discrimination is the prejudicial treatment of an individual based solely on
their membership in a certain group or category... It involves excluding or
restricting members of one group from opportunities that are available to other
groups.

Introduction to sociology. 7th ed. New York: W. W. Norton Company Inc, 2009 page 324



Now, please thoughtfully answer this question

=== Describe a time when in ISKCON you experienced inappropriate discrimination on the basis of your diksa or siksa-gurus ===

Question number two

=== List some of the possible long-term consequences for ISKCON arising from inappropriate favoritism or bias on the basis of Guru ===

Possible answers could be that

1. There would be conflict, chaos, sectarianism and pain amongst ISKCON members

2. Loss of mutual respect, mutual understanding and mutual cooperation.

3. Individuals will start focusing on their own Guru's interest rather than the
growth of ISKCON as a whole

4. There would be many factions and delusions in the movement, and it will
reduce its impact on the larger society 

5. Hurt feelings that exist amongst inappropriately discriminated Vaishnavas
will bring forth various of types of Vaishnava aparadha.


Thus cooperation will be hampered and Srila Prabhupada, previous acaryas, will
be unhappy, withrawing the abundance of mercy that they always wish to give us.


One more important question. Describe your vision of what ISKCON would be like
if devotees maintained positive and cooperative relationships between all ISKCON
Gurus and disciples.

What would happen then to ISKCON?

Now, we will see some important quotes regarding how to have appropriate
relationships within ISKCON members.

I am so pleased with your mutual friendship that I wish you all good fortune

The Lord said: My dear sons of the King, I am very much pleased by the friendly
relationships among you. All of you are engaged in one occupation - devotional
service. I am so pleased with your mutual friendship that I wish you all good
fortune. Now you may ask a benediction of Me.

        Srimad-Bhagavatam 4.30.8, The Lord speaking to the sons of King
        Pracinabarhisat


Cooperate to keep this institution together after I am gone

"Your love for me" said Srila Prabhupada, "will be shown by how much you
cooperate to keep this institution together after I am gone."

        Srila Prabhupada-lilamrta Volume 6, 52: "I have done my part"


United we stand; divided we fall.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself wanted our cooperation. He is God, Krsna. And
therefore cooperation is very important thing. Nobody should think that "I have
got so great ability. I can do." No. It is simply by cooperation we can do very
big thing. "United we stand; divided we fall." This is our... So be strong in
pushing on Krsna Consciousness, and Krsna will help. He is the strongest. Still,
we must be combined together.

        Room conversation with Radha-Damodara Sankirtana Party
        March 16, 1976, Mayapur


Now we will discuss what could be practical ways for developing and maintaining
cooperative relationships with all ISKCON Vaishnavas.

1. First and foremost, each of us, should take a determined oath. I shall speak
and act in such a way that I will promote feeling of belongingness to Srila
Prabhupada and his ISKCON family. I will not discriminate against on the basis
of my Guru and your Guru.

2. We should invite varieties of bona fide Vaishnavas to our communities, to give
multiple inspirations to our community members.

3. Conduct the initiation ceremonies of various Gurus in the community together.
When two-three Gurus sit together and give initiation to their own prospective
candidates within the community, it gives a tremendous boost to the heart of all
the community members, where they feel that we are all a big family.


And we should conduct this disciples course every year to increase awareness,
skill and proper attitudes in the newly evolving community members in our ISKCON
temples.
