Lesson Topics:

* Guru-tattva
* Types of Gurus
* Guru-parampara System
* Refuting the Posthumous Ritvik Theory

Now let us begin Lesson 2, guru-tattva and parampara.

=== Briefly explain, in your own words, the position of Guru ===

1. Representative of Supreme Personality of Godhead, Previous acharyas and Parampara.

(He is to be treated as good as God, being a bonafide messenger of God, as we
 sing in the beautiful song, Guruv Ashtakam, samsara davanala ...)

(That guru is compared to a mercy cloud, who bottles mercy from the ocean of
 mercy.)

(And he comes in our life which are like hot parch dry lands not at all having
 any solace and completely burnt by three-fold miseries of material existence
 and showers that mercy in the form of guidance, inspiration, wonderful
 facilities to practice Krishna Consciousness. That is his position.)

(Also, in Vedic literatures, there are many verses that talk about the position
 of Guru.)

2. Praptasya kalyana... transparent via medium, mercy incarnation of Krishna.

3. Brahma nistham.

4. Guru rupe krishna kripa karen bhakta gane

5. Shabde pare ca nisnatam.. Brahmani upasamasrayam

(One should approach a Guru, especially doing inquiry about the ultimate good.
 What are the qualificiations of Guru? He is expert in the Science of God
 Consciousness. He has thorough understanding of God Consciousness. He has
 mastered the art of practicing of devotional service for the Supreme Lord)

(That He has taken supreme shelter of Lord Brahman, Lord Sri Krishna)


6. Order of Krishna comes through Guru. He orders us and engages in service.

7. Knows Krishna tattva - ei krishna tattvavetta sei guru haya




Now let us have a read at this important document, what is guru-tattva. Here are
some exerpts, Caitanya Caritamrta, Bhagavatam and other important sources:

...




What do you think is the meaning of the term "Guru must be Mahabhagavata"? Does
it mean that everything that he does is perfect or is that he is a pure devotee,
who is a nitya siddha? This paragraph explains that at a very kanistha, preliminary
level of our understanding of Guru-bhakti, we have trouble accommodation that
who our guru is perfect, yet not a nitya-siddha, an eternally liberated
associate of the Lord.

For example, there are many charismatic people in this world who make a
personality cult. But they sooner or later cheat their disciples. On the
contrary, there are people who are not making a big personality cult, yet have
firm faith in their Guru's order, pure conduct, strict adherence to daily
sadhana-bhakti and very very dedicated for the service of the Lord. Such
personalities, they are far more worthy of worship than having a charismatic
leader.

What a Guru does, is that, he connects the disciple to the perfect process of
Sudhya-bhakti, pure devotional service. This process liberates the disciple, not
just Guru-Shakti, the potency of the spiritual master. One has to personally
cultivate pure devotional service in order to become liberated.

This is one of the reasons why, sometimes we see that even after Srila
Prabhupada, certain of his disciples fell away, because they were of the opinion
that Guru-Shakti is everything. But actually, one has to access the potency of
Bhakti-Devi by sincerely practicing the principles.

Srila Prabhupada also was a bonafide of our disciplic succession, not just
because he was a nitya-siddha devotee, but also, because he connected all his
disciples to the process of suddha bhakti.

Prabhupada would often say that my lady disciples no more than me and that he
could not drive a car or could not swim and he was not some superman and he was
not behind making any personality cult, yet we accept him as a pure bonafide
representative, despite lacking the so called charisma of this world.

The reason behind that is anyone who follows the principles of ever-liberated
persons, is as good as the one in the abovementioned group.


