Hare Krishna.

Now, Lesson 9.

Guru seva.

In this session, we will learn about the

* Qualifications of a disciple
* Guru-seva and service to ISKCON
* How to keep the balance, and also, meeting obligations in
a balanced manner.

The disciple may have many-many obligations, familial, social, personal, even to
his other siksa-gurus and spiritual authorities, towards his spiritual master,
how to meet all of these various obligations in a balanced manner.

Here is a beautiful quote, where Srila Prabhupada mentions why we should
render service to the spiritual master.

Sevaya

Just like if you purchase something...

---

Now please take out some time and list, as given in the table below, answers to
these two questions.

=== List in the table below: ===

Ways we can serve the mission of ISKCON? | Ways we can serve our guru?




Here are some possible answers for some ways in which the disciple can serve the
Guru:

* By cooking and serving prasadam for him
* By rendering other personal services like massaging body, washing and ironing clothes,
cleaning room
* And by taking care of Guru's physical needs

* One can also serve one's Guru by properly practicing one's own spiritual life
* By engaging in preaching activities and assisting Guru in his preaching
efforts (for the same)
* By cultivating wonderful Vaishnava qualities and setting a good example for
others to follow
* And especially by strictly adhering to Guru's instruction, a great service is
performed




Now, here are some ways by which the disciple can serve the mission of ISKCON:

By rendering service in the ISKCON centers, like:

* Worshipping deity
* Washing pots, cooking for deities and so on
* By distributing Srila Prabhupada's books
* By donating funds to ISKCON's preaching activities
* By accepting initiation from an ISKCON authorized diksa guru one takes the vow
to serve the mission of Srila Prabhupada
* And one can also try to serve to fulfill the seven purposes of ISKCON as given
by Srila Prabhupada




We can make a note that:

* There is no difference between the service offered to Guru and to the mission
of ISKCON when the Guru's sole aim to serve the mission of Srila Prabhupada and
he would engage his disciples in those services alone, that would eventually
serve the mission of Srila Prabhupada.

* We should try from our side to bring harmony in following the instructions of
our local authorities and instructions of our Guru, and also, our various other
obligations that we may have to productively utilise in doing some meaningful
service to ISKCON.

* In general, it must be taken a note that any service we do to ISKCON is
service to one's Guru.

Neophytes may sometimes think that I am rendering my service to Guru and that
is, whether or not authorised by ISKCON authorities, is service to ISKCON.
Sometimes, it appears to a disciple that when my Guru is in town, I come and do
service in temple. Other times, I disappear. This is not proper. One should
generally know the needs of the local temple and other ISKCON authorities and
harmonize one's services with them.

We are discussing this important topic because at times, there may be a
conflict between what the Guru is asking to be done as a service for his
personal preaching project and what the local ISKCON authorities are asking to
be done as a service to the needs of the local community. We need to be very
thoughtful and sensitive in our dealings to harmonize the two needs and render
the best service we can.

In general, it is always recommended that one conducts a meeting between the
local authorities as well as one's own spiritual master to get a clear-cut
understanding of how best one can serve in given situations.

Meeting obligations in a balanaced manner. Please answer the following two
questions.

List some obligations you have in life, in addition to obligations given to me
by my Guru.

Possible answers could be that I have been asked by the local temple
authorities to be present for every single important managerial meetings and
take responsibility in the temple management.

Second question: suggest solutions to challenges faced in fulfilling
obligations in a balanced manner.

Possible solutions could be conducting a meeting with all our service
authorities and our spiritual master in order to strike a balance between
various roles and responsibilities with discharge in service to ISKCON.

Another possible solution could be to actually keep a track record often
services rendered in the past few months and prepare a brief report which is
given to both the local authorities as well as to one's Guru so that they can
have a clear understanding of what our needs are, when there have been met and
what needs to be done to help us perform better.

Meeting to obligations in a balanced manner. We all have varieties of roles and
responsibilities to discharge in the course of practicing Krishna
Consciousness. Of course, our sadhana, our service to temple or a devotee
community always is an important consideration, but besides that, we have needs
like

* Self care, having proper diets, sleep, exercise, healthcare, knowledge and
skills development, et cetera

* We have needs towards our family members and the responsibilities that we
need to discharge for them.

* We have also our profession and we need to take care of our professional or
occupational responsibilities.

* Especially, while taking care of our spiritual responsibilities, there could
arise a tension between the service that our local community leaders, such as
temple president, may ask us to do and our spiritual master who also has got
certain project or certain activities that he emphasizes.

* This tension when it arises, the needs of both the parties have to be met in
a balanced manner while we also take care of our own needs of growth and
long-term Krishna Conscious well-being.

-----
In following major roles and responsibilities in my life:

* Self care - diet, sleep, health care, knowledge and skills development etc
* Family - fulfilling their legitimate needs
* Profession - equip and engage myself and others as per job description,
communication, team building, pending to dos etc
* Spiritual practitioner - studying scriptures, associating with saintly
mentors, sadhana etc
* Service to devotee community - given by local authorities and/or by our
spiritual master
-----

Now, we will see some quotes regarding how duty of the disciple is to carry out
the order of his superior, especially the spiritual master. What is that order?
Spread Lord Caitanya's message all over the world.

---

Here are some important quotes regarding Guru-seva...

---

So, this tells us the clue as to what are the qualifications that a disciple
must have in order to receive spiritual knowledge and enlightenment. First,
pranipata, submission, humble mood of service, pariprasna, relevant inquiries
and sevaya, sticking to the orders of the Guru and carrying out various services
for his satisfaction.

If there is no surrendering, there is no advancement...

---

One must strictly try to execute the order...

---

In this way, the bhakti-lata shrivels up...

---

The order of the spiritual master is the life substance of the disciple...

---

So in this chapter we learnt that how Guru-seva is very important for the
disciple that service should be rendered with attention, respect and especially
a mood of obedience. These are the qualifications of a disciple that make him
advanced in Spiritual Consciousness. The service of the Guru and the service to
the local ISKCON authorities should be kept in balance by consultation and a
balance must be striked between varieties of obligations that we may have.

