ISKCON gurus

In this lesson, we will learn about three things.

1. Attitude of an ISKCON Guru
2. Gurus' and ISKCON authorities' instructions

... to their subordinates and how they can congenially co-operate with each
other and especially what should be our stand on accepting:

3. Gurus outside of ISKCON

Please take some time to answer the following question.

=== What do you consider is the appropriate attitude in general for an ISKCON guru (current and future) in regard to:

        a) the teachings of Srila Prabhupada?
        b) the authority structure within ISKCON?
===

Possible answers could be:

That the ISKCON guru, first of all, must demonstrate proper understanding and
conduct as per teachings of Srila Prabhupada. He should not be seeking respect
or worship, especially more than or above that of Srila Prabhupada.

In regards to his relationship with the authorities, generally there are two
types of authorities that one has:

* the GBC authority as given by Srila Prabhupada as his next successors, the
ultimate managing authority within ISKCON

* and also the local authority, the center where we are part of a community of
devotees practicing Krishna Consciousness.

So the local authority and the GBC authority.

What should be relationship of a Guru with these two? First and foremost, the
Guru must comply with GBC and local authority, especially to avoid any kind of
conflicting situations.

To avoid the failure that happened in Gaudiya Math, with ISKCON in future. Srila
Prabhupada appointed GBCs and he made them the ultimate managing authority of
the entire ISKCON.

The essential quaifying charateristic of a Guru is to follow the order of his own
Guru. Therefore, to qualify and to serve as a Guru in ISKCON, one is bound to
respect the authority of GBC, which is direct instruction of Srila Prabhupada.

Also, in regards to the local authority, the ISKCON Gurus should be sensitive and
thoughtful in knowing, understanding their needs and interest and also, he should
guide his disciples to have a balance between proper personal needs, such as
sadhana, as well as the service needs of ISKCON. Any major decision in the life
of disciple should be taken by the Guru in mutual consultation with the
disciple and the local authorities in order to have congenially relationship.

a)

1. He should be a living example of Srila Prabhupada's teachings
2. He is loyal to Srila Prabhupada's mission and sheltered in ISKCON

b)

1. Follow Governing Body Commission as representative of ISKCON
2. Co-operate with their decisions
3. Accountable to GBC system

---

Please have a look at this diagram, which is not so much made in terms of
legally being correct, but as an indicative of a hierarchical structure within
ISKCON.

At the helm of the leadership of ISKCON is Srila Prabhupada himself, the
Founder-Acarya. Next to him is the GBC body. GBC body has varities of
other subsidiary bodies that look after various important services within
ISKCON, such as the Sannyasi Ministry, the Regional Body and Guru Service
Committee.

Regional Body will be heading various Nama Hatta centers and the coordinators of
various local temples and also the Temple Presidents therein.

Similarly, the Sannyasis and the Gurus would be coming in touch with these Nama Hatta
coordinators and as well as Temple Presidents in due course of their service.

Below the Temple President or Nama Hatta coordinators would be various temple resident
devotees and the temple's congregational devotees or disciples of the Gurus and
the Sannyasis.

Let us have a look at what are the instructions given by Srila Prabhupada
regarding GBC. This is given in the additional quotes for Lesson 4.

---

GBC

"The Governing Body Commission (GBC) will be the ultimate managing authority of
the entire International Society for Krishna Consciousness."

Srila Prabhupada's Declaration of Will, June 1977

---

Srila Prabhupada studied why Gaudiya Mission had failed in doing preaching work
after Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati left for the spiritual world.

---

In this quote, Srila Prabhupada greatly emphasizes two things.

1. One should take to the missionary activities so that one does not try to gain
cheap popularity by becoming prematurely renounced from preaching mission in the
name of chanting Hare Krishna.

Also, the botheration that comes in trying to maintain expand preaching
activities is actually good for us, because it keeps us grounded in strong
sadhana and exemplary behavior.

This botheration also helps us that the mission of the Lord goes on expanding.
It does not become stagnated.

Accepting the authority of the GBC was Srila Prabhupada's order. So in order to
avoid this danger of becoming nirjan bhajan, chanting in a secluded place by
leaders. Srila Prabhupada gave us a mandate that there will be an organisation
headed by a few dedicated leaders that push the missionary activities of ISKCON.

Here is a quote.

---

Next quote is regarding the disciple must carry out the spiritual master's
instruction without deviation ...

---

This is a very important pastime that took place in Srila Prabhupada's room with
devotees, who insisted they could faithfully obey Srila Prabhupada, but could
not follow his GBC representative or his ISKCON. The devotees in Prabhupada's
rooms had been formerly leaders of ISKCON Hawai, but had left and where now
threatening to use the funds and properties in their own names...

---

A disciple should always remain a fool in front of his spiritual master...

---

A thoughtful man must act in this way...

---

Now please have a look at this diagram that suggests relationship between ISKCON
Gurus and authorities and the devotees in ISKCON. Please note that this diagram
is for educational purposes and it is not some kind of administrative mandate.

At the helm of ISKCON's leadership is Srila Prabhupada, who is the
Foundery-Acarya and the preeminent siksa-guru of the rest of ISKCON.

After Srila Prabhupada, as we studied in the pastime earlier mentioned, he
has appointed GBC body as the ultimate managing authority for all affairs within
ISKCON.

GBC body has multiple services and for each of those, they have formed
subcommittees, just like there is Sannyasi Ministry, there is Guru Service
Ministry and there is the Regional Body.

The Regional Body takes care of the management of the local temples or Nama
Hatta coordinators' activities and subsequently there will be the temple
resident disciples or devotees, or the congregational devotees or disciples.

In this structure, there are some very very important noteworthy features.

First is that everyone is accountable to someone. As they say, each one watch
one, while being watched by one. This is not to do some policing over each
other, but it is actually to help each other when we need it the most.

Now, everything in this structure is also not depending on your Guru. He is
private and main source of inspiration for us as disciples, but at the same
time, he has got additional support systems to look into or to take help from.

This structure also gives a clue that it is a team work that we practice in
ISKCON. It helps build synergy and it also helps us solidify and expand ISKCON
in better ways. This structure also suggests that Gurus are also sheltered in
their godbrothers and their superiors.

In this way, this structure, which is being mentioned here, has got certain
advantages. Seeing at the history of ISKCON, through various ups and downs that it
has gone through, this structure, when followed very properly, can help build a
powerful ISKCON that has got wonderful vertical and horizontal meshes forming
support systems for each other.

Now, someone may ask the question, can Guru, who is a pure representative of
God, be put under some organisational structure. We must take a careful note
that in Kali-yuga sannyasi itself is forbidden. But then because of Srila
Prabhupada and Caitanya Mahaprabhu's mercy, we are establishing sannyasi order
for benefitting the missionary activities.

Then, what to speak of Guru's role. It is far more serious responsibility and
certainly everyone will need some support.

At the same time, the status of a Guru who abandons this structure will be that
he will be nowhere in the picture. Why? Because if a Guru becomes independent,
whimsical or not complying to the instructions given by Srila Prabhupada or
those mandates or policies made by GBC, then we can easily know that he is
actually a deviant. Rather than figuring that out at a later stage where it will
be too late, Also, by remaining administratively connected to this structure,
the Guru is also getting spiritually connected to his godbrothers and superiors
simultaneously. That keeps him safe and also us as his disciples safe.

Now, let us see some important quotes regarding the attitudes of an ISKCON Guru.

Service to Srila Prabhupada and our guru-parampara...

---

Here is a quote by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati regarding Governing Body.

---

Now, let us answer an important question.

=== Why should one accept siksa and diksha-gurus within ISKCON? ===

and

=== How one should relate to Gurus who are non-ISKCON Gurus in a Vaishnava manner? ===

One can clearly see that from scriptural as well as from practical point of view
that Srila Prabhupada was an extra-ordinarily unique and empowered personality
who furthered the mission of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. ISKCON is a society
established by him. He is the Senapati bhakta, pure devotee acarya, who never
deviated, even slightly, from following parampara. In that sense, ISKCON is
already unique.

Now, teachings of Srila Prabhupada and institutional and cultural supports that
have been set up by him are a very powerful combination for an aspirant to take
to Krishna Consciousness. He can advance swiftly and safely.

This setup also provides support for Gurus and disciples within ISKCON.

Srila Prabhupada's disciples authorized to initiate by GBC, are intern,
similarly carrying forward Srila Prabhupada's mood and mission. Srila Prabhupada
has instilled earnestness, clarity, honesty in the hearts of his dedicated
followers and being sheltered under their instructions can help us tremendously.

The association of Vaishnavas and the instructions they impart, such as siksa,
are assured means of success for spiritual practitioners. However, Srila
Prabhupada sometimes observed that when his followers received instructions
outside ISKCON, their devotional practicies for various reasons became impaired.

Therefore, Srila Prabhupada directed his followers that they siksa solely from
ISKCON members.

Here is one such quote. This is a letter to Ishan and Vibhavati written in Calcutta.

You have both been very nice devotees and I would like you both to continue to
make nice advancement. So, please patch up any crack that may have come between
yourself and ISKCON. As husband and wife, you must always remain together and
raise your daughter in Krishna Consciousness. I would like you to go back to New
Vrindavan and fix up a nice living place for yourself and help the devotees to
develop New Vrindavan's scheme. Our ISKCON should be taken as being a family
based upon love and trust. So, as the father becomes unhappy when one of his
children wishes to break family connection, I also become unhappy when there is
difficulties within our ISKCON family. So, please do not consider leaving as you
are spiritual children of mine.

This is a letter to Hamsaduta Prabhu...

---

Please avoid them ...

---

This instruction, Srila Prabhupada had given, because he observed that on
certain occasions, certain of his godbrothers with whom his disciples associated
with got into some kind of criticism about ISKCON, about Srila Prabhupada's
books, about the ideologies that were very different than what Srila Prabhupada
offered. Some of them, the disciples, were told that being advanced is a
prerogative of those only born in India and foreigners can have a chance not
unless until they take birth in India. Seeing this kind of various
controversial statements and subsequent confusion and disheartening in his
disciples, Srila Prabhupada instructed them that they should not associate with
people outside ISKCON, otherwise they may jeopardise their faith and practices
seriously.

Here is one another statement that talks about how one should deal with
Vaishnavas who come to our temples from other Vaishnava institutions.

---
