Now Lesson 3.

Srila Prabhupada, ISKCON's Founder-Acarya.

Are there any symptoms that we can observe that if Srila Prabhupada is not kept
in the center of ISKCON's activities that there is a tendency that we may go away
from the mood and mission of Srila Prabhupada.

We might see sometimes that there are devotees who take to demigod worship or 

=== How has ISKCON gone astray from Srila Prabhupada's Mood and Mission? ===

1. Demigod worship in temple

2. Giving more importance to fund raising and temple maintenance than preaching.

3. Not emphasizing standards as given by Srila Prabhupada




... such as singing Hare Krishna in kirtans, in what way and how long, etc.
These symptoms are indicative that we need delve very seriously in this topic as
to what is the position of the Founder-Acarya. What does he exactly do in
setting right the mood and mission for his wonderful institution to carry
forward?




Here is a dictionary definition of found.




== Function of the Founder Acarya ==

To found:

* To give a basis or firm support to.
* To ground in (a subject of instruction).
* To set up or establish for the first time (an institution, etc.) with
provision for its perpetual existence.

Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press




=== List below ways Srila Prabhupada functions as ISKCON's Founder-acarya: ===

There is pragat lila of Srila Prabhupada, wherein he did certain activites and
gave certain instructions, which formed the mandate for the ISKCON and now what
we have apragat lila of Srila Prabhupada. His presence can be still felt even now.

So here are some important aspects:

1. By his teachings and books (they form the foundation for the philosophy and practice of Krishna Consciousness within ISKCON)

2. Murti - daily we worship Srila Prabhupada's deity, the figure head of ISKCON.
(guru puja)

3. Basic practices as set by him - 16 rounds, 4 regulative principles, sadhana -
seva standards.

4. Basic culture / lifestyle - attire, addressing as Prabhu/Mataji

5. Basic administration system - GBC, zonal, regional, temple president

6. His examples, pastimes, etc.

7. Printing and distribution of his books and magazines, Rathayatras, Holyname, opening temples

8. 7 purposes (which were given by Srila Prabhupada, which formed the core that binds us together in our activities)

9. Every project/product announces as under ISKCON and Srila Prabhupada as Founder Acharya

10. Examination system - Bhakti sastri, Bhakti vaibhava, etc.

11. Legalisation of ISKCON, letterhead, etc.




Now we begin an important topic, Srila Prabhupada, the empowered representative
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Here is a quote from...

---

This is Caitanya Mahaprabhu's prediction of a Senapati bhakta coming in due course to spread Krishna Consciousness all over the world.

=== Why we accept Srila Prabhupada as the empowered representative of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu for the modern age? ===

1. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's predictions come true - prithvite ache yata nagaradi grama..

2. Srimad Bhagavatam's prediction - tad vag visargo janatagha...

This verse speaks about Srila Prabhupada, because he presented the Vedic culture and Krishna Conscious phiosophy in a foreign language. In fact, there is a saying ...

There is no alphabet in sanskrit from which you cannot produce a mantra... There
is no root of a herb, from which you cannot produce a medicine according to
ayurveda.

No one in this world can be stamped as fit for nothing.

What is the difficulty? ... To get an organiser is very difficult. One who can
put the alphabets in a way that it can form a mantra. One who can arrange the
roots to cure a disease or one who can make an unqualified person qualified.

Srila Prabhupada was one such person. He was so empowered. Forget using sanskrit
as a language and using its alphabet. Srila Prabhupada used English, amlecha
language and he wrote literatures, gave classes and conducted his preaching
activities and communication through this language. And he used the words of
this language in such a way that it caused those words to give liberation to the
mankind from the tabernacle of material existence.

So, what is his potency? He can make an unqualified language qualified to
deliver conditioned souls. Then we have the roots in Ayurveda. Srila Prabhupada
was a pharmacist. He knew how to use medicines. But on one occasion, he
mentioned that I know one particular medicine. This is this Holy Name. If the
conditioned souls take to this Holy Name, it can act most wonderfully to cure
their disease of bhavarog, the disease of material existence. In that sense, he
was the physician for the soul.

And then we have, last line of sloka...

When Srila Prabhupada went to America, the candidates that came to him were
hippies. They were rejected by a lot of the Society, parents had given up on
them, government had given up on them, social wellfare people, army, navy,
whatever you call it as the intelligentsia or the elite class of America all had
given up on them, considering them to be ayogya, fit for nothing.

Srila Prabhupada went and stayed amid such people and by his example and
teachings, he transformed them, to an extent where they became so qualified,
went on to become great acaryas of Bhagavat philosophy, preaching all over the
world the message of Bhagavat Gita and Srimad Bhagavatam and thus they were
transformed into yogja, very highly qualified empowered representative of the Lord
by Srila Prabhupada.

That is why he used to say: I made the hippies happies.

Now, this is a feat that not an ordinary soul can ever perform. This goes to show how
unique is Srila Prabhupada.

There is the prediction given by Bhaktivinoda Thakura: adbuta mandira...

3. Bhaktivinoda Thakur's prediction - adbhuta mandira, senapati bhakta

That will appear across the bank of Jalangi, which could be seen from his own
home Swananda Sukadha Kunja in Gaudrumadvip. And now so many years laters, that
prediction is coming true in the form of our temple of Vedic Planetarium being
built at Sri Dham Mayapur, all due to Srila Prabhupada's effort. He is that
Senapati bhakta, predicted by Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

4. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur's prediction - "he'll do everything in due course of time"

There was also prediction by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati. He mentions one
time when Prabhupada was being asked to be made a temple president for the
Bombay unit. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati mentioned to his other sannyasi
disciples, leave him, he meant Abhay Caranaravinda Das, leave him alone and due
course of time he will do everything. Now, this goes to show that Srila
Prabhupada is a recognised and specifically empowered personality coming in our
disciplic succession.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu says it, Srimad Bhagavatam predicts it, Bhaktivinoda Thakura
mentions it and Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati directly approved it.

5. His accomplishments were not done before and cannot be repeated, unique - spreading vaishnavism all over the planet

6. Academic - Life transforming literatures written/translated

7. Preached and transformed very degraded people

8. Scientific preaching - Scientists terrorised faithful and Srila Prabhupada terrorised them!

Prabhupada was the first one during his time to challenge scientism, the
paradigm that science is always perfect and bona fide and thus he went on to
create doubts about scientists who were atheistic and their theories.

9. Offered different perspectives/solutions to unique problems of modern times

In modern times, there are abortions, divorce, especially trouble family life,
drug addiction, alcoholism, varities of problems. Srila Prabhupada gave a
practice to everyone to adopt, which no matter what condition the person may be
undergoing, he can still spiritual culture despite all those conditionings.

In this way, Prabhupada made Krishna Consciousness accessible and practiceable
to everyone on the planet. This is his unique position.

Now, having discussed what a unique position Srila Prabhupada carries in the
world history and especially of Gaudiya Vaishnavism and also in the heart of all
ISKCON followers.

Let us discuss what can threaten Srila Prabhupada is being acknowledged as a
figure head of ISKCON and what can be done to ensure that Srila Prabhupada
remains ISKCON's Founder-Acarya and preeminent siksa-guru in the future.

The things that could disturb Srila Prabhupada's uniqueness or his position in
ISKCON as the preeminent siksa-guru, is that when the gurus who are coming after
Srila Prabhupada are being emphasized over and above Srila Prabhupada's
position.

Another possible threat is that we do not regularly utilise the vast knowledge
and Srila Prabhupada's instructions that are presented in his book to be
represented as it is. Where we start mixing things from various sources in our
classes that we give.

It could also be threatened if we fail to distribute Srila Prabhupada's books
and emphasize them as a regular part of study of our ISKCON members.

Prabhupada's position could be endangered if in our conducting Vyasa Pujas,
various appearance and disappearance festivals and ISKCON's various celebration
days like Ratha Yatra, we fail to hear Srila Prabhupada's lectures or we do
not emphasize observing certain stature of worship for Srila Prabhupada.

And therefore, here are some important considerations so that we can all ensure
Srila Prabhupada remains ISKCON's Founder-Acarya and a preeminent siksa-guru.

=== What can be done to ensure that Srila Prabhupada remains ISKCON's Founder Acarya and preeminent siksa-guru in the future? ===

1. Distribute Srila Prabhupada's books

... and emphasize studying them. It is very important that although we may
become teachers, counsellors or leaders in ISKCON that the standard of our
ISKCON is Srila Prabhupada said, which means that we are not to present anything
of our own. We are actually representing Srila Prabhupada and his teachings. We
study Srila Prabhupada's books and teach them directly in due course of our
preaching. Another important aspect is to:

2. Attend and conduct daily gurupuja in temple

... or in the community that we stay, or even in our homes for Srila Prabhupada.
All the members should come together and join in this beautiful song (sri guru
carana padma kevala bakati sadma) and offer homeage to Srila Prabhupada with
heart full of gratitude for what we have received from him.

I remember in my CC days where I got training as an airforce surgent. There was a
custom that every morning after the bugle blows, you have to go and report to
the surgent, what have you done the past day, what is your plan for the future,
the commands that are given to you, and how are you going to execute them.

I remember that as a ritual even now, but now I apply it to Srila Prabhupada. He
is our commandering chief and we are small soldiers in his army. We go and
report and seek blessings and guidance from him through prayers and especially
through a personal connection we establish with him through his teachings that
we practice. Another is, we could also take:

3. Oath of allegiance to Srila Prabhupada

Now, this has also been incorporated in the initiation vows apart from taking
vows of sixteen rounds and four regulative principles, we take the vow of trying
to serve the mission of Srila Prabhupada, ISKCON, as a humble servant of the
servant. This is important that we take this oath and live by it. There is great
need that we have Srimad Bhagavatam class at least once a week, that is held in
the temple, and if possible, all of us should try to hear Srila Prabhupada's
lectures regularly, at least one to two hours per week and we should conduct
appearance and disappearance days of Srila Prabhupada, ISKCON's incorporation
day, and regularly study the varieties of conversations, letters and morning
walks, etc, of Srila Prabhupada to carry his legacy in our heart and keep it
alive.

4. Observing Srila Prabhupada's Vyasapuja, appearance and disapperance festivals, ISKCON est day, etc, hearing Srila Prabhupada's lectures.

5. In preaching, quote Srila Prabhupada's teachings, examples and pastimes ..

It is not that we have our spiritual master, that we somehow or other try to
make people convinced that they should follow him, but rather we should
emphasize how Srila Prabhupada is preeminent siksa-guru for all of us, and from
amongst the many diksha gurus authorized by ISKCON, we can accept any one of
them by proper personal discretion.

This situation of conducting or giving classes in such a manner, where Srila
Prabhupada and his teachings are emphasized will make sure that Srila
Prabhupada's position remain unique within ISKCON.

Here is a beautiful letter to Bhagavan Prabhu, written by Srila Prabhupada in
Los Angeles.

---


