Hare Krishna

And now Lesson 14.

The conclusion for this course.

There is a beautiful prayer, which a guru and a disciple would regularly recite
in the Vedic time whenever they would come together for studying Vedas. I would
request you to recite this after me:

	Om Saha navavatu
        Saha nau bhunaktu
        Saha viryam karavavahai
        Tejasvi navadhitamastu
        Ma vidvisavahai
        Om Shantih, Shantih, Shantih
        
The meaning of this prayer is very amazing.

Om Saha navavatu: the Guru and the disciple are praying to the Supreme Lord.
May we both come together and remain protected in Krishna Consciousness.

Saha nau bhunaktu: may we get nourished in Krishna Consciousness and enjoy
spiritual as well as material opportunities for service together.

Saha viryam karavavahai: may we perform powerful acts on behalf of the Lord in
service of mankind.

Tejasvi navadhitamastu: may our intellect become sharpened by the study of
these Vedas.

and

Ma vidvisavahai: this is interesting one, may we not become envious of each
other, or develop some misunderstanding, or animosity towards each other.

This goes to show that Vedic culture emphasized how much important it is for a
Guru and a disciple to regularly come together. So, it is the duty of the Guru
to give enlightenment and it is the duty of the disciple to receive
enlightenment in a most congenial relationship with each other.

I, at this point of time, would like to thank each and everyone of you for
taking to this course, ISKCON's Disciples Course. I hope that this journey was
very happy, fulfilling, enlightening one for you. I especially thank you for
taking out your valuable time to learn this wonderful seminar.

At this point of time, I also wish to say that it had been an amazing co-learning
with all of you. Going through this course, I personally learnt so much about
how can I improve in my service to my spiritual master, Srila Prabhupada, ISKCON
and all fellow living beings.

I wish you a very fulfilling and healthy discipleship within ISKCON and
especially, I want to request you to kindly take to the precourse and postcourse
materials which are loaded on the website. Go through them and enrich your
understanding further.

Now, the concluding quote for this entire course.

If transaction is perfect from both sides... then Krishna Consciousness is very,
very easy.

One must be serious to undestand, and he must approach a qualified mahatma guru.
Then his business will be, transaction will be very nicely done. This is Vedic
process. .. if the transaction is perfect from both sides, from the disciple's
side and guru's side, then Krishna Consciousness is very, very easy.

        Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.5.29, Vrindavana, August 10, 1974


At this point of time, I would also like to offer the prayer that we may all
jointly, cooperatively please Srila Prabhupada and our guru-shishyaparampara
through proper self-development, proper loving relationships, and meaningful
service contribution to all living beings.

Thank you very much.
