Hare Krishna.

Now, Lesson 7

Initiation vows.

In ISKCON, when we take initiation from a bona fide spiritual master, we take following vows:

1. That I shall chant 16 good rounds of Hare Krishna maha mantra on my beads every single day without fail
2. That I will follow four regulative principles, namely meat eating, gambling, illicit sex, intoxication being completely avoided
3. And finally, I shall serve in the mission of Srila Prabhupada as a humble co-operative servant of devotees.

These initiation vows are very important. Now, in the session that follows, we shall see four important topics.

1. Strictly following these initiation vows
2. Challenges Faced Following Initiation Vows
3. Solutions to Challenges (and)
4. Steps of Rectification (in case of discrepancy).

---
brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva
Guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja
---

There are countless souls wandering in this Universe in search of happiness.
However, only a greatly fortunate soul who comes in contact with the bona fide
spiritual master gets the seed of creeper of devotion to Lord Krishna. The
spiritual master soils that seed in his heart and nurtures that seed through the
process of shravanam and kirtanam, hearing and chanting about Lord Krishna.

However, the candidate who has come across a bona fide spiritual master and has
taken a formal initiation should maintain the vows that he takes at the time of
initiation.

Lord Krishna is having difficulty in having a reestablished relationship with
the conditioned soul because birth after birth, conditioned souls give hard time
to Lord Krishna in giving assurance that they will not break the promises that
they give.

Often we see in our lives, despite having repeated misery and even untold
crises, we continue to act sinfully and maintain our bad habits. It is not very
easy to come out of the inertia of those bad habits. At the time of initiation
when we take this vow, Lord Krishna is still having difficulty. How can such a
person be accepted in the family of pure spiritualists? It is our spiritual
master who comes and vouches on our behalf. No, this time this candidate is
giving me the assurance that he will follow these principles very strictly, so
I am requesting you Lord Krishna, please accept him as your family member.

---
diksha kale bhakta kale atma samarpan
tara kale krishna tare kare atmasam
---

At the time of initiation when the candidate surrenders to Lord Krishna through
the bona fide spiritual master, Lord Krishna accepts that candidate as one of
his own family members and he treats him on almost an equal level.

Now, this being a very serious commitment that we are giving to Guru and that
Guru is giving to Krishna that I will take care of this candidate's Krishna
Consciousness. So, it is very important that we follow the vows that we take,
very seriously.

These four vows that we take, namely no meat eating, no gambling, no illicit
sex, and no intoxication are actually to be followed in their positivity also.
There are four pillars of dharma, religion. Satyam, Saucam, Tapah and Daya.

When we participate in gambling we break the principle of truthfulness, when we
participate in illicit sex, we break the principle of cleanliness (saucam),
internal as well external cleanliness. When we break the principle of no
intoxications, we actually destroy the pillar of religion, called tapah. And
when we participate in meat eating, we destroy the pillar of religion, called
daya, kindness or mercy to other living beings.

When dharma is so disturbed by our practice, we can see that not only
personally, but socially, we create havoc in our lives. Thus, it is very
important that we maintain these principles of religion by strictly following
our vows.

Here are some quotes of Srila Prabhupada on following the initiation vows very
strictly.

---

I cannot give you protection, that is not possible...

---

Otherwise they are not my disciples...

---

Now please consider the following question and answer it thoughtfully.

=== What are the challenges that we face in following our initiation vows? ===


The answers could be we primarily face three challenges, laziness, enjoying
mentality and pride. When we are lazy, we tend to not follow the actual
standards of cleanliness, austerity, et cetera, same with enjoying mentality and
especially when we become proud of some spiritual or material accomplishments,
we tend to become neglectful or our duties. Laziness prevails when we are in
mood of ignorance, enjoying mentality prevails when we are in mood of passion,
and pride prevails when we are in mood of goodness. All these can make us
vulnerable to break one or the other of regulative principles.

=== What could be possible solutions for them? ===

Possible solutions could be:

=== Write, in the box below, some helpful solutions to challenges faced in strictly following initiation vows. ===

1. To have a regulated sadhana (morning programme). To have regulated study and
hearing of Srila Prabhupada's books as well as lectures and that of our
spiritual master and other senior vaishnavas.

2. We make sure that we culturally make our surroundings very conducive for
practicing Krishna Consciousness (at home, in temples as well as if possible in
our workplace)

3. We must have some shelter in some siksa as well as diksa gurus to whom we can
reveal, in confidence, our difficulties and take proper guidance.

4. We diligently arrange positive and ongoing higher tastes in Krishna
Consciousness to flood our life, having wonderful services, festivals, superior
association and engaging our talents, capacities and skills in the service of
the Lord, so that we have hardly any time. There is a secret to overcoming bad
habits: no time, no opportunity.

If there is anything that gives us space which can be filled up with demoniac
thoughts, then we better guard against making such a space in our life. Thus by
being busy in Krishna Consciousness, one can actually quickly live the four
regulative principles in their purest form.

Now here are some quotes from Srila Prabhupada that can inspire us to practice
our initiation vows very strictly.

Tapasya for forcing you to make very rapid advancement in Krishna Consciousness...

---

Defying means to disconnect the relationship with the spiritual master...

---

If I pour water on it then it will be difficult to ignite...

---

Lord Caitanya accepts all kinds of sinful persons on one condition...

---

Purifying process is already there in the heart of the devotee...

---

Then you are not even a gentleman what to speak about being devotee...
