Guru Vapuh and Vani-seva

* Methods of Guru Vapuh and Vani-seva
* Importance of Guru Vapuh-seva
* Behaving Appropriately in the Presence of the Guru
* Inquiring from Guru
* Importance of Guru-vani-seva

And now Lesson 10

Guru Vapuh-seva and Guru's Vani-seva

In this, we will learn

* What are the various methods of rendering vapu and vani-seva to one's Guru
* What is the importance of these services
* How one should behave appropriately in the presence of one's Guru 
* And how should one inquiry one's Guru so that one can continue to render
service to the vani of one's Guru

Let us first discuss what is vapu-seva and vani-seva.

--- Vapu-seva

Vapu-seva refers to the service that a disciple renders to the physical body of
the spiritual master, such as washing his cloths, massaging his feet, taking
care of his quarters where he stays and also cooking and serving prasadam, et
cetera, to him. By taking care of physical needs of the Guru, the disciple
assists the spiritual master's mission by giving him proper facility so that he
can effectively spread the message of Lord.

At the same time, this service binds the disciple lovingly to the spiritual
master, wherein he gets to observe the activities of the spiritual master
closely and seeing the exemplary character, wonderful Vaishnava qualities, and
constant absorption in the service of the mission of the Lord, gives the
disciple a feeling of strong sense of belongingness to the spiritual master.
That is the advantage of vapu-seva.

--- Vani-seva

Now, vani-seva is hearing or contemplating regularly the Guru's instructions and
following them. Vani-seva is more important than Vapu-seva because through this
one can eternally, constantly associate with one's spiritual master, even after
the passing away of the spiritual from this world. Through this service, one can
be always with one's spiritual master. For example, Srila Prabhupada met Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, his Guru Maharaja, very few times. In those few hours
of association that he received and the instructions that were imparted by his
Guru Maharaja, Srila Prabhupada was so inspired that he dedicated his rest of
life completely for following those instructions.

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati gave him two instructions. Whenever you get
money, print books, and preach the message of Gita, message of Lord Caitanya in
English language all over the world. Srila Prabhupada dedicated his entire rest
part of his life for following the instructions of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati. Prabhupada used to often say that it is in following the instruction
of the spiritual master, one meets the spiritual master.

So we should emphasize vani-seva. This is not to minimise vapu-seva, but
vani-seva has to be regularly carried out. Sometimes, we get to see that there
are disciples who render wonderful vapu-seva to the spiritual master, but they
do not actually regularly hear the instructions of the spiritual master. As soon
as the spiritual master's class begins, they go elsewhere, they are not
attentive, they start doing other shores, and in this way, they lose the
valuable opportunity of having association of their spiritual master.

This is very important that we emphasize hearing, contemplating and applying the
instructions of our spiritual master. By rendering both vapu and vani-seva, the
disciple can really follow the meaning of the eighth verse of Guruv-astakam.

        dhyāyan stuvaḿs tasya yaśas tri-sandhyaḿ
        vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

By meditating on the spiritual master three times a day and carrying out his
instructions can gradually advance in Krishna Consciousness. There is a saying

        sadhu-sangha', 'sadhu-sangha' - sarva-sastre kaya
        lava-matra sadhu-sange sarva-siddhi haya

The verdict of all revealed scriptures is that by even a moment's association
with a pure devotee, one can attain all success.

        Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya 22.54

However, there is an art that one should learn, there is a proper etiquette that one
should learn in associating with such bona fide spiritual master. Here are some
important etiquettes given in Hari-bhakti Vilasa, how one can behave
appropriately in the presence of one's Guru.

1. First and foremost, one should fall down like an uprooted tree, on seeing the
spiritual master, dandavat pranam.

2. When the guru approaches, one should face him, and when he leaves, one should
follow him.

3. One should not leave the spiritual master's presence without asking
permission.

4. One should not utter the spiritual master's name inattentively, but always
with respect, such as "His Holiness", so and so.

5. He should not imitate the gait, activities, or voice of the spiritual master.

6. He should always hold the spiritual master's words in great respect.

7. Though, the disciple may be punished by the spiritual master, he should not
take it unkindly.

Just like we have in the pastime of Srila Jiva Goswami, when Rupa Kaviraja, Rupa
Narayana came to Vrindavan and he wanted to defeat Rupe Goswami and Sanatan
Goswami in a debate. They readily signed his vijaya patra, saying that you are
greatest scholar, we do not want to debate with you. And thus, carrying that
vijaya patra in great pride, he was going away from Vrindavan. Jiva Goswami
stopped him and he asked him what happened. He said I have defeated the greatest
Vaishnava scholars on planet, Rupa Goswami and Sanatan Goswami, here is their
signature. Jiva Goswami then replied that please first have a debate with me. I
am their disciple. If you can defeat me, then I can appreciate what you say.

In the debate that ensued, Jiva Goswami in next 21 days thoroughly dismantled
all the doctrines said by this great scholar. Having been thus defeated, he
became very morrows and left Vrindavan. The news reached Rupa Goswami who called
Jiva Goswami and chestised him saying that you have this intense desire to show
scholarship. Person who has even the slightest bit of pride in his heart cannot
stay in Vrindavan. So please get out of Vrindavan. Now, think of it, whatever
Jiva Goswami did was simply to preserve the reputation of his spiritual masters.
But nevertheless, Jiva Goswami never took it as an insult or unkindness. He
actually felt that yes it is wrong on my part to debate and to disprove somebody
else without the permission of my spiritual master. And thus he decided to live
somewhere else and thus later on when he was found by Rupa Goswami in a very
very emaciated condition, very very pitiably lamenting how he has displeased his
spiritual master, Rupa Goswami personally nursed him back to health. All that
happened was thus reconciled. It was just a test for Jiva Goswami's dedication
and purity of intention conducted by his spiritual master.

So, we should never treat the punishment given by the spiritual master unkindly.

8. One should not bear to hear criticism of the spiritual master, of the
scriptures, or of the Lord. But one should leave the place immediately.

9. He should not step on the spiritual master's garland, bed, shoes, asana,
shadow or a table.

10. One should not spread his legs before the spiritual master, nor should one
yawn, laugh, or make disrespectful noises before him.

11. He should not sit on an asana or bed before the spiritual master.

12. He should not worship others in preference to the spiritual master.

13. He should not give diksa, scriptural explanations, or show superioty in
front of the Guru.

14. He should not give orders to the spiritual master, but always obey him.

15. He should treat the spiritual master's spiritual masters with similar
respect.

16. He should treat the wife, son, relatives of the spiritual master as the
spiritual master, but he should not clean the body of the son, take his remnants
or wash his feet.

        Qualifications of a Bona Fide Disciple from Hari-bhakti-vilasa, from
        Pancaratra-Pradipa

So, these are some considerations on how one can follow proper etiquettes in the
presence of the spiritual master.

Here are some quote on Guru's vapu-seva.

Personally serve the spiritual master by giving him bodily comforts...

---

As hard as thunderbolt, and as soft as a rose...

---

Family members of the spiritual master may consider him an ordinary human
being...

---

Respect one's spiritual master's godbrothers...

---

It is the characteristic of a devotee to observe and protect the Vaishnava
etiquette...

---

Here are some quotes on how to inquiry from one's Guru.

They should not be done in a challenging spirit...

---

Inquiries one makes should strictly pertain to transcendental science...

==========

And now, here are some quotes regarding importance of Guru's vani-seva.

Vani continues to exist eternally...

---

Vani is more important than vapu...

---

The bug who is sitting on the lap of the king...

---

If you kindly try to fulfill my mission, that will be our constant
association...

---

The feelings of separation will transform into transcendental bliss...

---
