Now, Lesson 5

Guru-padasyraya (taking shelter of a bona fide spiritual master)

This includes three types of asraya (shelter).

1. Prabhupadasraya
2. Diksa guru asraya
3. Siksa guru asraya

There is this beautiful sloka in Svetasvarata Upanisad (6.23):

    yasya deve parā bhaktir
    yathā deve tathā gurau
    tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ
    prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

"The real import of the scriptures is revealed to one who has unflinching faith
in both the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the spiritual master."

Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledge automatically revealed.

This verse tell us about the neccesity of having implicit faith in one's Guru
and taking firm shelter of him.

Now, there are some guidelines that we would like to bring forth regarding
Prabhupadasraya.

Srila Prabhupada has a unique relationship with every ISKCON devotee...

---

=== List some specific ways we can develop a deep/authentic devotional relationship with Srila Prabhupada from the beginning of our spiritual life ===

1. Read Srila Prabhupada's books.
2. Watch his videos and learn.
3. Associate with and hear from his disciples about him.
4. Regularly pray to him.
5. Understand and serve his Mood and Mission.
6. View and meditate on his pictures.
7. Distribute his books regularly.
8. Chant his pranam mantra regularly.

One can feel personal relationship with Srila Prabhupada and this is to be
shared by every single devotee in ISKCON.

Quote Number Two:

Instruct new members to take shelter of Srila Prabhupada...

---

This means that when a candidate is becoming ripened to take first initiation,
we instruct that person in the beginning of his taking to Krishna Consciousness
that Srila Prabhupada is his siksa-guru. He is very much welcome to take
guidance, training and assistance from those who are instructing him in
spiritual life, and at the same time he should focus his attention on Srila
Prabhupada as Founder-Acarya. This can be specially done by teaching them to
chant the pranati mantra of Srila Prabhupada in the beginning of all the
spiritual activities that they conduct. Or they can be taught to remember Srila
Prabhupada even in their ordinary day-to-day activities. This is how we instruct
the new members to take shelter of Srila Prabhupada.

Next quote:

Chant at least the first of Srila Prabhupada's pranam mantras...

---

Every time we bow down before the deities, after jayadvani when we get up or
many other such occasions, we shall recite after chanting the mantra, pranam
mantra of our diksa-guru, the pranati mantra of Srila Prabhupada.

nama om visnupada krishna preshtaya bhutale
srimate bhaktivedanta swamin itinamine

Next quote

The purpose of siksa and diksa within ISKCON.

After having established a solid relationship with His Divine Grace Swami, and
after a minimum of six months of strict sadhana, they may accept an authorised
ISKCON devotee as a prospective diksa-guru. After a subsequent minimum of six
months, accept Vaishnava diksa from him or her. It should be understood that
(the process) the purpose of diska and siksa within ISKCON, is to strengthen the
devotee's relationship with Srila Prabhupada in terms of fidelity, attachment and
affection.

This is an important ISKCON law. It tells us how it is very important that
before even a candidate appears for first initiation, his preliminary
relationship with Srila Prabhupada as siksa-guru is well-established by his
teachers.

This law also mentions that the purpose of siksa and diksa within ISKCON is to
strengthen the devotee's attachment, fidelity, and affection for Srila
Prabhupada.

What is the purpose of a mantra? Mantra is meant to taint the mind and
reorientate towards proper thoughts. Thus, when we chant pranati mantras of
spiritual master, it directs our mind to their mood, mission and instructions.

So, let us make it a habit that we chant the mantra, pranati mantras of our
spiritual master out loud in offering obeisances.

Srila Prabhupada personally did not chant the pranati mantra of Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati publicly. He would usually do it in chanting the mantra:

        vandeham sri guroh sri yuta padakalam
        sri gurun vaishnavam scha

So through that, he would generally offer respects to his spiritual master.
However, the guideline that we have also necessitates that we chant Prabhupada's
pranati mantra regularly.

Now, let us discuss what is guru-padasraya in ISKCON.

First and foremost is to understand that there are three sources from which we
take shelter.

1. Siksa gurus
2. Srila Prabhupada
3. Diksa guru

So siksa-guru is certainly very important because he gives us orientation,
facility, guidance and inspiration in Krishna Consciousness. In fact, on
day-to-day basis our contact with siksa-guru is so great that practically
everything we learn in ISKCON is through him. And therefore, this unique
position of the siksa-guru is certainly very important.

When we say yasjan prasada bhagavad prasado yasja prasada nagati gutopi, it
includes all these three gurus, siksa guru, diksa guru and Srila Prabhupada.

So how can we know that we have a proper relationship with them?

And that that relationship is kept on spiritual platform, and not on a material
platform.

So here are some guidelines to be followed by siksa-gurus and by us in our
relation with siksa-guru.

Prabhupada mentions: siksa-guru not speaking something against...

---

A devotee is delivered through a combination...

---

Think of it, what do we have as backup? So many varieties of manifestations of
Lord's mercy. Just to make us advance in Krishna Consciousness, we should take
complete advantage of this.

So, our relationship with our siksa and diksa gurus can be kept completely
spiritual if we keep the six loving exchanges offered by Rupa Gosvami in our
mind:

=== How to know whether our relationship is spiritual or not? ===

1. Quality of desires
2. 6 of loving relationships "sad vidham priti lakshanam" with "mad citta mad gata prana" in center

That giving gifts and accepting gifts, revealing heart in confidence and hearing
from them, instructions, and especially offering and receiving prasada from each
other. This forms the basis of loving relationship.

Besides that, we should see what is the quality of our desires when we interact
with them and we should make sure that our relationship is kept purely
spiritual.

It is done out of love and that is the basic principle. As said earlier in the
verse...

It is important that the firm faith and following of the words of these
important spiritual masters in our life manifests in our rigid practice of
Krishna Consciousness and dedication to the mission of Srila Prabhupada.

Now, one very important question.

=== What is the relationship between diksa/siksa guru-padasraya and Prabhupadasraya? ===

It is something like receiving an inheritance. There is grandfather, then there
are fathers and then there are elder brothers in the family. So, they are all
important in receiving the inheritance of the mercy of Lord in our life. It
especially is a closed family unit, where each one is trying to strengthen our
relationship with every other person. They are trying to establish fidelity,
affection and attachment towards each other and especially towards Srila
Prabhupada. So, this is how we have to see the culture within ISKCON when we
take shelter of various types of Gurus.

 
