Approach the spiritual master
Render service to him

Two types of people:

1) Materially very attached (kruhpan) - afflicted with miserly mentality

2) Slightly awakened to spiritual understanding and seeking happiness higher that of material happiness(brahman) - broad intelligence


Friend - poor man - hardly had any understanding of city life and worldly pleasure

You become millionaire, gifted personal car to the farmer

Farmer uses for plowing fields

After one year, you return

Every part of the car is making sounds, very deliberate condition. You would rather give a tractor, right?

Similarly, material nature gives us this human form of life - meant to achieve higher goals of life, not material, spiritual

However, most people of this world use this body for eating, sleeping, mating, defending, which are animalistic activities, but in a more sophisticated way. They spoil the body.

So they will be awarded animal life to do all these activities.

Therefore, we should cultivate spiritual activities under the guidance of a bonafide spiritual master

In every field of life, we see that there are experts, for learning tabla, karate or so many other fields of activities. We need a teacher. It is not like one can figure out by reading book. That is why it is very important to find a bonafide spiritual master.

When the Lord comes as Lord Rama, he accepts Vasistha Muni as his guru, when he comes as Krishna, he accepts Sandipani Muni as his guru, and in so many his incarnations, even as Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he accepted Isvara Puri as his guru.

Thus, we must from our side make an effort to search out a bonafide spiritual
master and take shelter of him to learn transcendental knowledge.

Who, someone may say: is it not blind faith to just surrender to somebody and do whatever they ask to do?

Well, as far as faith, or blind faith goes, we put it in so many things of this world, when we enter a lift and want to go to 10th floor of a building, we are having faith that this lift works and it will not suddenly have some difficulty by which I will lose life. If when we go to the barbar, he puts a knife right across our neck to shave us up. We have confidence that he will not cut our throad. When we are a student, we accept the authority of so many text books which are described by the bold. We do not always check everything. However, this faith must be reasonable and verifyable.

So in order to have reasonable faith and verifyable faith in the spiritual master and spiritual institution.

What qualifies someone as bonafide spiritual master?

Who is not a guru? It is quite fashionable in India to have a guru. This is my grandmother, this is my father, this is my dog, and this is my guru. In this way, it is quite fashionable sometimes to have a guru. So Guru is not such a fashion. Certainly, one who charges fee to give secret mantra, is not guru. Certainly, anyone who allows to lead any kind of nonsense (meat eating), is not a guru. Defying the Vedas, I am God, You are God, is not guru. People fall victim of such unauthorised gurus.

=== Then who is a guru? ===

Guru is especially meant to deliver us from our material existence.

om agjana timirandasya ...

Spiritual master is meant for opening our eyes with the torchlight of knowledge and giving us proper vision to see according to scriptures. So such a guru has the following qualifications.

First and foremost,

* Must have heard the truth in disciplic succession

He himself must be a member of a bonafide guru sisha parampara. It is not that anyone can start himself becoming a guru without having any reference to his spiritual master.

* Must have realised the conclusions of vedas

or the scriptures by deliberation.

* Must be fixed in devotional service to God

* Authenticity confirmed in his personal life

through sincere practice



Once George Harrison person met Srila Prabhupada and he asked him a question. Srila Prabhupada immediately replied knowing the background of the hippy generation. Just see who is most addicted to God. This is how Srila Prabhupada defined who is a bonafide spiritual master. One who is 24/7, constantly engaged in rendering service to the Supreme Lord.


He must not need to be a charismatic person. Srila Prabhupada was an old man. Not a so called melodious voice according to materialistic standards. Especially his English was difficult to understand to the Western audience. And on top of it, he had no money, no big contacts which through make a big impact in the Western society. Yet, his humble endeavour, his purity of practice, and especially his enlightening knowledge was so powerful that he caused a revolution in the life of many-many misguided people. So, guru is not just a charismatic person, but especially meant for giving us spiritual knowledge. Sometimes, people think that he has to have the knowledge of sanskrit or some people think that his birth has to be Indian. Guru is beyond caste, creed, color, nationality and superficial differences. Just like when you ask an engineer to construct your home. Do you ask him whether it is a brahman engineer, or ksatriya engineer, Engineer is engineer. Whether it is a foreigner or Indian one, it does not matter.

Similarly, a person who knows the science of God, science of Krishna, can be accepted as spiritual master. It is very clearly stated in the scriptures, in Caitanya Caritamrta, that anyone who knows the science of Krishna can become a bonafide spiritual master. It does not matter who or what background that he represents and comes from.

So these are some important considerations while accepting a spiritual master. Thank you.

Hare Krishna. Now, let us discuss the qualifications of a disciple. It is not that only Guru is supposed to have qualifications. Even a disciple must have certain qualifications for receiving transcendental knowledge. In Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna surrenders to Krishna by reciting following verse:

..

Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all my composure due to miserly weakness, oh Krishna. In this condition, I am asking you, to please tell me for certain, what is ultimate good for me. Now, I am your disciple, and the soul surrendered unto you. Please enlighten me.

This verse sets the right mood or the approach of a disciple in approaching a spiritual master. Generally, we become overly conscious or even proud of our material abilities or qualifications. This becomes a disqualification when it comes to accepting a spiritual master.

We see Arjuna. He had extra-ordinary talents and capacities. Let us see how Arjuna was exceptionally qualified. He was, first of all, royal prince, born in a high dynesty of gurus. He was the best of the archers and could shatter the hearts of his enemies in the warfield, simply by twanging his bow.

He was the best of the disciples of Dron acharya, from he had learnt multiple weapons and the art of fighting wars. He had various kind of weapons with him... He could make things appear and disappear at his will. He went to heaven to collect multitude of weapons. It is said that Arjuna was also self-controlled.

We see that Arjuna had a high degree character, competence and capacities. Just before the war of Kuruksetra, right in the middle of the battle, Arjuna became overwhelmed with this question in his heart. Should I really fight this war in which I had to kill so many of .. and he raised so many doubts. However, despite having knowledge of dharma sastra, najya sastra, and various other scriptures. He could not reconcile what should be the exact course of his actions. Thus, he surrenders to Krishna, who is Jagat Guru, the spiritual master of all the worlds.

So in our life, we can see, that despite economic advancement, despite having wonderful material facilities, somehow or other, when it comes to solving real problems of life: birth, old age, disease, death, various of types .. miseries, miseries caused by body and mind, miseries caused by other living entities, miseries caused by natural calamities. When we it comes to solving these actual problems of life. We are very much incapacitated. This is why we need transcendental knowledge coming from a bonafide spiritual master.

Like Arjuna was his grandson, Pariksit. He also, we see in the beginning of Srimad Bhagavatam, surrenders to Sukadeva Goswami, to get enlightenment in spiritual masters. So, one should be ready to discipline oneself under the guidance of the bonafide spiritual master if one is really serious about making spiritual advancement.

Here are some qualifications that are very essential for a disciple. As Lord Krishna says:

* submission
* inquiry
* service

They form the basis of guru-disciple relationship.

Qualifications of Disciple:

* Submission, Inquiry and Service
* Devotion to the Supreme Lord
* Unflinching faith in the order of Guru
* Truthfulness

A disciple should have devotion to the Supreme Lord. As said in Bhagavad Gita ... Arjuna, you are able to understand this knowledge, because you are my devotee and you are not envious of me. So, Lord Krishna mentions this as a prerequisite. One should at least herotically accept that Lord Sri Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and I am his servant. And one should accept the basic standards of practices of spiritual life, such as shravanam, kirtanam, smaranam and sevanam.

Hearing about, chanting, and remembering and serving the Lord. This is called devotion to the Supreme Lord.

We see when Lord Krishna, along his friend Sudama, was studying in the gurukula of Sandipani Muni, his spiritual master, they were given such instructions, sometimes even menial services to do, such as getting wood from the forest or doing other menial activities, cleaning, sweeping, etc. And the Lord would with great delight perform those activities for the pleasure of his guru.

So, unflinching faith in the orders of the Guru, makes one win the heart of the Guru, who then bestows this mercy upon his disciple in the form of wonderful qualities and spiritual potency being imparted. Sandipani Muni blessed Krishna that you always remain ever-fresh in your memory of all that I have taught you. This knowledge will always come to your rescue in all the difficult situations in life and especially you will know how to utilise this knowledge that you have received from me in the time of crisis.

These are the benefits of faith in Guru's orders. Now, we have this beautiful story of Damyarushi. Damyarushi had three disciples: Aruni, Veda and Upamanyu. Once during a rainy season, he asked Aruni to go to the field and block the water from entering the field. Aruni went alone and tried to stop the water. But the field was becoming overflooded. Seeing the situation in order to fulfill the order of his guru, Aruni laid himself as a floodgate, thus stopping the overflooding water to enter to the field. Later, when his guru came searching after his disciple. He found that he has shown such an amazing feat to follow his order. It is said that he blessed himfor his wonderful surrender.

The third and last important quality is about Truthfulness. Sometimes, we may have certain conditionings. We are struggling with them. Future, past, sinful backgrounds, or certain activities or culture that we are coming from. It is very important that one should truthfully reveal one's deficiencies to the spiritual master and seek appropriate guidance in order to make spiritual advancement. There is a beautiful story in this connection in Chandyog Upanisad. Sathyamkam Chabal was a very young student who approached spiritual master, Gautam Urishi and he requested him: can you please initiate me as a brahman? So the Guru asked him, can I know who your father is. So, the boy went back. He asked his mother. She had been a prostitute from background. I do not know. I have come across many men and I do not really know who your father is. The boy came back and truthfully told the Guru. This is my background. I do not know. My mother does not know who my father is. Pleased with that boy's honesty, the spiritual master exclaimed: you are a brahman. Why? Because you are truthful. Thus, this quality about truthfulness helps one to quickly overcome one's deficiencies by seeking proper guidance and blessings from the spiritual master.
