Presenting One's Guru

* Presenting Srila Prabhupada
* Presenting Current ISKCON Gurus

Now, Lesson 12

Presenting one's Guru

In this session, we will learn about what are the appropriate attitudes and
behaviors regarding promoting

* One's Guru
* As well as Srila Prabhupada

We will also learn about various relevant scriptural quotations and ISKCON Laws
that govern our presentation of our Guru. And especially why is it important for
ISKCON disciples to develop an appropriate attitude in this regard.

Let us discuss presenting Srila Prabhupada. Please answer the following
question.

=== List some benefits of publicly promoting Srila Prabhupada as the
Founder-Acarya and preeminent Guru in ISKCON for our present and future ===

Possible answers could be

1. Everyone within ISKCON accepts Srila Prabhupada as their siksa-guru.

2. And no one will have any objection in publicly promoting Srila Prabhupada

3. Rather, it will strengthen unity within different ISKCON centers and preaching projects

4. It also encourages book distribution and public can take to pure Krishna
Consciousness through Srila Prabhupada's teachings.

5. All teachers will refer to Srila Prabhupada's books as reference in all these
courses. Thus, common thread will bind entire ISKCON through these teachings.
This will increase the weight of the teachings also. Both the tenants and
practices will remain pure and align with pure devotee, Srila Prabhupada.

6. There will be no more distractions or deviations.

This will also bring about harmony and unity in diversity in ISKCON, despite
multiple diksa-gurus continuing to initiate future generations of disciples.

7. Each ISKCON member can also feel nourished, guided and enlivined by vani of
pure devotee, Founder-Acarya Srila Prabhupada. They intern can give proper
nourishment, guidance, and protection, and harmony to future generations of
ISKCON.




Now, please thoughtfully answer

=== Some inappropriate ways in which we tend to present ISKCON's present Gurus ===

Possible answers could be

1. Devotees are seen promoting one's Guru through classes they give, through
ceremonies they conduct, and especially having various symbols and campaigns, et
cetera.

2. Sometimes, devotees are seen not giving responsible services to disciples of
other Gurus in the community. They do not allow permissions or facilities for
their teaching efforts.

3. Or they hold back sanctionings for initiations. While sanctioning for one's
own Guru's aspiring disciples, even though they may be less qualified.

4. Sometimes we see devotees imposing one's Guru's classes or instructions on
others in the community through media propagation.




In this way, these inappropriate attitudes certainly may bear some consequences.

=== What do you think are the possible consequences for ISKCON when such inappropriate ways prevail in representing ISKCON Gurus? ===

Possible answers could be

1. By misappropriately representing the Gurus, we will disturb mutual respect,
understanding and co-operation amongst members.

2. We will eventually have conflicts, chaos, pain, and sectarianism.

3. It might happen that inviduals in ISKCON would start focusing on their Guru's
interest more than to focus on ISKCON's growth as a whole.

Generally, it is a disciples of political interest who have disguised themselves
as Guru premis, who tend to take advantage of such a situation. To grow ISKCON
exponentially, we need to avoid factions and delusions in our movement. This
will be seriously hampered.

4. And above all, Srila Prabhupada would be displeased because he asked us to
co-operate, and the abundance of mercy that would come otherwise in our life will
be thwarted.

5. Sometimes, there could be hurt feelings amongst those who are inappropriately
discriminated against. And all this would certainly lead to Vaishnava aparadha
and thus the ruination of our individual and social spiritual lives. These could
also cause hurt feelings amongst those who feel inappropriately discriminated
against. All these could lead to Vaishnava aparadha and this would ruin our
personal spiritual life as well as our spiritual communities.




Now, we shall study some important quotes regarding how one should represent
one's Guru. This is a verse from Hari-bhakti-vilasa.

One should hide one's Guru...

        gopayed devatam istam gopayed gurum atmanah
        gopayec ca nijam mantram gopayen nija-malikam

One should hide one's ista-deva, one should hide one's guru, one should hide
one's mantra, and one should hide one's japa-mala.

        Hari-bhakta-vilasa, verse 2.147




Just like anything valuable we may have in our life, we do not keep it here and
there in public view, sometimes it may get stolen, misused, or disrespectfully
dealt with, therefore this injuction.

Sometimes, we see in ISKCON, devotees directly go and ask someone, so who is
your spiritual master. This is a highly disrespectful way of asking, because in
the Vedic culture, a wife, a chaste wife would never take the name of her
husband directly. She would be very shy and if she has to at all mention the
name of her husband, she would mention it in some indirect way.

Similarly, we should be very shy as well as hesitant to unnecessarily promote
our spiritual master and our personal relationship with him. In case, we need to
mention his name, we should do so very reverentially and with proper etiquette.

This is culture. We should bring about such Vaishnava culture amongst our
dealings with our various Guru's godbrothers.




We will study certain ISKCON Laws promoting Srila Prabhupada as the
Founder-Acarya of this movement, and thus harmonizing the rest of the ISKCON
under the shelter of Srila Prabhupada.

ISKCON Law regarding first initiation.

Instruct new members to take shelter of Srila Prabhupada. ISKCON members shall
choose when and from whom they wish to request initiation. They must focus their
on Srila Prabhupada as the Founder-Acarya and as their preeminent siksa-guru.

        ISKCON Law 7.2.1


ISKCON Law regarding use of title

All ISKCON publications, such as books, magazines, et cetera, should clearly
display full name and title of Srila Prabhupada including Founder-Acarya,
Prabhupada and His Divine Grace. For example:
"His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, Founder-Acarya for the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness."

        ISKCON Law 2.3.1




ISKCON Law regarding plaques

All ISKCON temples and prominent buildings which do not already have Srila
Prabhupada's name inscribed upon them, shall install plaques Srila Prabhupada's
full name and his position as the Founder-Acarya of the International Society
for Krishna Consciousness.

This shall also apply to prominent buildings of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust,
Bhativedanta Institute and any other society founded by Srila Prabhupada or
affiliated to ISKCON.

        ISKCON Law 2.3.3
        


Disciples of ISKCON diksa and siksa-gurus should not wear or publicly display
Guru T-shirts, posters, bead-bag buttons, athletic caps, et cetera, other than
that of Srila Prabhupada.

        ISKCON Law/Recommendation 6.4.8 Worship and Etiquette


Photographs of ISKCON siksa or diksa-gurus

ISKCON temple residents may keep photographs of ISKCON diksa or siksa gurus
privately in their ashram quarters but are not to display them publicly on
ISKCON premises. Promoting occasional special preaching events may be an
exception.

        ISKCON Law 6.4.8 Worship and Etiquette


Websites prominently feature a picture of Srila Prabhupada

That ISKCON center officials shall be responsible to ensure that any and all web
sites published by the center prominently feature a picture of Srila Prabhupada
on the introductory page. This picture should be larger than any other
individual's photo (such as the GBC, center president, or Guru). Srila
Prabhupada should be addressed by his formal name and title:
"His Divice Grace A.C. Bhativedanta Swami Prabhupada, Founder-Acarya of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness".

        304. GBC Statement on the position of Srila Prabhupada (March 2013)



So in this session, we learnt how one should present Srila Prabhupada and how
one should present one's current ISKCON Gurus appropriately through one's
personal behavior and especially when one is in public.

This kind of conscientious behavior will help all the ISKCON members to continue
to stay together very happily as one family. ISKCON will not disintegrate into
smaller factions. Preaching will not be hampered by improper behavior of
devotees within ISKCON. Other spiritual sex of people who have left ISKCON will
not be able to cause damage to our society, and proper behavior of disciples
will please their spiritual masters and Srila Prabhupada who asked us to
co-operatively serve in the mission of ISKCON.
