Guru-tyaga

(Rejection of the Spiritual Master)

After Srila Prabhupada departed for the spiritual world, ISKCON which was a very
very fledgling movement suffered countless difficulties, one of which was the
falldowns of certain appointed diksa gurus. At that time, it created such a
great disturbance within the society that the emotional outbirst of the
disappointed disciples became a great concern for the rest of the ISKCON.

The disciples of these spiritual masters who had fallen away from the practices
of Krishna Consciousness did not exactly know how are they to deal with this
situation.

This topic is especially covers

1. Principles of Guru-tyaga
2. Procedures of lodging concerns regarding Guru's misconduct
3. Re-initiation
4. And continuing to practice devotional service in ISKCON

In Srimad Bhagavatam, we have the classic example of Sukracarya instructing Bali
Maharaja not to surrender to Lord Vishnu who has come in the form of Vamanadeva.

At such time, Bali Maharaja staunchly, completely rejected the instruction of his
Guru and continued on the path of surrender to Lord Vishnu.

So, this is an example of when a spiritual master gives instructions contrary
to the Vedic literatures, contrary to the teachings of previous acaryas, then
one can reject him.

There are standards of conduct for Gurus in ISKCON, which are given in ISKCON
Law. For example:

1. Guru must always set the highest example for all devotees.

2. He must guide his disciples to follow Srila Prabhupada and his instructions
as taught and followed in ISKCON.

3. He must protect and nourish the faith of all ISKCON devotees in their Gurus,
in Srila Prabhupada and in Krishna.

4. He must encourage newcomers' faith in ISKCON and protect the faith of
existing members.

5. He must not give initiation until the approval process has been fully
completed.

6. He must not canvass for disciples.

7. He must allow all uninitiated devotees full freedom to exercise their right
to accept initiation from the Guru of their choice.

8. He must allow uninitiated devotees who have preliminary taken shelter of him
the full freedom to change their minds on their choice of initiation Guru.

9. Since the Guru daksina received by an ISKCON Guru is a property of ISKCON, it
must be used for the benefit of the Krishna Consciousness movement. All Guru
daksina must be kept in a special account, preferably an ISKCON account, with at
least two signatures, and accurate account records must be kept.

10. It is prohibited to require a prospective disciple to make a minimum
donation or any other financial commitment, as a prerequisite, to be accepted
for initiation.

11. Guru shall minimise the number of devotees engaged in their personal
service, and in their traveling entourage. Gurus shall not personally engage
single members of the opposite sex or married members of the opposite sex
without their spouse, in direct personal service, and should never be alone in a
solitary place ordered by sastra.

=========

So these were some general standards that the Guru is supposed to observe.

Here are some standards in relation to the GBC Body.

1. The Guru must act under the supervision of and in coordination with GBC zonal
secretaries.

2. He must not change his residency without consulting the local GBC zone
secretaries beforehand since such a move may affect the temples and devotees.

3. He must disclose financial records to the GBC secretariat on an annual basis.




Now here are some standards in relation to ISKCON Spiritual Authorities.

1. The Gurus in ISKCON must cooperate with and be accountable to the local
ISKCON authorities.

2. He must not initiate any devotee who has not received proper recommendation
from the appropriate ISKCON spiritual authority.

3. He must instruct disciples and other devotees to cooperate with ISKCON
authorities and to follow proper etiquette in case some disagreement arises.

4. He must maintain amicable working relationships with ISKCON authorities and
not undermine them in any way.

5. Since temple presidents and project leaders are fully responsible for
engaging the devotees in their charge, he must not discuss changes in service,
location, or ashrama with a disciple without first consulting the disciple's
local authority.




So in this way, we can see that there are various standards that a Guru is
supposed to follow and if we observe and discrepancies in this regard, then are
to bring it to the concerned authorities.

In such case, where the Guru is not, despite repeated warnings or corrections,
willing to change his set of behavior, the disciple is then requested to reject
him and to select another spiritual master as his initiating spiritual master.




How does GBC deal with Gurus who are seen to have certain misconduct. There are
four levels.

1. Warning

If a Guru is found deviating from or neglecting spiritual practices, but the
deviation or negligence is not very severe or habitual, or if a Guru is
transgressing the approved standards or guidelines for Guru behavior (such as
not canvassing for disciple), the Guru should be warned or censured
confidentially.


2. Probation

If the warnings are not heeded, or if the deviation or neglect of spiritual
practices are of a more serious nature, or if the transgressions of Guru codes
of behavior are serious and habitual, the Guru may be put under probation with
specific conditions, which regulate his Guru functions, including temporarily
withdrawing the authorisation of initiating new disciples. In addition, he may
be given general recommendations or specific activities to perform as part of
the program for his rectification and eventual reinstatement.


The third level of correcting the misconduct is:

3. Suspension

If a guru blatantly ignores the terms of probation, or repeatedly breaks one
or more of the regulative principles, or acts in a manner which seriously and
harmfully disregards existing ISKCON or GBC policies, or leaves his ashrama
sannyasa without authorisation, or leaves the association of the devotees of the
ISKCON movement or completely deviates from the standards of sadhana, he may be
suspended. If a Guru is suspended, he cannot give initiation, nor maintain an
absolute siksa position in relation with his disciples, nor be introduced as
a spiritual master, nor perform his Guru function, such as receiving Guru-puja
or acceptance of daksina.


On the fourth level, where the Guru has seriously continued his misconduct is
the stage called:

4. Removal

If the Guru becomes openly inimical to Srila Prabhupada or ISKCON, or otherwise
acts demoniacally, or becomes an impersonalist mayavadi, or preaches the
unauthorised philosophy of apasampradaya groups against Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's principles, or blatantly and consistently defies ISKCON and GBC
policies, or if a Guru's attachment to sense gratification is serious,
prolonged, or hopeless, then as per sastric injuction, he shall be removed from
his position as diksa or siksa-guru.




Now, what are the principles or procedures regarding Guru-tyaga.

Here are some quotes. This is Bhagavad Gita as It is, chapter 2, text 5.

A teacher who engages in an abominable action is fit to be abandoned.

        According to scriptural codes, a teacher who engages in an abominable
        action and has lost his sense of discrimination is fit to be abandoned.

        Bhagavad Gita As It Is 2.5

Spiritual master is liable to be rejected if he proves himself unworthy.

        According to revealed scriptures, a teacher or spiritual master is
        liable to be rejected if he proves himself unworthy of the position of a
        Guru or spiritual master.

        Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.7.43

---

By mistake you have come to a rascal ... you can reject him ...

---

Now answer very thoughtfully this following question.

=== How does ISKCON protect a disciple, in case of a Guru, who proves himself unworthy of the position? ===

Here are some procedures for lodging concerns regarding Guru.

A disciple may express his concern in relation to their Guru in consulation
with:

1. Temple and GBC authorities

2. Siksa-gurus

3. ISKCON Resolve

This is a committee established for conflict resolutions within ISKCON.




=== When can a fallen Guru be rejected? ===

This is also mentioned in the Appendix you have. The GBC Laws on rejection of a
fallen Guru.

If it is ascertained either by the admission of the Guru, or by the testimony of
irrefutably reliable witnesses that the Guru was fallen at the time of
initiation, then the disciple has a legitimate reason to reject him and take
re-initation from a bona fide spiritual master.


=== When can a fallen Guru be rejected? ===

Hopelessly entangled in sense gratification.

If a Guru has become hopelessly entangled in sense gratification, and it has
been established by reliable testimony or by his own admissions that he has been
regularly violating the regulative principles of Krishna Consciousness and if
there is virtually no hope for his rectification, then the disciple should
reject him and may accept reinitiation.


Or if there Guru takes on demoniac qualities.

If the spiritual master takes on demoniac qualities and becomes inimical towards
ISKCON, he should be rejected and the disciple may take reinitiation.




=== Now, in case of suspended Gurus, when can one reject him? ===

A disciple of a suspended Guru who has seriously lost his faith in his spiritual
master, or who has developed an offensive mentality towards him, or who is
unable to regain his faith, even after hearing many instructions in this matter,
may take permission from the spiritual master for release to accept a different
initiating Guru. The devotee should act in consultation with his local GBC
representative. If the suspended Guru withholds his permission, then the
disciple may seek permission from the GBC Body.




So till now, we discussed that the Guru has fallen away and in that situation,
what is to be done by the disciple. So, Guru-tyaga refers to rejecting a
spiritual master who is not in good conduct and now not inline with the
parampara system. However, sometimes it may happen that a disciple whimsically
wants to reject his Guru because the disciple has got some hidden agenda. He
feels that his Guru is not allowing him certain type of sense gratification, or
that his Guru and his teachings are very heavy on his heart in terms of his
incapacity to follow them due to various types of attachments. There could be
many reasons.

=== In such a case is a disciple's rejecting his Guru allowed? ===

Certainly not. Here are certain quotes from scriptures.

If you give up the company of spiritual master, that is not good for you...

---

As long as your mantra guru is present, you cannot go elsewhere...

---




Now let us discuss what is reinitiation

A devotee who, considering GBC guidelines on the subject of rejecting a Guru and
consulting with senior ISKCON devotees, has decided to reject his non-bona fide
Guru, he may seek initiation from an approved ISKCON Guru. Normal procedures as
applicable in the case of first and second initiations are described in this
manual according to ISKCON Law, they must be followed. 

        ISKCON Law 7.2.6




Now, think about this question carefully and note down some points

=== List ways a disciple can continue to be connected to Srila Prabhupada, the Guru-parampara and ISKCON, in the case of Guru-tyaga, before being reinitiated ===

Here is a quote from a letter to Cidananda by Srila Prabhupada

Please always try to remember me by my teachings and we shall always be together

Please always try to remember me by my teachings and we shall always be
together. Just like I have written in the first publications of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, "The spiritual master lives forever by his divine instruction
and the disciple lives with him.", because I have always served my Guru Maharaja
and followed his teachings, I am now even never separated from him.

        Letter to: Cidananda - Bhaktivedanta Manor 25 November, 1973




In conclusion, in this lesson we learnt

* Principles of Guru-tyaga

In what conditions can a disciple reject his spiritual master and at the same
time, how a disciple should not be whimsically rejecting his spiritual master
when he is in good standing.

We also studied the process of lodging concerns regarding Guru's misconduct

* Procedures of Lodging Concerns Regarding Guru

and in case an unfortunate situation arises where the spiritual master falls
away from standard practices of Krishna Consciousness, how one can accept

* Re-initiation

Continuing to remain within ISKCON practicing devotional service

* Continuing to Practice Devotional Service, in ISKCON




This topic is a very very sensitive topic and that is why we request you to take
help of your superiors if you have any questions or further clarifications that
you need on this topic.
