Lesson 6

Selecting a Guru

In this lesson, we will see two things.

* What are the qualifications of a bona fide Guru?

and

* How we should select our spiritual master

Please answer this question.

=== What are you looking for in a Guru? ===

Now, answer the second question.

=== What are the qualifications of a bona-fide Guru (that you have earlier known)? Take notes from the discussion, in the box below: ===

So here are some quotes from the scriptures regarding the qualifications of a
bona fide guru.

In Nectar of Instructions, Srila Rupa Goswami states:

---

väco vegaà manasaù krodha-vegaà jihvä-vegam udaropastha-vegam
etän vegän yo viñaheta dhéraù sarväm apémäà påthivéà sa çiñyät

A sober person who can tolerate the urge to speak, the mind's demands, the actions of anger
and the urges of the tongue, belly and genitals is qualified to make disciples
all over the world.

Upadesamrta Verse 1

---

In Mundaka Upanisad, there is a beautiful verse

---

tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet
samit-päëiù çrotriyaà brahma-niñöham

To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in
hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the
Absolute Truth.

Mundaka Upanisad 1.2.12

---

Dhatam With the firewood in hand refers in our context that with a mood for
rendering some service, a disciple should approach a spiritual master.

Srila Prabhupada mentions in the Teachings of Lord Kapila:

A bona fide guru does not impart some self-styled, concocted knowledge; his
knowledge is standard and received from the parampara system. He is also firmly
fixed in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (brahma-nistham).
These are his two qualifications: he must have heard the Vedic knowledge through
the disciplic succession, and he must be established in service to the Supreme
Lord. He does not have to be a very learned scholar, but he must have heard from
the proper authority.

Teachings of Lord Kapila, Verse 4, Approaching a Bona Fide Guru

---

Here are the steps for selecting our Guru. These are steps mentioned in the
ISKCON Law regarding how a candidate should look forward to initiation. There
are four steps.

1. One year preparatory period.
2. Prabhupadasraya
3. Diksa and siksa guru padasraya
4. Harinam initiation

1. One year preparatory period, the candidate is expected to engage favorably
in devotional service, strictly follow the four regulative principles, chant 16
rounds a day, attend full morning programme in temple, if he is a temple
resident, or at home or in the Nama Hatta center if he is a non-resident
candidate, in ISKCON.

2. Then, comes Prabhupadasraya. The candidate is instructed to focus his attention
on Srila Prabhupada as his preeminent siksa guru. He also begins to chant the
pranam mantras of Srila Prabhupada while day-to-day devotional activities that
he performs. He also receives guidance from respective ISKCON spiritual siksa
and diksa gurus in the meantime.

3. Now, diksa and siksa-guru padasraya. After a minimum of six months of following
these above procedures, one may select an ISKCON authorised diksa-guru from
amongst one's established siksa-gurus. Note that six months is the minimum
period and one may take as much time as required to make this selection.
Responsibility of the candidate to choose Guru is that they exercise their own
intelligence. Then, they notify the local temple president or the relevant
authority, take written examination issued by ISKCON authorities, receive formal
letter of recommendation from an ISKCON authority, then receive permission from
the selected Guru by showing the letter. Begin to worship that guru and chant
his pranam mantra and continue chanting Prabhupada's pranati mantras after the
Guru's mantra.

In addition to taking instructions, one will now continue to take instructions
from one's established siksa-gurus and diksa-guru regularly. He will also
communicate to Guru and local authorities if he ever makes a change of having or
desiring to have initiation from another ISKCON Guru.

4. The fourth step is harinam initiation. After a subsequent minimum of six
months, one may accept Vaishnava diksha. The Guru is not under any obligation to
initiate a candidate. It is solely his choice, prerogative whether he would like
to accept certain candidate as his disciple.

And after initiation, one may accept additional siksa-gurus with the permission
of one's diksha-guru.

Let us see some inappropriate reasons for selecting a Guru. You may even laugh
at them because you may not have them. But mind you, sometimes devotees do have
certain of such inappropriate reasons. For example:

"Oh, this Guru has got many followers, so that is why he is my Guru."

Another one:

"Maybe, if I accept this Guru, I may get a foreign chance or better material
facilities, such as a good position, because his disciples are also rich and
materially affluent in the background."

"Oh, this guru, he sings very sweetly and he behaves very sweetly, I am
emotionally affected by him."

"This Guru is an Indian, so he is our soil, Indians may think, and those Gurus
are foreigners, I do not think I will accept them."

"Oh, this Guru has academic achievements, he is a PhD and a scholar."

"This Guru, if I accept, there are no delays, you see. I can get quickly
initiated."

There are others who consider that "my love for Guru is most important, siksa and
diksa just do not matter, where do I get it from".

=== List, in the box below, some inappropriate reasons for selecting a guru. ===

1. "He has many followers."

2. Material allurements given by disciples of guru like foreign chance, good wife, etc

3. "I may get a good job/wife - better material facilities, his disciples are in good position and I will have their contacts"

4. "He sings and behaves sweetly" - emotionally affected

5. "He is an Indian" or "He is an American etc"

6. "His academic achievements are good - PhD" etc..

7. I can get initiated quickly, no delays"

8. "Shiksha and diksha is not important, but my love is important"

---

In this way a candidate may sometimes either due to sentimentality or naiveness
have so many inappropriate reasons for selecting a Guru. We should be guarded
against that. What will be the consequences of selection based on such reasons?

=== Consequences of selection based on such reasons ===

1. The disciple may reject the guru later

when he comes to know so many other things that does not fit the criteria that he had in mind.

2. The disciple may feel bitter, cynical or harbor anti-ISKCON feelings

... that I got cheated here.

3. He will have no more right motivations

... in his spiritual life, because he accepted Guru based on not proper
philosophical foundation. Then

4. He will do comparisons and criticisms with others

... based on his limited understanding of this subject and all this may lead to
offenses

5. He will end up committing offences.

... which will certainly destroy his spiritual life.

-----

So here are some quotes from Srila Prabhupada and various other scriptures
regarding the qualifications of a bona fide Guru.

1. Personal behavior and preaching...

-----

"You simultaneously perform both duties in relation to the holy name by your
personal behavior and by your preaching. Therefore you are the spiritual master
of the entire world, for you are the most advanced devotee in the world."

Purport: Sanatana Goswami clearly defines herein the bona fide spiritual master
of the world. The qualifications expressed in this connections are that one must
act according to the scriptural injunctions and at the same time preach. One who
does so is a bona fide spiritual master.

Sri Caitanya Caritamrta Antya 4.103

---

2. From any asrama...

---

3. Every one of you become the spiritual master...

---

4. On my order, that is the crucial point...

---

5. We should not accept a guru suddenly out of fanaticism. That is very dangerous...

---

6. Meet together, at least for one year...

---

7. One must hear him, at least for one year...

---

8. One must not being upon himself the calamity of having to reject his spiritual master...

---

9. One should not accept a spiritual master in terms of social conventions...

---

10. Correctly choose by the exercise of their own intelligence...

---


