Now in Lesson 2, we shall discuss about the Posthumous Ritvik Theory.

This Posthumous Ritvik Theory is a fallacious theory by which a spiritual master
allegedly acts as diksa-guru, even after his departure, through the agency of
officiating priests, called as ritviks.

Why Ritvik Theory came up?

1. Fall downs and difficulties of diksha gurus.
2. Numerous bad examples

This Theory tells us that after Srila Prabhupada, there is nobody as qualified
as him, and nobody has been practicing or imparting pure Krishna Consciousness
at the same caliber as Srila Prabhupada did. Therefore, it is safe for us to
have Srila Prabhupada only as our diksha-guru and the latter disciples of Srila
Prabhupada can offer us initiation from Srila Prabhupada on his behalf, acting
as ritvik priests.

This theory, however, has many-many flaws. Today, we shall study a few of them.

Actually, Srila Prabhupada has never mentioned anything about a system of ritvik
proxy initiations after his physical absence. Nor is it mentioned in any sastra.
So, it is not a mere tradition or application, but a fundamental principle of
guru parampara, that after the spiritual master departs from this mortal world,
the next generation of disciples should take up the responsibility of
countinuing the guru parampara. There are countless quotations that we can quote
on the topic. Here are a few.

Srimad Bhagavatam 2.9.43 Purport:

"One who is now the disciple is the next spiritual master. And one cannot be a
bona fide and authorised spiritual master unless one has been strictly obedient
to his spiritual master. Brahmaji, as a disciple of the Supreme Lord, received
the real knowledge and imparted it to his dear disciple Narada, and similarly
Narada, as spiritual master, handed over this knowledge to Vyasa and so on."

---

Regarding your question about disciplic succession coming down from Arjuna. It is
just like I have got my disciples, so in the future these many disciples may
have many branches of disciplic succession.

---

The second reason why Ritik Theory is fallacious, is because by jumping over
one's Guru, one commits greatest offense against the spiritual master and his
spiritual life is finished.

---

The third reason, Ritvik Theory gives raise to doctrines that do not exist, such
as only a liberated soul can become Guru, the acarya can change sastras, misuse
of expression "I am in my books" that Srila Prabhupada mentioned. The other
fallacious doctrine is "Gurus cannot fall", or the misuse of expression "uttama
adikari" in the purport of "Nectar of Instructions". If you have studied "Nectar
of Instructions", verse 5, Srila Prabhupada mentions their symptoms of "uttama
adikari". One who is continually engaged in preaching activities of Krishna
Consciousness, and who strictly follows the order of his Guru without deviating,
is considered an "uttama adikari".

Now, this term has to be understood, to apply to a person, who can be initiating
spiritual master, yet necessary not yet on Mahabhagavatam stage.

No need of physical guru, gaps in sampradaya prove ritvikism, or a liberated
soul cannot fall. All these doctrines are not necessarily supported by
scriptures, and thus they do not exist.

Fourth reason, why Ritik Theory goes wrong, is that it minimises Srila
Prabhupada's potency in making pure devotee disciples and thus rendering
discipleship in ISKCON meaningless.

Here are some points that are mentioned from the student handbook for disciple
course.

---

There are numerous advantages of having a living siksa as well diksha guru. As
Lord Krishna mentions in the Bhagavad Gita:

...

In order to apply the principles of pranipata, paripisna, seva (submission,
inquiry and service), one needs a living guru. And such a living guru can give
us instruction, corrections, alignment and even protection in our spiritual
life. Seeing the personal example of the Guru is actually far better than
bookish knowledge that we may get from scriptures because by seeing the behavior
of the great devotees, one can see what is dharma and what is not.

Books are not enough because they may establish conclusive truth, but the conclusive
practice according time, place and circumstance cannot be established by books
only.

And what then would happen to Vapu Seva of Guru which is so much emphasized in
scriptures? Vapu Seva is also very important and that can only be rendered to a
living Guru.

The personal inspiration that a disciple has with his living siksa or
diksha-guru inspires and amplifies as it goes on associating with them his
Krishna Consciousness.

One can also get confirmation of what one is doing, whether it is pleasing to
Krishna or not, from our diksha and siksa-gurus, and especially one can identify
with their help specific anarthas that are troubling our heart, and accordion to
given time, place and circumstance, find suitable solutions to overcome them.

These are numerous benefits of having a living siksa as well as diksha-gurus.

Now here are some quotes on guru-tattva.

---

Now here are few quotes regarding types of gurus and meaning of diksha.

---

This quote refers to the potency of the Holy Name, that Holy Name can act
powerfully even before diksha. This quote should not be misinterpreted to mean
that Holy Name is sufficient, so I do not need to go under formal initiation.
That could be the case with some exceptional and very elevated devotees, but
that exception cannot be made rule for general public. In our lives, we must
seek a bona fide spiritual master, accept initiation from him and under his
guidance, render devotional service.

Just like Srila Prabhupada gives an example, Ravindranat Thakura got an honory
PhD given to him by Calcutta University, without he having to even one day go to
the College. That was an exceptional arrangement. Can anyone of us say that, oh, this
is a good idea, I will also not go to College, I will not give any exams and I
want a PhD. That is not proper. Thus, in our lives, we must accept a bona fide
spiritual master and under his instruction, offenselessly continue cultivating
devotional service, especially the chanting of the Holy Names.

Next quote:

---

This quote tells us that it is very important that a candidate takes it very
seriously to his heart that after initiation, he will not participate in sinful
activities. It is not that because Guru has taken the contract of suffering
for my sins, I may go on committing sin without any rectification. This mentality is
hellish. It is actually great offense against the spiritual master.

Knowing that if I do any wrong sinful activity, my spiritual master may have to
take the karma, a disciple becomes all the more conscious and responsible in
discharge of his various duties.

---

So here are three stages that are being described:

1. The disciple's relationship with the spiritual master begins right from the
day he hears from his spiritual master and he feels that his heart resonates
with his instructions.

2. Later on, as this relationship matures, in a solid commitment in the heart of
the disciple, he accepts formal first initiation, called harinam diksha.

3. As one continues to practice Krishna Consciousness, under the vows that one
has taken at first initiation, he qualifies himself further for second
initiation, which is called Gayatri-mantra-diksha, or brahman initiation.

These three stages of hearing, first and second initiation are very important in
the life of a progressive devotee.

---

So there are two kinds of path, there is pancaratrika marg and there is
bhagavata marg. Pancaratrika marg refers to the process of deity worship as
delineated by Srila Narada Muni in his book Pancaratrika Vidhi, and Bhagavad
Marg refers to the path of hearing and chanting about the Supreme Lord,
specifically Srimad Bhagavatam to be regularly heard and recited, and the Holy
Name, Hare Krishna maha mantra to be regularly heard and propagated. This is
Bhagavat Marg. They both assist each other. Bhagavad Marga gives us proper
philosophical basis and understanding with which one can worship the Supreme
Lord in the form of deity. On other hand, Pancaratrika Marga gives the necessary
purity of mind and body by regulating their activities so that one can perform
quality hearing and chanting as per Bhagavat Marga.

Now here are some important quotes regarding guru-parampara system:

---

So this shows that a living Guru, who can point out the defects of a disciple is
essential, because in the life of a disciple there could be so many things that
need rectification, his attitude, his behavior or his certain particular type of
approach to Krishna Consciousness.

And therefore, Srila Prabhupada would often mention, quoting the example of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, that a disciple should remain a fool number one in front of
his spiritual master and accept instrunctions in total.

---

So this concludes our Lesson 2, guru-tattva and parampara. We learnt very
important concepts in this session. First is that there is guru-tattva, which is
one, although Gurus could be many. Actually, they are not many in the sense that
the siddhanta they represent is actually the same. We also learnt about various types of
Gurus, namely siksa and diksha-gurus. We learnt about guru-parampara
system, how Lord Krishna gives knowledge to Brahma, who gives in turn to Narada,
then to Vyasa, Madhavacarya. In this way, guru-sisa parampara comes up to Srila
Prabhupada and this must continue on in the form of various living siksa and
diksha-gurus, giving the knowledge of Krishna Consciousness to the succession of
upcoming members. This guru-parampara system is greatly thwarted by the Ritvik
Theory, which is completely fallacious because it is not supported in
scriptures.
