Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yYdkbgPgbFY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=fVIahxZMrT_HMwMQUhBSieaJVKx8MTU0ODQ4NzQ3OEAxNTQ4NDAxMDc4&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_058_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_63_to_70_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=yYdkbgPgbFY&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our study of the second chapter of the Bhagavad
Gita as a part of our Bhakti Shastri course. So, we will continue with our
discussion on 2.62-63, which we had started yesterday. We discussed about how
from "dhyāyato" to "praṇaśyati" is a sequence. Which can seem irreversible.
But it is not. We discussed the example of a horse. How the horse can be reined
in and controlled. And the earlier we do it, the better it is. You know, now, we
will discuss about how, you know, Prabhupada explains the purport. Like I
mentioned earlier, Prabhupada continues the flow of thought, which has started
from the earlier verses in his purports. So, let us look at "dhyāyato viṣayān
puṁsaḥ". So:

        dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ
        saṅgas teṣūpajāyate
        saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ
        kāmāt krodho ’bhijāyate

So, now, Prabhupada explains that:

"One who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious is subjected to material desires while
contemplating the objects of the senses."

Conversely, it implies that one who is Krishna Conscious will not be subjected
to material desires. And now, then, Prabhupada gives the example of Lord Shiva
and Haridasa Thakur. And he says, how Lord Shiva was agitated by Pārvatī.
Whereas Haridasa Thakur was not. Now, we may wonder, you know, what does this
mean? Lord Shiva is such a great devata. And how can we say that he is agitated
and Ha..., whether Haridasa Thakur is not agitated. Actually, here, there are
other places where Srila Prabhupada quotes Lord Shiva thus being a dhira. And
he quotes about how, when, even when Pārvatī came and tried to agitate him.
Still, he never got agitated. So, that is the theme of a dhira. So, the point
here is, and there, he says, Pra..., he is, Lord Shiva was absorbed in
meditating on the Supreme Lord. And because he was, you know, meditating on the
Supreme Lord from bhakti-yoga, he was not disturbed. So, here, when Srila
Prabhupada is comparing, it is not a comparison primarily of people. It is more
a comparison of processes, of processes. So, in this particular i..., context,
Prabhupada is talking about the glory of the holy name. So, if one is fixed in
the chanting of the holy names, one is fixed in the process of bhakti-yoga.
Then, the process of bhakti-yoga gives one a higher taste by which one would get
resist the lower taste. Whereas in this particular context, Prabhupada is
talking about Lord Shiva in terms of a yogi. And he is saying, that, and then,
that yogi, as a yogi, that is not necessarily bhakti-yoga. That does not
necessarily give a higher taste. That is equivalent to the taste that one comes
from, gets from bhakti-yoga. And that is why one may fall away. So, the
important principle here is that one does not let oneself get overwhelmed by
material desires. So, bhakti-yoga ensures that one does not get overwhelmed. And
the point of comparison is that, if we, due, that, Lord Shiva, and Lord Brahma,
no doubt, exalted personalities. And those exalted people are respectable,
worshipable in many ways. At the same time, the point here is that just material
position and power are not enough to overcome the, the people of temptations.
One needs the protective grace of the Supreme Lord, which we will get when we
take shelter of the process of devotional service. So, comparing the relative
potency of the two processes of yoga versus bhakti, is the essence of this
example. So, that is why Prabhupada concludes the purport. And he says:

"One who is not, therefore, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, however powerful he may be
in controlling the senses by artiﬁcial repression, is sure ultimately to fail,"

Because there is no higher taste.

"for the slightest thought of sense pleasure will agitate him to gratify his
desires."

So, now:

        krodhād bhavati sammohaḥ
        sammohāt smṛti-vibhramaḥ
        smṛti-bhraṁśād buddhi-nāśo
        buddhi-nāśāt praṇaśyati

So, "krodhād bhavati sammohaḥ". So, when there is, you know, from anger comes
delusion. From delusion comes loss of memory. So, we discussed this. You know,
i..., irritation, then there delusion. Then, there is oblivion. And then,
"buddhi-nāśāt", "buddhi-nāśāt". "buddhi-nāśo". And "buddhi-nāśāt praṇaśyati".
From oblivion comes stupefaction. Stupefaction leads to destruction. So, now,
Srila Prabhupada continues this thin..., win of thought, and he says that,
actually, you know, the senses also have to be engaged in Krishna's service. And
he quotes Rūpa Gosvāmī for "phalgu vairāgyaṁ" and "yukta-vairāgyam". So,
"phalgu" means false. So, what is this "phalgu vairāgyaṁ"?

        prāpañcikatayā buddhyā
        hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ
        mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo
        vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate

"phalgu kathyate". Such a "parityāgo" is "phalgu". What is that "phalgu
vairāgyaṁ"? "prāpañcikatayā buddhyā". That "prāpañcika" means mundane. Material.
That "buddhyā". You know, one, by which, one thinks as mundane. You know.
"hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ". Those objects which are connected with Lord Hari.
"mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo". When one thinks them of as they were mun..., mun...,
mundane. And "mumukṣubhiḥ". One who is aspiring for liberation gives them up.
"parityāgo". Such a person is called as "vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate". That
"vairāgyaṁ" is considered "phalgu". It is considered lower class "vairāgyaṁ".
So, you know, point is, that, how does one control the senses? One has to fix
the mind on Krishna. And how do we fix the mind on Krishna? We often have to use
our senses to fix the mind on Krishna. So, therefore, the senses themselves are
to be used. And we can use material things in Krishna's service. Prabhupada's
point here is that how will we be able to avoid "dhyāyato"? Now, we cannot just,
you know, close our eyes and work. When whatever we are doing, we try to,
whatever we are using, we use it in Krishna's service. And that way, we can
avoid "dhyāyato". And then, Prabhupada used the example of how one may, a, a
person, a devotee can take prasad. Whereas a materialistic person, or an
impersonalist, that person who is trying to renounce without engaging the
material in the service of spiritual, can fall back. Because there is no higher
taste available easily. So, now, after this, with this, the answer to the third
question. Third question was "kim āsīta". That is over. So, now, "vrajeta kim".
How does such a person move around? That is talked about here. So, let us look
at that. Hmm. So, now, the other's answer is not discrete. Because in one sense,
in 2.61, also, Krishna said, you know, "yukta". So, "yukta" is connected.
"yukta". So, in that sense, there, he, am..., "yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ". So, that
was a, connected also can be used in the sense of engaged. So, that answer is
flowing into this answer. So, h..., what is the answer now?

        rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu
        viṣayān indriyaiś caran
        ātma-vaśyair vidheyātmā
        prasādam adhigacchati

So, "caran". "caran" means moving about. So, "vrajeta" was the question. And
"caran" is the reference to that point again. "vrajeta" means to move around.
"caran" means to move around. So, what does one do? "viṣayān indriyaiś caran".
So, "indriyaiś" is the senses. They move towards to the sense objects.
"viṣayān". "caran". So, the senses have a ten..., t..., tendency to rush towards
the sense objects. What would we do with that? "ātma-vaśyair". The person brings
them under control. And how does that person do that? "vidheyātmā". By following
the "vidhey"s given in scripture. And for that, what does one have to do? That
is described in the eigtht part of the verse, "rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu". For
that, one has to keep one's attachment and aversion under control.

        rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu
        viṣayān indriyaiś caran

And when one does like this:

        ātma-vaśyair vidheyātmā

Then what happens?

        prasādam adhigacchati

Such a person gets prasad. What is the prasad? The prasad is, you know, purity.
The prasad is mercy. The prasad is higher happiness. "adhigacchati". So,
basically, this is talking about how one can get the higher taste. There is a
gradual process over here. What is that gradual process? "rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais
tu". Put our, aside our attachment and aversion. There may be certain things
which we may like. Certainly, which we may dislike. But we have to put them
aside so that we can move h..., move towards something better. Because just like
a small child is there, small child does, dislikes studies, and likes playing.
Now, it is not that playing is entirely banned. But the point is, the child has
to learn, like this is how I should work. And there has to be balance. Ok, child
may not like certain subjects to study. But still, the child does that. So, put
asides the situation. And child may like to play a lot. But then, child is told,
ok, now, this is your plate. And then, that is all. So, "rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais
tu". So, "rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu". If one puts aside the attachment and
aversion, while following scriptures. Now, scriptures do not absolutely ban all
the things that we like to do. In fact, many of the scrip..., things that
scriptures ban. They are actually harmful for us. So, by giving, d..., giving
them up, we become purified. And we stay our..., keep ourselves out of trouble.
And, of course, we become purified, when we also get a higher taste and we
connect ourselves with Krishna. But by giving them up, itself, further
impurities are stopped. And in that sense, we become, or, we stay a, less impure
than what we would have been otherwise. And when we bring in the pure sound
vibrations, connected with Krishna, that purifies us further. So,
"rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu". So, like that, whatever attachment and aversions are
there, then we put it aside. And then, follow the scripture.

        ... vidheyātmā
        prasādam adhigacchati

Now, it is interesting, Srila Prabhupada uses the word for "prasād...",
"vidheyātmā", you know, for, f..., for the regulative principles of freedom.
Th..., now, generally speaking, we talk about regulation, or discipline, or
restriction as negative. You know, restriction, we think of as deprivation of
freedom. But restriction is not actually deprivation of freedom. Restri..., so,
regulation is not necessarily deprivation. It can very well be protection. You
know, when the mother embraces the child. The child is not in restless. And the
child is asking, why is the mother restricting me? But if the mother embraces
the child, that child, embrace may well be for protection. So, essentially, the
important point is that what is one looking for? So, if we are looking for all
sorts of wanted, godless, sensual enjoyments, then, the scriptural rules and
regulations may seem like a restriction for us. But if we had changed our
values. And we have redirected our desires to be, we have redirected our heart
towards Krishna, then the restrictions serve as protection for us. You know, it
is way, depends on perception. If I want to enjoy in immoral ways and that is
what I think is enjoyment. Then, the rules and regulations act as restrictions.
Why cannot I enjoy? Why are these rules and regulations there? But actually,
when we purify ourselves, and then seek a higher, richer, inner happiness. We
are at the level of the soul. There is pure happiness available. And then, when
we seek that happiness. Then, what happens is, that happiness i..., becomes our
goal. And when that happiness is our goal, then the sensual enjoyment that are
there, they, which are tempting us, that will decide, no, I am not going to
enjoy these things. Then, we just understand that there is actually, not really
deprivation. I do not want those. But they are intruding. Then, I have made
resolve. I will not do this. Then, the rules actually act as protection for me.
So, you know, there may be a, there is a building, say, and there is a fence
around the building. Whether, say, electric wiring all around, so that nobody
can go out. Now, if I am inside. That say, now, I can see that fencing as a
protection. Or I can see it as a deprivation. You know, what, what will it
depend on? It depends on what I consider as important. You know, if the serious
business of my life is inside the house. That means, what I want to do is there.
Everything is there. And there, then I understand that actually, going out would
simply be a destruction for me. Whatever I have to do is inside. My treasure is
inside. My, you know, whatever my, whatever I valued in my life is inside. Then
the fencing is a protection. It is not a deprivation. But if I think that, oh,
everything wonderful is outside the fence. And this fencing is stopping me from
going outside. Then, the same fencing would appear like a deprivation for me.
So, ultimately, what is freedom, it depends on what our goal is. So, if our goal
is material enjoyment. Then, certainly, the rules and regulations of Krishna
Consciousness will appear to be like deprivation. But when we understand that,
actually, my goal is devotional service. And my goal is Krishna prema.
Developing love for Krishna. Then, the fences that are there. You know that
means the rules, regulative principles are there. They act as protection. So,
they do not, I do not anyway want to go there, go outside. But, you know,
sometimes, it is, the mind may just surrender off, and may go in different
directions. But no, I have taken this initiation vow. So, these are regulative
principles that I am going to follow. So, they keep us within a safe zone. So,
that is why regulative principles of freedom mean that they actually free us
from the ever-present distractions which will drag us away from Krishna.

So, we need to see rules not as deprivations, but as protection. Like a mother's
embrace. Another way to understand this is to, the disease metaphor. Which we
have discussed many times. When the doctor tells the patient, do not do certain
things. That may be sounding as a disea..., restriction, but may see..., be seen
as a restriction, or a deprivation. But the point is, the doctor wants the
patient to get healthy. And after getting healthy, the patient will have much
more freedom. You know, right now, the patient is sick. And the patient says, I
want to eat this food. I want to eat that food. And I do not want to take this
bitter of tasty medicines. What happens by that is? Patient cannot get cured.
And when the patient is not cured, then the patient cannot move forward. So,
therefore, the important thing is that if the patient just follows the rules,
and there is freedom. And after that, the patient can do so many things. Whilst
the person, patient is healed. So, same applies with us also in our spiritual
life. Actually, once we develop our love for Krishna, that is the meaning of if
we become spiritually healthy. And there is so much joy available at that time,
in loving Krishna. In serving Krishna. In remembering Krishna. And that is our
goal. So, Prabhupada explains that "prasādam adhigacchati". What is the
"prasādam" over here? Now, generally, we think of the word "prasādam" as the
"prasādam" which we will take with the, honor with the tongue and the mouth.
Yes, that is "prasādam". But the word "prasādam" has a generic meaning. It means
mercy. And what is the mercy over here? The mercy is the higher taste. The mercy
is the "paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate". That was talked about in 2.59. That was "yukta
āsīta mat-paraḥ". Fixing the mind on Krishna. That was talked about in 2.61. So,
h..., actually, when we follow the rules and regulations. Then, fixing the mind
on Krishna becomes easier. We find that, ok, fixing the mind on Krishna is not
so difficult. Why? Because we have become purer now. We have become purer. That
is our goal. Now, after this, Krishna will describe, once we get "prasādam",
then what happens? So, once we see this, then we will understand clearly that
this is not referring to just the prasad that we honor with the tongue. It is
talking about higher taste.

        prasāde sarva-duḥkhānāṁ
        hānir asyopajāyate
        prasanna-cetaso hy āśu
        buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate

"sāde", when one gets "prasādam". "sarva-duḥkhānāṁ hānir". All miseries go away.
"asyopajāyate". So, all misery goes away for such a person. And then, after
that, what happens? "prasanna-cetaso hy āśu". "prasanna-cetaso". Such a person
becomes joyful. "prasanna-cetaso", becomes, you know, joyful. Now, "āśu". "āśu"
means quickly. "buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate". And at that time, the intelligence
becomes rock solid. The intelligence becomes unshakable. So, it is interesting
that, before that, you know, Krishna is saying the intelligence is not sh..., is
not so strong. Let us see what this means. So, once we get the "prasādam". Once
we get the higher taste. Once we will become absorbed in the remembrance of
Krishna, then "sarva-duḥkhānāṁ hānir". That, actually, all misery goes away. How
can all misery go away? The threefold miseries will continue on. This means that
we still have misunderstanding with other. We may still fall sick. And that it
may be too cold. It may be too hot. So, what does it mean "sarva",
"sarva-duḥkhānāṁ hānir"? Actually, it depends on our consciousness. We may, you
know, there is a joy despite the miseries. The Krishna Conscious joy is so
great. So great. That the miseries become, they are there. But they do not
matter. Because actually, there is so much su..., such, so much, So many better
things available for us in our spiritual life. So, that is how "hānir
asyopajāyate". You know, just like, when we are getting some little food. Say,
man..., we are getting some, if our meal is just one chapati. And that is also
rukes chapati. That is also dried and tasteless. And then, we think, oh, any, it
is ch..., it, it will make us feel bad. We may wonder what. Why this wants such
a simple chapati. But then, if I have many food items. And in that feast, there
is one item which does not taste all that good. There are so many other items
that taste good, that that one item becomes insignificant. So, it is there. But
it does not matter. Because there is so much better food there is available. And
high class food is there. So, like that, you know, when our consciousness at the
material level, if miseries there are at the material level, because our
consciousness is at the material level, so we have e..., nothing else to
experience. It is just like I have only one food to eat. And that food is
miserable, then it is miserable. But then, on the other hand, if I have access
to spiritual happiness. If I develop my relationship with Krishna. And I am
experiencing happiness at the spiritual level. Then, yes, at the material level,
I am experiencing misery. But because what is a..., what I am experiencing at
the spiritual level, so much richer, so much deeper, that, this does not matter.
It is there, but it does not matter. As long as we are in material existence,
the threefold miseries will be there. But they will not matter. Then,
"prasanna-cetaso hy āśu". So, when, like that, we are connected with Krishna,
then we will become "prasanna-cetaso". We will become alwa..., become always
joyful. And then, we are thus joyful. What happens then? "buddhiḥ
paryavatiṣṭhate". At that time, the "buddhiḥ" becomes fixed. So, what does it
mean when Krishna says the "buddhiḥ" becomes fixed so late? Why doesn't
"buddhiḥ" become fixed earlier? Is it not fixed earlier? Actually, it is, but,
at from the time we start hearing scripture, our intelligence becomes strong.
But still, when we ourselves experience the happiness that is being talked about
in spiritual life, then the "buddhiḥ" becomes much stronger. The fixedness of
the "buddhiḥ" becomes much greater. So, how does this happen? It happens because
we are practicing spiritual life. And we have tasted, the experience for, of
happiness for ourselves. So, initially, when we hear from scripture, things seem
logical. Things seem sensible. Things seem intelligible. So, that is good. At
that time, our intelligence becomes little strong. But f..., when that which is
logical becomes experiential. Now, I experience:

        pratyakṣāvagamaṁ dharmyaṁ
        su-sukhaṁ kartum avyayam

In 9.2, in Bhagavad Gita, Krishna will tell, that, "pratyakṣāvagamaṁ". We
experience directly within. What do we experience? "su-sukhaṁ kartum". This
joyful. That is "rāja-vidyā". That is bhakti, actually. Just like when I go to a
doctor, I have a little faith. Just stop to make worthing, makes sense. But when
I take the medicines and I get cured. Then, ah, yes, what the doctor make...,
says makes perfect sense. I have got cured by it. So, like that, you know, our
intelligence becomes very strong, "buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate". When we ourselves
experience the "prasādam". And by that, our "hānir" goes a..., "sarva...",
"sarva-duḥkhānāṁ hānir", all misery goes away. And then, we become
"prasanna-cetaso". Then, we become joyfully situated. So, actually, in the
initial stages of a spiritual life, we cannot just trust our intelligence. We
have to actually expose ourselves to regular scriptural study. Because s...,
scripture is our intelligence. And to the extent we remember scripture, to that
extent we act intelligently. To the extent we forget scripture, to that extent
we act unintelligently. So, that is the difference. Between, so, in our, in our
case, we are talking, intelligence simply means, intelligence simply means the
practice of remembering guru, sadhu, shastra. And acting accordingly. To the
extent we do not remember guru, sadhu, shastra, to that extent, we cannot
act appropriately. And to the extent we do not act appropriately, to that extent
we put ourselves under trouble. We put ourselves to suffering. So, now, let us
move forward and think. If a, if my "buddhiḥ" is established with that stage,
what can I do now? Right now, I can keep hearing. And as I keep hearing, I,
r..., you, by the hearing, I get expe..., get some understanding. That is
the "buddhiḥ". And whatever that experience I have, that reinforces my
"buddhiḥ". So, r..., that, at our stage, hearing is extremely important to stay
steady on the spiritual path. And "buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate". So, intelligence
essentially means the words of guru, sadhu, shastra. We may have material
intelligence in terms of material information processing capacity. There are
many scientists, many scholars, many thinkers who have brilliant information
processing capacity. But often, if we look at their personal lives, now, they
are still, despite their brilliant intellectual capacity, they do not have sense
control. You know, they have so many, you know, they fall prey to lust. Some of
them fall prey to, you know, greed. They have affairs. So, you know, why does it
happen? Because there is a difference between material intelligence and
spiritual intelligence. Material intelligence is the capacity to process
information. And they have that capacity to process information. And by that,
they can come up with some significant insights. They can write books which have
very beautiful poetic metaphors, and literary values. Or they can make scien...,
they can, they make a, s..., inventions and come up with discoveries which
significantly alter the, a progress of technology. But as far as internally
they are concerned, that in and of itself does not lead, guarantee self-s...,
self-control. So, for that, one needs higher taste. And that higher taste is
based on the higher intelligence. So, spiritual intelligence is, the
intelligence that comes from guru, sadhu, shastra. And that intelligence becomes
internalised when we ourselves get the higher taste. So, now, Krishna is
describing how do we do "vrajeta" in this world, "kim vrajeta". We act according
to scripture. We make scriptures our bor..., borders, our, our protection
fences. And then, we move along. Now, Krishna says, while doing this, there is a
danger. What that danger is, we will describe in the next verse. If we do not do
this, then what happens.

        nāsti buddhir ayuktasya
        na cāyuktasya bhāvanā
        na cābhāvayataḥ śāntir
        aśāntasya kutaḥ sukham

So, "nāsti buddhir ayuktasya". For one, who is not connected with Krishna. Then,
"nāsti buddhir". Such a person does not have any "buddhir". You know, for,
       
        nāsti buddhir ayuktasya
        na cayuktasya bhavana

So, "bhavana" here refers to the steady mind. So, there is no strong
intelligence. There is no steady mind. "na cabhavayatah santir". Then, there
cannot be any peace. And if there is no peace, "asantasya kutah sukham". So,
ready k..., regular, rhetorial question. There is no peace. Then, where can
there be happiness? So, here, Krishna is essentially talking about the sequence.
So, important sequence to understand. You know, unless there is some basic level
of peace, we cannot have happiness. And peace comes when the mind and sen...,
intelligence are focused. So, if we do not have a, if we are not fixed in
Krishna Consciousness. If we do not have Krishna as ultimate goal, then our
subtle body is not fixed. The mind is going here. The intelligence is going
there. Mind, intelligence are going here and there. So, at that time, what
happens essentially is, one does not have the steadiness to focus. When we do
not have the steadiness to focus, "na cabhavayatah santir". So, we cannot have
peace. Mind is thinking of this, that, that, that. It is running a..., in
a dozen directions, you know, trying go everywhere at the same time. Or
sometimes, going one direction, but go at such a reckless place, pace, and to go
to such a dangerous place. Yes. That, it can ruin us. So, we cannot have
happiness. So, happiness is possible first of all if we need some basic level of
peace. Now, this peace does not necessarily mean that a devotee does not have
any anxieties. A dev..., a, a devotee has to live. And some peaceful riverside
kutir, where there is nobody coming to disturb or something like that. This
peace is not so much external as internal. This peace essentially refers to when
we are internally clear. We have things I am going to do. The things I am going
to do, work. When we are internally clear, that is the point of mind and
intelligence being under control. And there is a peace. This is my goal. And
this is the way I am going to go along the road. There will be challenges. And I
will deal with the challenge. But I will move along my goal towards this. So,
this is what our focus is. That we want to move along straight towards Krishna.
And once we are fixed, then there is basic level of shanti. So, this, so, shanti
is not necessarily external peace. Although a devotee likes to have external
order, also, an orderly situation so that service to Krishna can go on
effectively, productively. But the important point is, the devotee is at peace
within. Because the devotee is connected with Krishna. Now, Prabhupada's purport
here is a classic. So, Prabhupada explains that, Prabhupada quotes the Bha...,
f..., 5.29 peace formula which we will discuss when we come there. But here:

"Disturbance is due to want of an ultimate goal"

It is an interesting statement. What does it mean? Actually, "Disturbance is due
to want of an ultimate goal". It essentially means that, actually, we set up
some goals for ourselves. Now, even if we achieve those goals, that in and of
itself does not lead to happiness. All that happiness is that either if we do
not get the goal, I feel devastated. If I get the goal, there is some temporary
relation. But afterwards, again, there is disappointment. Because the pleasure
from that goal is so short-lived. It is gone. And again, after that, oh, I want
something more. I want something more. How will I get it? So, that is how our
mind deludes us. And we feel captivated by illusion. So, "Disturbance is due to
want of an ultimate goal", "want of an ultimate goal". So, wha..., how do we set
up an ultimate goal? So, that ultimate goal is a relationship. That when we have
a relationship with Krishna, we understand that if I just serve Krishna, ok, the
ways in which I serve Krishna will be different. But the principle is, it is not
that I want to get this in this world. And I want to get that in the world. Yes,
I may want certain things in the world, also. But what I essentially and
ultimately want is, I want to love Krishna. And the things that I want in the
world, are so that I can steadily serve Krishna. So, once I have that clear in
my life, then, that becomes my ultimate goal. And, so, Prabhupada says,
"aśāntasya kutaḥ sukham". He explains that, actually, if you are not fixed about
what the ultimate goal is, how can there be peace? And how can there be
happiness thereafter? So, then, Prabhupada goes on to say that:

"Krsna consciousness is a self-manifested peaceful condition which can be
achieved only in relationship with Krsna."

and even without Krishna Conscious:

"and is without peace, however much he may make a show of peace and spiritual
advancement in life."

So, what this essentially means is that, actually, we all have to practice
spiritual life. And it is, some people, you know, if, externally, spiritually,
they look very peaceful, very dignified, very calm, very gentle. And when you
make them, you smile. They smile sweetly. You know, all that is good. Some
people may have a sattvic disposition. You know, because of the sattva guna
cru..., sattvic culture that they have been brought up in. Or they may also be
doing that as a facade. You know, see, in general, th..., the person's
appearance is not necessarily an indication of the person's substance.
Appearance and substance are not necessarily the same, you know, c..., a...,
actually. So, for example, now, many people in, many people say the western
countries, things are very very clean. Now, the cleanliness is good. And as far
as, as a virtue is concerned, having things clean, having things orderly, that
is good. But at the same time, you know, people often are filled with so many
contaminated desires. And then, we are externally clean. But then we are
internally very unclean. So, we cannot just, you know, jude. We cannot just, you
know, understand what, where people are at by looking at externals. So, suppose
he may be very peaceful externally. At the same time, that person may be very,
you know, know, agitated internally. Have, they, that person may have desires
which are self-defeating. Which can be, which may be harm oneself. Or which may
be vicious. Whichc may be harming others. And the external peacefulness may be a
facade that the person has kept for the sake of influencing others, for deluding
others. For the sake of making them do what that person wants. So, important
thing is that we have to understand the values that drive a person. We have to
understand the goals that a person does have. You know, normally, knowing, based
on that, we can understand, actually, whether the peace full behavior is a
facade or the substance to it. So, without having that substance internally. You
know, one can maintain a facade for, you know, some time. And so, people are
illit...., then, determine, they can maintain it for a long time, also. But
ultimately, one has to f..., you know, one has, cheating oneself. Even if one,
say, succeed in cheating the world. We cannot avoid cheating oneself. Because we
are not actually internally peaceful, not actually internally satisfied. For
that, we need a deep spiritual connection. That is his connection with self
makes us happy. Otherwise, we cannot have happiness. So, let us move forward to
the next verse now. "nās...". Hmm. Hmm. So, let us go to the next verse. Now.
Hmm. So, this is the section where Krishna is talking about how to k..., "kim
vrajeta". So, Krishna is now describing how one will be eventually deluded if
one is not careful. Ok.

        indriyāṇāṁ hi caratāṁ
        yan mano ’nuvidhīyate
        tad asya harati prajñāṁ
        vāyur nāvam ivāmbhasi

"indriyanam hi caratam". So, when the senses are wandering. Now, the question
was "kim vrajeta". So, "vrajeta". So, when one is going around in this world, at
that time, when the senses wander.

        indriyāṇāṁ hi caratāṁ
        yan mano ’nuvidhīyate

Wherever the mind fixes itself. "tad asya harati prajñāṁ". That will drive away
the intelligence. "prajñāṁ" is the intelligence. "vāyur nāvam ivāmbhasi". Just
as wind sweeps away the boat. This is now, Krishna is using very, you know, apt
example over here to illustrate how we, one may be dragged away. So, now when a
boat is in the ocean, actually, you know, if a storm comes, the boat is
helpless. Sometimes, there may be big ships, also. And the ships may be
helpless. That a ship may be just swept away. Tuck. By the power of, by the
power of the boat. So, how does such a thing happen? It happens because the boat
there is vulnerable. So, like that, you know, we are in the material existence,
which is bhavasagara. Which is an ocean. And what are these winds? The winds are
like desires. So, the desires come. They can just sweep us away. So, what do we
do when these desires come? How do we deal with them? So, actually, the way to
deal with them is by understanding that we are all vulnerable. So, we have to
protect ourselves. How do we protect ourselves? Just like when a ship is going
in a particular direction. And there are weather forecast. Oh. This site, there
is a storm. So, then, the ship's captain gives orders, is that, take some other
way. Or if there is no other way, in the front, with the storm is there, then
prepare. You know, go slowly. And then, we make sure that the heavy wind that is
there, one has some defense against it. So, like that, you know, scriptures,
they tell us, we are in the "bhavasagara". But in the "bhavasagara". In the
material ocean. In the ocean of material existence, there are certain areas
where the storms of material desires are far greater. And if we go in those
areas, then we are exposing ourselves to danger unnecessarily. So, all of us
know which are the stormy areas for us based on our par..., past conditionings.
So, all of us, we may have some general stormy areas. But each of us can have
some our special field of stormy areas, also. So, we have to protect ourselves.
Only, when we protect ourselves, oh, you know, there is, if I go in that
direction, there will be a stormy. That storm can sweep me away. And I do not
want to get swept away. Because I do not want to get swept away, so I will not
fall prey. So, I will not do this thing. So, when we think in this way, at that
time, we can protect ourselves. So, how do we go into the storm? That is
described by "indriyanam hi caratam". So, the senses are always wandering here
and there. They are searching. Oh. Where can I get some pleasurable object? And
then, you know, when one looks at it, so the senses are going to wander. We
cannot close the senses here. But what do we do? If we let the mind focus on
that. Earlier point was also "dhyāyato". I was not "drishyato". It was
"dhyāyato". So, if the sense is  wandering here and there, it looks at some
object, and then, it catches. It stares and then gets devoured. So, "yan mano
’nuvidhiyate". When the mind becomes focused on it, then what happens is "tad
asya harati prajñam". Tuck. The mind drags away the intelligence. And then, one
falls off. You know, as just a, one is blown away. Just as the boat is blown
away. Now, it is interesting. This verse is similar to 2.60. But there is a
difference. What was 2.60?

        yatato hy api kaunteya
        puruṣasya vipaścitaḥ
        indriyāṇi pramāthīni
        haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ

So, we discussed about there, there is three level..., the sense objects,
senses, and the mind. So, the senses are so strong and impetuous that they carry
away the mind. That is what we discussed. Now, what we are discussing is
slightly different. Krishna's focus over here is that, actually, the, when the
senses wander and the mind focuses on the senses, then what happens is the mind
drags away the intelligence. So, what is the difference? So, so sense objects.
There are senses. There is mind. There is intelligence. So, 2.59 is saying that
the senses drag away the mind. And 2.67 is saying that the mind drags away the
intelligence. If the mind focus on the sense objects, of, mind focuses on the
senses. Then the mind drags away. So, what is the difference between the two?
So, actually, the difference is "yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ". Krishna earlier was
primarily talking about sense control in terms of yes, "kim āsīta". The question
was how does one regulate the senses? So, the focus there was on, ok, we draw
the senses inwards and regulate them. But now, Krishna is talking about positive
engagement. So, when we are doing positive engagement, we have to know, this is
material. This is spiritual. And we focus on the spiritual and avoid the
material. So, we are going to be engaged in the world. And that is why it is
critical that we be focused on Krishna. And that is why Krishna is saying that
a, the mind should not drag away the intelligence. We are go..., we are in the
world of sense objects. And when we are in the world of sense objects, we will
be exposed to danger. But how do we deal with that danger? We do not let the
mind be dragged away, mind drag away the intelligence. How is that possible?
When we do not focus on the sense objects. You know, so that means the senses go
here and there. And so, sense focus, sens..., one sense focus on a particular
object. Then, when the sense looks at that object. Then, if the mind also
focuses on it. Then, from that time, our delusion will begin. So, Krishna is
talking over here at a one level higher. That we are following the scriptures.
When we follow the scriptures, the, our intelligence is fortified by that, by
its scriptural knowledge. And then, we do not let the mind go here and there.
So, how does one do it? That we do not let the mind get swept away by the
desires. That He describes in the next verse. So, let us go to the next verse.

        tasmād yasya mahā-bāho
        nigṛhītāni sarvaśaḥ
        indriyāṇīndriyārthebhyas
        tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

So, "tas...", what does one have to do? "tasmād yasya mahā-bāho". Therefore, oh,
"mahā-bāho", Arjuna, you are a great warrior, you have conquered many great
enemies. But now, you have something bigger to conquer. And what is that? That
you conquer your senses. "indriyanindriyarthebhyas". "nigrhitani". Therefore,
one has to control the senses. And how does one control the sense? "sarvasah".
All the senses. Even one. So, it is, so, in the previous verse, the emphasis was
that even one of the wandering senses can drive away the mind. Therefore, none
of the senses should be allowed to wander. Even one can cause danger. Therefore,
none should be allowed. "sarvaśaḥ". So, the emphasis here is "sarvaśaḥ".
"indriyāṇīndriyārthebhyas". Do not let the senses go towards the sense objects.
Do not let the mind focus. The senses may and sense objects may come in contact
with each other. But when we let that contact prolong, the mind gets involved.
And then, one starts getting deluded. But when one control the senses.
"nigṛhītāni sarvaśaḥ". One controls. Then, "tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā". That way,
one can become "prajñā pratiṣṭhitā". One's intelligence will become strong.
"mahā-bāho". So, there is a challenge to Arjuna. This is what you have to do.
Oh. You are, so, the test of true strength. The test of true character is not
the size of one's biceps. You know, people can have big biceps. But then, they
can have very weak willpower. When the temptations come, they just fall plop.
You know, as if they are made of, they are, they are m..., they are made of
sandcastles. Tuck. They get crashed. So, the point is, our strength is
determined by our determination, by our willpower. And, the, so, Arjuna, your
willpower is to be able to discipline the senses. Not let them carry o..., carry
off, but stay on plan. Now, after that, now, Krishna will describe one of the
most important off-quoted verses, which is a metaphorical verse. So, let us look
at this verse.

        yā niśā sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        tasyāṁ jāgarti saṁyamī
        yasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni
        sā niśā paśyato muneḥ

So, "yā niśā". Now, this is a metaphor verse. "yā niśā sarva-bhūtānāṁ". For all
living beings that which is "niśā". "niśā" is night. That which is night for all
living beings. "tasyāṁ jāgarti saṁyamī". For the "saṁyamī". For those who are
regulated that is the time of awakening. "yasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni". And that
which is the time of awakening for all living beings, "sā niśā paśyato muneḥ".
That is the time of night for all living beings. So, what is this talking about
here? You know, we may, if we look at a, a, if we look at it from a
chronological, clock based point of view. Actually, you know, the night for
everyone is the same. Even the Sun is not there. When there is dark. There is
night. When the Sun is there, there is daytime. So, is it talking about, say,
when people for America, or it is night. When people for India, it is day? And
people for India, it is night. Then, for America, it is day? No. Krishna is not
talking about any geographical or chronological in that sense over here. So, a,
time, what, what is, is, what is being referred to here is that night refers to
period of inactivity. Period of a, period of lack of interest. Lack of activity.
You know, lack of stimulation. And day refers to the period of interest,
activity, stimulation. So, that which is night for all living beings, is a day
for the self-controlled. And that which is day for all living beings, is night
for the self-controlled. What this means is that their activities of interest
are different. Their activities of interest are different. Their e..., phase,
their pea..., their focus has, their focal are different. So, now, what is the
activity of interest for materialistic people? That is sense gratification. So,
that sense gratification is a day for the materialistic people. And that is
night for the spiritualist. So, what will, why was it night for the
spiritualist? You know, what is the sense gratification?

        punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām

Again and again, chewing the chewed. You know, that is what we have enjoyed in
so many lower species. And now, we are enjoying it again in the human specy. So,
what is, what is s..., so great about it? You know, human life is meant for
something higher. Why is one wasting one's life in this? So, one, it does, just
does not not make any sense for people. So, that is the perception for these. 
So, what is perceived as your day? What is the perceived as a, a period of great
interest for the materialist is perceived as a period of lack of interest, lack
of. It does not have any meaning. It does not have any substance. So, that is
what, what is day for the materialist is night for the spiritualist. Now, s...,
on the other hand, what is a day for the spiritualist is night for the
materialist. What is day for spiritualists? Day refers to the ph..., you know,
phase of interest and activity. So, that is self-realisation. That is
advancement in Krishna Consciousness. So, devotees sit and chant Hare Krishna.
Devotees study scripture. Devotees develop their relationship with Krishna. And
then they get "navad nava rasa dham anya". They get newer and newer happiness
in that relationship with Krishna. So, this is incomprehensible for
materialistic people. Just sit at one place and utter some sound for two hours.
What do you do? And like that, you do it for a whole life. Then, what you get
out of it? So, it is incomprehensible. So, that is what Prabhupada, that is what
it means. That what is night for the self-realised. What is night for all living
beings, is actually day for the spiritualists. So, you know, here, we have to
understand that there is a i..., significant difference between materialist and
spiritualist. You know, we cannot live and advance in spiritual life if we
continue to hold on to a material definition of success. Material definition of
success means, if I think, I want to make it big in life. I want to enjoy in
life. And then, at the same time, I also want to make spiritual advancement.
Now, a devotee may also have a significant impact. We have been given talents.
And we want to use the talents in Krishna's service. And if you use those
talents, and we get successes by using those talents. That is wonderful. We
should do that. But that does not mean that a devotee gets caught up in it the
same way as a materialist does. A devotee's goal is not just fame in this world.
It is not fame. It is prema. The devotee's goal is to develop love for Krishna.
And as a loving offering, as a loving service, devotee may also try to do
wonderful things in Krishna's service. But the goal is different. If our goal
is, you know, the material definition of success. Then, we cannot make
substantial spiritual advancement. So, "sa nisa pasyato muneh". So, as devo...,
devotees, we have to u..., see that this is actually not of much value. When
Srila Prabhupada met Ambarish Prabhu, Alfred Ford for the first time. You know,
he is a great grandson of Henry Ford, you know, the famous, you know, pioneering
business man who made the Ford car. So, you know, Pra..., now, he was, so, among
the wealthiest persons in the world. And when he met Srila Prabhupada. What was
the first thing that Srila Prabhupada said? So, he was a great grandson of Henry
Ford. Where is he now? So, Ambarish Prabhu says that, oh, he says, where is he
now? So, what did, Prabhu..., now, Prabhupada did not expect him to have some
sort of paranormal vision by which he will know where Henry Ford has gone in the
next life. Which specy he is. What he is doing.

But Prabhupada's point was this, he built such a beau..., big empire. Such a
big legacy has gone. You know, co..., corporate empire he built. But he is gone
now. So, this wealth is not eternal. This wealth is not going to stay with us.
Therefore, what is there with us, rather than trying to hold on it, in a futile,
hold onto it forever, which is futile. One actually uses it in devotional
service. And thereby gets the eternal, the wealth that we can always hold unto.
That is our love for Krishna. So, you know, that is the difference in the
perspectives of the materialists and spiritualists. And interestingly,
Prabhupada says there are two kind of intelligent people in the purport. He says
material intelligence and spiritual intelligence. So, that means, you know, we
do not have to deny that materialistic people can also be intelligent. They are.
For example, when we use technology. So, here, to have a com..., to make a
computer. To make a computer function. To have internet connection. That
requires intelligence. So, now, we are having this online Bhakti Shastri course.
You know, the technology that has been, that has gone into making this requires
intelligence. So, we do not deny that materialistic people c..., also have
intelligence. What is that intelligence? That intelligence is divorced from
ultimate reality. The ultimate reality is that we are eternal beings and we want
eternal happiness. But when one neglects that and focuses only on the temporary
time to make the temporary better and better. Then, one misses out on the full
potential of life. So, you know, we have to have a balance. Sometimes, we make
here all materialistic people are fools and rascals. Prabhupada saying like
that. So, that is from the spiritual perspective. Yes, what is the ultimate
value of a person? What that person needs to be? But still, within the relative
perspective, those who are intelligent. You know, they can, if we want, if they
had done something laudable, we can appreciate that. But we can also point out
the ultimate futility of all that has been done over there. Becau..., if one is
not connecting oneselves with spirituality. Now, after describing this, this
metaphorical verse. So, what is the point of this metaphorical verse over here?
Krishna was t..., the section was talking about "kim vrajeta". How can one
control one's senses? So, then, after the previous verse, 2.68, which was
continuing on with the flow of control all the senses. Now, we may say, where do
we see such a control's? If one is completely controlling one's senses, then
what will be the enjoyment available? What will be the enjoyment available? And
what is the kind of l..., what is the point of living such a life? So, that
question may come up. If one just, all the senses are controlled, then where is
the enjoyment? You know, he says no. There is a different definition of
enjoyment. Do not impose the material definition of enjoyment on spiritual life.
If you do that, if you impose the material definition of enjoyment on spiritual
life, then spiritual env..., no..., life will seem, not only unenjoyable, it
will be f..., it will be frightening. It will feel like choking us at the neck.
There is a different definition of enjoyment. And that is the definition of
enjoyment that we should pursue. So, there are two different people, classes of
people with two different definitions of enjoyment. Definitions of happiness.
That is what this verse tells. And the sadhaka's journey is to move from the
materialistic definition of enjoyment to the spiritual definition of enjoyment.
Now, in the next verse, Krishna will describe how one can experience inner
happiness. How one can move from the lower level of ha..., happiness to the
higher level of happiness.

        āpūryamāṇam acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ
        samudram āpaḥ praviśanti yadvat
        tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarve
        sa śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī

This is also very often quoted verse. In fact, this whole section of 2.64 to
2.72, it contains one of. You know, it is one of the most practical sections in
the Bhagavad Gita for us sadhakas. You know, it, c..., it, all these verses can be 
memorised. And they can be recited. And contemplated. And we can get a lot of
direction, wisdom and empowerment for living according to shastra as sadhakas.
So, let us look at this verse. So, "āpūryamāṇam". "pūrya" means complete. So,
f..., being filled. "āpūryamāṇam acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ". So, "pratiṣṭhaṁ" is. So,
"acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ" means not getting disturbed. It is within its boundary.
Within its support. "samudram āpaḥ praviśanti yadvat". "samudram" is ocean.
"āpaḥ" is water. So, just as water keeps flowing into the ocean. But the ocean
never overflows. Similarly, s..., "tadvat kama yam pravisanti sarve". Similarly,
"kama", material desires enter into a person. But "sa santim apnoti na
kama-kami". That that pers..., such a person, who is not affected by the desire,
that a person is "sa śāntim āpnoti". Such a person will get "śāntim". Not
"kāma-kāmī". Not a person who, it is a very significant verse. "kāma-kāmī". So,
"kāma" is desire. And "kāmī" is desirer. So, not one who is the desirer of
desires. What does it mean desirer of desires? We will have to look at the
whole, you know, metaphor to understand this. See, normally, when we talk about
desires, we talk about desires going outwards. Isn't it? You know, when I see
certain object, then I desire that object. So, we normally talk about desires
going outwards. I desire something. But Krishna is comparing desires here to
rivers which are flowing into an ocean. He is talking about desires coming
inwards. That means what? There are external sense objects and the external
sense objects when they come in contact with the senses, they inject desires
within us. So, that means, desires come in means in the perception of the sense
objects, which are inviting, alluring, they come to us. But "na kama-kami". That
means that when the desires come in, one does not become the desirer of desires.
One, w..., w..., we do not accept those desires. Just like somebody may come at
our door. Or somebody may knock on our phone, call on our phone. You know. Sir,
I have got this for you. You know, this, this. And may, advertisers may come.
You know, was, sales people may come. They say, can you, would you like to
purchase this, this, this, this, this? So, now, that means they are presenting a
proposal over there, a proposition over there. When they present a proposition,
at that time what do we do? If I do not know, you know, somebody calls, wrong
number. Or not interested. Somebody knocks on the door. We just not. I do not
want. Close the door. So, what happens is, the desire comes to us. But we do not
say yes to the desire. We say no to that desire. "na kama-kami". Not the desirer
of desires. So, similarly, in this case over here, what is being said is, the
desires will come inside. But there are no desires that go outside. So, how do,
can that happen? So, in ocean has so much water in it that some more water comes
in, the ocean does not overflow. But if there are instead of ocean, there was
just a small paddle, a little water in it. And then, some, some rivers, river
flows over there, into that paddle. Phew. Everything will overflow. So, what
does this paddle or ocean referring to in this case? It actually refers to
happiness. So, if we are internally like an ocean. If we are remembering Krishna
internally. And Krishna is ananda sagara. He is praying my sagara. He is an
ocean of joy, ocean of happiness, ocean of love. So, if we have in..., by the
practice of sadhana, we have invoked the presence of Krishna within our heart.
And thereby, we are experiencing oceanic happiness within. Then, when some
other, some sense object come, some sense perception comes in, and from, he
says, come on. Do this. You will enjoy. He says, no, I have, I have got so much
happiness inside. I do not need this. 57:46
