Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQfosyif6tE
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_055_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_47_to_53_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=PQfosyif6tE&event=video_description&redir_token=O2Nx8BeU-dnr3SuzgLQxD0uotrF8MTU0ODQ4NzM3N0AxNTQ4NDAwOTc3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We will
look f..., to discuss now on karma-yoga. Till now, we have discussed the
superiority of karma-kanda over karma-yoga, from verses 38 to 46. Now, we will
discuss how, you know, karma-yoga is to be practiced. Now, in this section, we
can see this discussion in the chronological flow of the Gita as talking about
karma-yoga. At the same time, these characteristics can also apply to
bhakti-yoga. So that we get an eternal result that it requires one-pointed
intelligence. This can apply to general transcendence. And it can also apply to
bhakti-yoga. So, within the k..., a, sequential flow of the Bhagavad Gita.
Because Krishna has not explicitly referred to Himself. It refers to karma-yoga.
But Srila Prabhupada connects everything in the Gita with its ultimate
conclusion. And in that perspective, all the section can be seen as referring
to Krishna Consciousness, also. So, we will discuss about this topic more in
detail as we move forwards. Now, let us look at the one of most widely quoted
verse in the Gita. It is a verse which is often quoted, but very rarely and
clearly understood. So:

        karmaṇy evādhikāras te
        mā phaleṣu kadācana
        mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr
        mā te saṅgo ’stv akarmaṇi

Now, this verse, generally, only one fourth of it is quoted. "karmaṇy
evādhikāras te". But it has four parts. Actually, each of the four parts has a
significance. "karmaṇy evādhikāras te". That we have a right only to do karma.
We have a right to do karma. "adhikāraḥ". Authority. Right. "mā phaleṣu
kadācana". But we do not have a right to the fruit. We should not demand or, you
know, we should not demand the fruit. "mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr". One should
not think of oneself as the producer of the fruit. And then, "mā te saṅgo ’stv
akarmaṇi". We should not think that, you know, because I have not, I ha..., I
should not get the fruit. So, then, I will not do karma only. So, let us look at
these four parts and try to understand what this verse is actually talking
about. So, first and foremost, Srila Prabhupada would often talk about half hen
logic based on a well-known traditional story. That a person wanted a hen.
Person want..., b..., l..., about had a hen which could give an, eggs, golden
eggs. That person thought, oh, the tail part of the cow and he is giving eggs.
The front part does not give anything. I have to feed it. So, let me just cut
off the front part. And then, the hen was killed. And then, there were no eggs
at all. So, like that, if we just take half of the hen, then we do not get
proper results. So, what does this half-hen refer to? If you only take from the
Bhagavad Gita, those sections, which are conducive to us. You know, and not
conducive in the sense that they are at our level of spiritual advancement. But
which simply fit into our world view. And we reject those which do not fit into
our world view. Then, we miss out on much of what the Bhagavad Gita can offer
us. So, what are the things that Bhagavad Gita can offer us? It can offer us an
a..., all-round elevation in our understanding of ourselves and God. And our
relationship with Him. So, that understanding in come only when we open
ourselves. So, half-hen logic means only accepting one part, one part of the
hen. So, actually, with respect to the Bhagavad Gita, you know, people often use
not just half-hen logic, with respect to this specific verse. But there is what
we could say even quarter-hen logic. Quarter-hen logic means, this verse has
four parts. But most people only quote one part. "karmaṇy evādhikāras te". So,
you know, "karmaṇy evādhikāras te". I have a right to do my work. So, actually
speaking, what is it, verse actually talking about here? So, if we look at the
flow of the Gita previously. Essentially, Krishna is talking seek the eternal.
Do not seek the temporary. He has not explicitly stated that. But He has talked
about the eternal, the soul, in 2.11 to 30. And then, He has said, ok, d...,
now, we d..., we detach from the material. That is what has been the theme from
2.38 onwards. "sukha-duḥkhe same kṛtvā". So, that means, you are the eternal
soul. And everything material is superficial. So, do not be eq..., only, excited
about that. Be equipoised amidst happiness and distress. And then, after that,
He talks then about the superiority of this over seeking materially good things.
So, now, He is describing how one, we should live, by which one can attain that
eternal. So, let us look at the four parts.

First is "karmaṇy", "karmaṇy evādhikāras te". That all of us have a right to do
the work. What does it refer to? Actually, most people think that we have a
right to the results. We do not care whether we have a right to the work or
not. We care for the result. Like students, often, they do not want to study.
But they want to get good marks. And that is have their all of kinds, you know,
gui..., study guide, which are said last minute revision, last minute study. And
they say, oh, this you study and you will, you know, get the top marks. Or
people also feel that. In general, people think I have a right to the results.
And I, and, with the least possible effort that I can put in, and I can get the
results. That is great. Few people think that I have a right to the work. But
Bhagavad Gita seems to say the exactly opposite. You have a right to the work.
But do not, you know, do not consider that you have a right to the fruit. What
does it actually mean? See, work is performed in the world, not just for its
material results. But also for its spiritual results. How can work produce any
spiritual results? It depends on what kind of work it is. If one is just doing
one's own activities, not according to scripture, but according to ordinary. You
know, wordly standards of what is right and what is wrong. Then, one will just
continue at ordinary worldly level. But if one understands spiritual knowledge
and tries to practice spiritual knowledge. Then, one understands that I am the
soul. And I have to raise to the level of the soul. So, how will I raise to the
level of the soul? By purifying myself. What does it mean to purify myself? It
means that the soul is sat-cit-ananda. And everything that causes the soul to
forget its sat-cit-ananda nature, is in one sense impurity. Now, those are which
are gross, very sensual, gross, gross sensory, or immoral pleasures. They are
considered to be a, very impure. And from the spiritual point of view, they are
extremely anti-spiritual. They choke and check our spiritual life. But beyo...,
or, so, when we say that we have a right to the work, which is like when a
student studies. The purpose of the study primarily is learning. And then, a
byproduct of learning is good performance in stu..., exams. So, the purpose of
study is what? Learning. It is inner growth. And, and actually, when we apply
ourselves to study, it is not just that we learn the subject that we are
studying. Actually, by that, even our mind grows. Even mind, by mind, I am not
referring to the aspect of the, the mind as we use it normally. We use the word
mind often to refer to that part of our, you know, being, which is always very
restless. Which is always filled with feelings. And which drags us down. But the
world mind is also used in a general sense in today's society. Where people will
say that Einstein was the greatest mind of the twentieth century. So, mind
refers to the faculty for deep thought. Which we have. So, when we talk about
this, we have to clearly understand that, you know, by studying, a person
develops th..., the thinking capacity, the reasoning capacity, the grasping
capacity, you know, and, of course one gets a deeper understanding of subject.
And all this, as a byproduct leads to the acquirement of good marks.

Similarly, when we work in this world. When we do our spiritual duty. Or, we do,
or do our worldly duties with a basic spiritual understanding of life. Then,
that enables us to grow in our inner understanding. That enables us to develop
our knowledge. So, when I, I act with detachment, then by that action, my
understanding that I am not the body, I am the soul increases. How is that?
Because there is action. And that action leads to transformation internally. So,
the purpose of an action primarily, when one is practicing yoga, is not just
acquisition of the fruit. The purpose of action is the growth of widsom. So,
when a person acts in knowledge, then the knowledge deepens further. So, when a
person, brahmana performs the brahmanical duties. Or ksatriya performs ksatriya
duties. Then, you know, now, naturally, when they work, obviously, they are, you
know, they hav..., every work is done with some result. It is objective. You
know, so, now, "mā phaleṣu kadācana". It does not mean, this verse does not mean
that one not care for the result. So, for example, now, when we are, you know,
assembling for this Bhakti Shastri course. Now, if we start thinking, you know,
I do not care whether I understand the Bhagavad Gita or n..., not. "mā phaleṣu
kadācana". You know, or, if we are cooking prasad for, you know, you know, for a
big festival, Janmashtami festival, say. And if the cook says "mā phaleṣu
kadācana". I do not care for the result. So, whether the sugar tastes good or
not. Whether sweet tastes good or not. Whether puris are half-fried, or properly
fried, or overfried. I do not care. "mā phaleṣu kadācana". And is that a correct
understanding of the Gita? You know, if that were what Krishna meant. Then,
Arjuna could have said, you know, I will fight. "mā phaleṣu kadācana". Whoever
wins, I do not care. So, that is a very simplistic understanding. And actually,
it is not our understanding. It is misunderstanding. So, "mā phaleṣu kadācana"
means, does not mean that one should not care for the result at all. Actually,
for most of us, it is the desire for the result that motivates us. And that is
not wrong essentially if we seek a particular result. But the idea is, we do our
duties, not just for that result. We do our duties because we know, through
that, we will get purification and illumination. So, when a coo..., a devotee
cooks for Krishna, now, when all of us are coming for studying the Bhakti
Shastri. What is our goal? By this, we want to become purified. By hearing
Krishna Katha. By understanding Krishna Katha. You know, by trying to
internalise it. You know, we become, then, we get these two results. One is
purification. And the other is illumination. Purification means all the
impurities subside because we are coming in contact with Krishna. Illumination
means our spiritual understanding also i..., you know, increases. So, this is
what we primarily seek when we do our services. So, when we take darshan of the
deities. When we cook. Yes, we want to get the good, we want to get things
cooked well. Because they are for Krishna. That is true. But that is not our
primary objective. Our primary objective is to please Krishna. And Krishna is
pleased, not just by our results. Krishna is pleased by our endeavor. So, if we
pu..., we do our service wholeheartedly. Then, even if the result does not come
out, Krishna is pleased. So, essentially, now, I have talked a, talked of
working at three different levels. First is the way most people work to get the
results. Why does a student study? Oh, I want marks in my exam. So, why does a,
why do we as devotees distribute books? Because we want our name to be
announced. Top distributor in the temple. Like that. So, we do it straight for
the results. Second is we do it because it will purify us. You know, I am doing
service, it will purify me. That is a good. Highest motive is, I do this because
I want to please Krishna. Now, among these three levels of motivations, if we
see. If I do the activity just for the sake of the results. Then, if I do not
get the results. Why should I do? I either do it. I simply wasted my time on all
this. That is how we feel. Why did I waste my time like this? And even if I do
it, you know, always, the thought is, oh. Will I get the result? Will I get the
result? Will I get the result? So, then, our consciousness is not really very
spiritual. But then, when we want to do it for purification, that is good. You
know, you understand. Why am I doing this activity? Because I will get purified.
So, when we give class. When we hear a class. Now, we do have, after this Bhakti
Shastri course, we will have exams. And there will be marking system. And
different devotees will get different marks. Someone will come first. Someone
will come second. Someone may even, came, come last. So, is this necessarily
bad? No. We can have marking system. But our goal in studying Bhakti Shastri is
not just to get marks. Our goal is to purify ourselves. We understand that by
giving serious thought on Krishna's message as it is sys..., systematically
presented through the Bhakti Shastri books. We will become purified. So, this
motive also frees us from dependence on the results. And that is actually very
liberating. If whatever we do, is simply dependent on the results, then it
creates a lot of insecurity. Will I get it? Will I not get it? Will I get it?
Will I not get it? So, if we do not want that sort of insecurity, then it is
important for us to recognise that there is, be..., there are better things that
we can do in life. That we just do not have to let our mental energy to get
sucked up in, you know, bothering about whether we will get the result or not.
We use it, our mental energy to o..., offer the result to Krishna. And do our
endeavor for Krishna's sake. That means that Krishna, whatever I am doing, I am
cooking this for your pleasure. You know, so, when we think of it this way, and
do it this way, then irrespective of whether that result comes out o...,
wonderfully or not. You know, some..., we decide to share Krishna's message. And
sometimes we go out and distribute hundred books. And sometimes, even two books
are difficult to be distributed. So, it does not matter. Because in all
situations, we are actually pleasing Krishna. If our endeavor is wholehearted,
we are pleasing Krishna. So, here, when Krishna says, you have a right to the
work, but not a right to the result. That does not mean that we do not care
about the result. Or we do not strive to produce the result. But our primary
motive is not acquiring the result. Our primary motive, at the level of
karma-yoga, is purification. At the level of bhakti-yoga is pleasure of Krishna.
This is we, how we understand this. Ka..., if, if my, if my goal is just the
material result, then I cannot have spiritual consciousness. And if I cannot
have spiritual consciousness, then I cannot make spiritual advancement. Now, why
cannot I have spiritual advancement when my goal is the result? Because if my
goal is just the result, the, then I will constantly be thinking about the
result. I cannot think about anything else. And that makes me weak.

Then, "mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr". So, then, you know, if I do not want to be
weak in terms of not being overcome by the craving for the result. There is one
more level of detachment. First level of detachment is that I do not, so, I do
not become a..., attached to the result. I do not become emotionally dependant
on the result as the motivation for my action. But after that, it is also "mā
karma-phala-hetur bhūr". Do not think that you are producing the result. "mā
karma-phala-hetur bhūr". Do not think that you are the cause of the result. Now,
how is that possible? You know, a cricketer may say that in the last ball, we
needed six to win. And I hit a sixer. I won the match. You know, I am, I am the
champion. You know, I did it. I, so, the student may say, you know, I had to
give a class. And I gave the class. I prepared for class. I am the "mā
karma-phala-hetur". If I had not done it, the result would not have come. So,
how can somebody say that do not think that you are the cause of the result?
See, Krishna's message is very, you know, profound. And what we have to
understand is when He says "mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr" means that do not think
that you are the only cause of the result. We will discuss about our action in
more depth later. But the important point to recognise here is that all of us,
we want results. But at the same time, deep within, we know that the results are
not entirely in our hands. Even in sports. You know, sports, where we see that,
the players' performance matter so much. You know, the, say, the batsman has
said, hits a sixer in the last ball or the white bowler gets a clean bowl in the
last ball. You know, it depends on the performance. But even the all best
cricketers and cricket fans know that there are factors which are beyond human
control, also. And they all play a role. And there are many cricketers who have
their own set of superstitions. You know, some cricketers, you know, they just,
there wa..., was a famous cricketer, who would, whenever he, he would play, he
would have a particular red-colored handkerchief. You know, coming out one third
from the pocket. And he always look. If there, handkerchief is too much inside,
he considers that is bad luck. If the hors..., handkerchief is too much outside,
that is also bad luck. If the handkerchief is not there only. That is s...,
super bad luck. And he would not that, as long as the handkerchief is one
third outside, red-colored handkerchief. Oh, oh, now, that is a good omen. Or
there are some, some other cricketer. Or, he had the idea that, you know, when
he would go out to play, you know, he would tell others. He would go before that
to the washroom and make sure all the lids of the washroom, a, the commodes
would be closed. And he said, if any lid would be open, and he would tell his
team members. You know, make sure everything is closed. He says, you know, what
is the correlation between b..., b..., batting over there and the, whether the
commodes are closed or not. Or some other player, they would wear some amulet,
something in the arm. Somebody, there was a famous tennis player who would have
an earring only in one ear. You know, he says, this is a good luck charm. Now,
we may say, this is all, you know, as superstitious. Now, oh, if we look at
these players, they are not foolish. They may act, may be acting foolishly in
certain ways. But the point is these are all their ways in which they are
recognising that, you know, there is something beyond their control. And that,
which is beyond their control needs to go their way for the results to come out.
So, when we say that there is, they are not foolish. That, that means that they
also know that, their performance matters. They, you know, that is why they are
playing. And they know that their performance matters. But they also know that
there is something beyond their performance which also matters. So, there are,
there is the, the way, people may use the name the destiny, faith, chance,
whatever. There are different names that can be used to refer to it. But the
simple fact is, there are factors beyond our control which matter. And they
matter a lot. So, when we recognise how much they matter. Then, we get the
betus, the motivation to find out what they are. And then, to see how we can
align ourselves with them. So, that is a different subject entirely. It is not
that the idea of superstitions, superstitious sort of activities, those higher
powers, or whatever is there, factors beyond our control, they will align with
us. That is not the point here. The point is an acknowledgement of factors
beyond our control. So, when Krishna says "mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr". His point
is that do not think of yourself as the only cause of the result. Recognise that
there are other factors involved.

So, to the extent we think that we are the cause of the result, to the extent we
will become bound. And to the extent we do not think of ourselves as the cause of
the result, to the extent, we will not become bound. "mā karma-phala-hetur
bhūr". So, you know, that means, these two levels of detachment are. First is do
not work just for the sake of the results. And by working, do not think that I
am the cause of the results. So, if I think I am the cause of the results, then
I identify myself with the specific ability, the specific talents that I have.
So, if I think that I am a, if I give good classes. Then, I start thinking of
myself as a preacher. And then, that is an identification. Which is different
from my identification as the servant of Krishna. So, of course, I am in...,
doing the service of preaching. And in that sense, I am a preacher. But I 
have to remember primarily that I am a servant of Krishna. So, in this way, by
this inner consciousness, one can stay detached. One does not think oneself to
be the cause of the fruits of action. And one does not work just for the sake of
fruit of action. So, this is, you know, we discussed till now of 2.47, A, B, C.
Now, at the D part of 2.47 is "mā te saṅgo ’stv akarmaṇi". So, do not be
attached to not doing one's work. What does this refer to? Actually, when I
start working, then if I am told, you know, you know, ok, appear for this exam.
You know, if somebody is told, you appear for this exam. But you will not get
any marks for it. You will not get any certificate. You will not get any
credits. And, you say, ok, for, I am not going to get anything. But let me not
do it, only. You will not, n..., no credit you will get. So, then, why should I
do it? No. Do not think like this. Do not be attached to an action. Why?
Because, actually, it is action which purifies us. So, when I study, when I work
in process of, in yoga, my primary goal is to connect with Kr..., Kri..., the
higher spiritual reality which is manifest at the topmost level in Krishna. But
the primary goal is to connect with Krishna. And will I connect with Krishna?
Only when my consciousness is not obsessed with temporary material things. So,
when "mā", if I am just inactive, then I am not actually engaging what Krishna
has given positively. And it is not artificially possible to directly think of
Krishna constantly. We have to think of Krishna, generally, through rendering
service to Him. So, it is service which purifies us. It is service which
elevates us, service which liberates us. So, "mā te saṅgo ’stv akarmaṇi". So,
let us look at this four points once again to understand this verse. "karmaṇy
evādhikāras te". You have a right to do work. Because the prescribed duties that
are given for us, they all purify us. "mā phaleṣu kadācana". Do not be caught
up, obsessed in the result because in that will not allow us to be spiritually
conscious, Krishna Conscious. Do not think that we are the producers of the
result. Why? Because then we will identify with our material skills, material
abilities, and material identity, and forget our spiritual identity, and forget
Krishna thereof. And then, do not just be attached to inactivity. Because
inactivity will not purify us. It is engaging our body, engaging our mind,
engaging our speech in yoga, in bhakti-yoga, will purify us, and elevate us. So,
now, this is like a sutra like verse which contains a, very profound depth of
meaning. So, let us look at the next verse now. After Krishna describe this.

        yoga-sthaḥ kuru karmāṇi
        saṅgaṁ tyaktvā dhanañ-jaya
        siddhy-asiddhyoḥ samo bhūtvā
        samatvaṁ yoga ucyate

So, Krishna says "yoga-sthaḥ". Become situated in yoga. You know, so, Krishna
has used the word yoga earlier in 2.39.

        eṣā te ’bhihitā sāṅkhye
        buddhir yoge tv imāṁ śṛṇu

He used the word yoga. And then, in that same verse, the yo..., word yoga
also comes once again.

        buddhyā yukto yayā pārtha

"dhyā yukto yayā pārtha". So, the "yukto" is a variant of yoga. So, what is this
yoga? Krishna is telling "yoga-sthaḥ". Be situated in yoga. Krishna had told in
2.39 that now I will describe this knowledge of sankhya, in terms of yoga. By
which, you will be able to stay free from karma, karmic bondage. So, here,
Krishna is describing that. And "yoga-sthaḥ". Be situated in yoga. And do your
karma. "karmāṇi". "kuru karmāṇi". Do your karma. So, "saṅgaṁ tyaktvā
dhanañ-jaya". How does one do one's work, karma? Without attachment to the
fruits. "saṅgaṁ tyaktvā". And "siddhy-asiddhyoḥ samo bhūtvā". So, what does it
mean to be attached from worldly fruits? That means whatever one gets. Whether
one gets succ..., success or failure. Stay equipoised. "siddhy-asiddhyoḥ samo
bhūtvā". And such "samaḥ". Equan..., equanimity. Such equ..., being equipoised
is called as yoga. "samatvaṁ yoga ucyate". And this is fascinating. Krishna is
giving like a sutra like definition of yoga. And He will give one more
definition of yoga in a verse in this section of the Gita itself. So, here, let
us look at this definition of yoga as "samatvaṁ. Equanimity. Be equal. Now, we
may say, we know what yoga means. Yoga is to connect with Krishna. You know,
yoga, huge, so, it comes from huge, physically, you know, the, not physically,
but spiritually, we connect with Krishna. So, physically, people think of yoga
as yoga asanas. We were, earlier discussed, that is only, the yoga asanas are
only one limb of one kind of yoga. There is ashtanga yoga, out of which it is,
which has eight limbs, out of which, is one limb. And there are many different
kinds of yoga, also. Karma-yoga. Dhana-yoga. Jnana-yoga. So, in this way, when
we understand that in just one type of yoga, "mā", then we un..., we become free
from the conception of yoga as just being physical exercises. But the word yoga,
then, we know, co..., we generally hear that yoga means connection. Connection
with Krishna. Connection with the atma, with the Paramatma. Then, why is Krishna
telling over here "samatvaṁ yoga ucyate"? Such equanimity is called as yoga. In
such equanimity is the platform for the practice of yoga. You know, when can I
connect with Krishna? If my consciousness is locked to material things. Want
this. Want this. Want this. Want this. Want this. Want this. If my consciousness
is locked to material things. Then, I cannot think of other things. How will I
be able to think of other things? So, when I am equipoised about material
things, then I can s..., look beyond matter. And I can think of s..., the
spiritual reality. So, "samatvaṁ yoga ucyate" means that equanimity towards
material things creates the foundation by which we can practice spiritual life.
So, this will help you to understand this whole phase. The point is be calm. Be
focused. Be clear. So, be equipoised. There is nothing in this world to get too
excited about. There is nothing in this world to get too agitated about. Because
it is all temporary. So, when one understand this. You know, there is these two
kinds of distraction that we have in this world. One is distraction by pleasure.
The other is distraction by pain. So, when we have either of these distractions,
distraction by pleasure or distraction by pain. We get excited or we get
agitated. But when we understand that actually neither matters. Why neither
matters? Because both are temporary. So, therefore, when we do not get too
excited by these things, then we can focus on what is the long-term goal. Now,
suppose, a person is driving back car. And he is very excited. What is here?
What is there? What is there? What is there? Just constantly looking, at this
side, that side, this side, that side. Then, I cannot focus. And I cannot see
where I am going. I cannot go very fast. Because I may cause an accident, also,
if I am not looking where I am going.

So, yoga means what? Yoga mea..., just means connection with the spiritual
truth, with ultimate spiritual truth, Krishna. But how will that connection
happen? That will happen when I am just, you know, not looking here, looking
there at material things. So, this looking here, looking there happens because
of my, you know, excessive agitation with the m..., material things. So, if I
work po...., w..., work calmly. Then, I can stay focused on spiritual reality.
"samatvaṁ yoga ucyate". This is the, actually, the art of yoga, staying focused.
Now, after this, Krishna will describe, He, now, very categorical verse, He
says. By which the earlier th..., you know, recommendation to karma, you do
karma-kanda is, you know, put down.

        dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma
        buddhi-yogād dhanañ-jaya
        buddhau śaranam anviccha
        kṛpaṇāḥ phala-hetavaḥ

"dūreṇa hy". "dūreṇa". Be, keep it far away. "avaraṁ karma". So, "varam" is
benediction. "avaraṁ" is the opposite of benediction. "avaraṁ karma" is
inauspicious work. Prabhupada calls as abominable work.

        dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma
        buddhi-yogād dhanañ-jaya

So, oh, "dhanañ-jaya". Put aside, you should practice "buddhi-yogā". The
practice of "buddhi-yo...". What is "buddhi-yogā"? Krishna has to, mentioned
this in 2.39 earlier. So, "buddhir yoge tv imāṁ śṛṇu". So, practice
"buddhi-yogā". "buddhau śaranam anviccha". And, K..., Krishna has not revealed
about himself positively over here. So, that is why He does not talk surrender
to me. He takes "śaranam" of "buddhi". He, He tells take "śaranam" of "buddhi".
That means take refuge in wisdom. "kṛpaṇāḥ phala-hetavaḥ". So, those who work
for gaining fruits, they are "kṛpaṇāḥ". They are shortsighted. They are
narrow-minded. They are closed in their conceptions and in their aspirations.
They do not think they gain off. "dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma". So, Krishna is
telling with intelligence, keep away in auspicious work. And do not seek the
fruits of work. So, what does it actually mean? Actually, you know, Krishna has
earlier talked about karma-kanda. And He has said that, ok, aspire for ha...,
you know, you can get to heaven if you win, if you lose. And you will get h...,
the earth if you win. Therefore, fight. Then in 2..., that was 2.37. And
2.38, Krishna said, you know, fight with equanimity, with no bother about
profit, loss, gain and vic..., victory, defeat. So, then, Krishna is explaining.
Why is He talking about two different meanings? The two different levels of
messages going on here over here? So, now, Krishna is telling that, you know,
that what I told you earlier, the calculations of karma-kanda. Ok, if I do this,
I will get that. If I do this, I will get that. At a material level, He says
that is all our own karma. So, those who work for fruits, they are
"phala-hetavaḥ". They are, because they are "phala-hetavaḥ", so, they are
"kṛpaṇāḥ", Krishna says. Now, what does "kṛpaṇāḥ" mean? "kṛpaṇāḥ" means
narrow-minded. Those who are not farsighted. So, human bod..., human life can
give us enormous returns. In fact, although the human life is temporary, it can
give us eternal results. But those who turn away and seek not the eternal, but
seek the temporary, they suffer. And what is their suffering? Their suffering is
that they stay on cycle of birth and death. So, if one wants to go beyond the
cycle of birth and death, the only way is by not being caught up with things,
infatuated with things which are within the cycle of birth and death. So,
"buddhau śaranam anviccha". Surrender with intelligence. And you surren..., take
refuge in wisdom. What is that wisdom? I am not the body. I am the soul. The
soul is eternal. And I should seek an eternal destination. "dūreṇa hy avaraṁ
karma". So, this is the verse which will lead to a misunderstanding. Which will
lead to the question that Arjuna will pose in 3.1 and 3.2. So, what is that
misunderstanding? We will discuss when we come to 3.1 and 3.2. But here, Krishna
is basically telling, oh, give up karma-kanda. And practice karma-yoga. And how
do you practice spi..., karma-yoga? By using "buddhi". So, "kṛpaṇāḥ
phala-hetavaḥ". So, people talk about being ambitious. And they say, think big.
Dream big. But actually, whatever people say, think big. Dream big. You know,
ultimately the thing is small, only. Why? Because they still think of success
within the rat race. And the problem with rat race is that even if we win, we
still remain rats. That means the co..., definition of success, the conception
of success does not change. I want a bigger house. I want a bigger car. I want a
bigger job. I want a bigger pay package. That is fine. But how much bigger is
big enough? Always, no matter how much I have, I want more, more, more, more.
And there is no limit to it. So, that which is never going to satisfy us
ultimately, craving for that indicates that we are not intelligent enough in our
craving. The ra..., we can choose either infinite longings. Or we can choose
longing for the infinite. We can choose infinite longings. I want a car. I want
a cellphone. I want a house. I want this. I want this. This. This. We can have
infinite longings which will never be fulfilled. Or we can choose longing for
the infinite. Yes. I want the Supreme Lord. I want the infinite to be my goal.
So, these are the two choices which we have. You know, we can either have
infinite longings or we can long for the infinite. So, when we are "kṛpaṇāḥ",
when we chase the fruits. No material fruits are going to satisfy us. So, when
we chase the fruits, we condemn ourselves to misery and suffering. We condemn
ourselves to perpetual dissatisfaction in the material world. Where we also get
the misery of repeated birth, old age, disease and death.

So, therefore, instead of choosing infinite longings, one after another, after
another, no matter how much I get, the longings will go on forever and ever. We
can long for the infinite. We can redirect our desires towards Krishna, towards
the Supreme Absolute Truth. That is intelligence. That is the intelligence which
Krishna is saying "buddhau śaranam anviccha". Now, in next verse, fiftieth,
Krishna will give another definition of yoga.

        buddhi-yukto jahātīha
        ubhe sukṛta-duṣkṛte
        tasmād yogāya yujyasva
        yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam

So, here, we will see that, Krishna in this 2.50C is repeating what had come in
2.38C. So, "yogā...", "tasmād yogāya yujyasva". So, in 2.38C was:

        sukha-duḥkhe same kṛtvā
        lābhālābhau jayājayau
        tato yuddhāya yujyasva
        naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi

So, there, it was "yuddhāya yujyasva". Here, it is "yogāya yujyasva". So, there,
it was a specific action which was talked about. The two are not identical. But
they are similar. So, therefore, engage in yoga. That is what Krishna is saying
over here. There, He was saying, engage in "yuddhā". What is the difference
between the two? You know, so, "yogā" is general principle. "yuddhā", "yogā" can
be performed in various ways. So, for a ksatriya, the yoga is performed through
fighting. But for others, which are, yoga may be performed in another way.
Brahmanas will perform yoga in another way. Vaisyas will perform yoga in another
way. "tasmād yogāya yujyasva". Therefore, engage in yoga. And when one engages
in yoga. "yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam". This yoga is the art of all work. It is
interesting. "kauśalam". "kauśalam" means expertise. You know, so, Prabhupada
translates that as art. Karma is action. So, expertise in work. That is yoga.
"yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam". So, what is this expertise? Is it that somebody says
a, a very brilliant guitar player. And he is, that person says I play guitar.
And I feel spiritual when I play guitar. So, "yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam". The
expertise in playing guitar. That is yoga. Or some football player says that
when I see goalkeeper. And I see the goal. And I see my foot. And I see the
ball. And then, when I hit the ball. And it goes into the goal. Then, that is
how I attain samādhi. I forget everything else. I go into yoga. And that is my
samādhi. Is that? So, different people can be expert in different things. So, is
it the material expertise and the absorption thereof that is yoga? Not exactly.
Yes, if somebody is very expert at something. And somebody gets absorbed in that
thing, one may experience a great fulfillment. Which is quite extraordinary as
compared to our normal level of existence where we are bored, or distracted, or
unfocused. But that, just because we are absorbed in something, does not make
that, or something spiritual. You know, what makes something spiritual is its
connection with spiritual reality. So, Kri..., yoga means connection with the
Supreme Absolute Truth, the supreme spiritual reality, you know, centered on
Krishna, in fact, our, manifesting as Krishna. So, "yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam"
means that working in such a way, the expertise of working in such a way that
our work becomes spiritually conscious. Our work becomes Krishna Conscious. That
is actually "karmasu kauśalam". So, how can I think of Krishna when I am doing
my day-to-day work? It is not easy. But I can. And the way I do it is by
practicing devotional service, you know, just, just st..., steadily. So, as we
keep practicing it, gradually, the remembrance of Krishna will become easier,
easier, deeper, deeper. That is how when we grow. "yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam".
"yoga" is the art of work, expertise in work. "tasmād yogāya yujyasva".
Therefore, Krishna is telling, now, do yoga. So, "buddhi-yukto". Use your
intelligence. In the previous verse, also, Krishna had talked about the bu...,
if you work with "buddhi", then what will happen? "ubhe sukṛta-duṣkṛte". It is,
so, "sukṛta" and "duṣkṛte". All the, you know, good results of your past work.
And the bad results of your past work. They will be "jahātīha". You will be able
to give them up. You will become free. So, that means, you will attain
liberation. That Krishna will mention explicitly in the next verse. The
important point here is Krishna uses also the word that "iha". "iha" means in
this l..., world, in this life itself. So, one does not necessarily have to go
through many lives for gaining liberation. Just in this one life, if one
practices devotional service seriously, one can attain liberation. If one
practices yoga with diligence, then one can attain, become free from
"sukṛta-duṣkṛte", both. "jahātīha". How does one have to do? "buddhi". So, use
the intelligence that we are giv..., we, given by Krishna. Understand the
philosophy. And then live the philo..., l..., live according to the philosophy.
Then, we can become liberated. "yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam". "yoga" is the art of
all work. "buddhi-yukto jahātīha". When we work according to "buddhi", then we
can become liberated. So, now, after describing this, Krishna will describe in
the next verse something deeper. The first time now in the Bhagavad Gita,
Krishna will refer to a destination higher than svarga, the destination of
liberation.

        karma-jaṁ buddhi-yuktā hi
        phalaṁ tyaktvā manīṣiṇaḥ
        janma-bandha-vinirmuktāḥ
        padaṁ gacchanty anāmayam

So, "karma-jaṁ buddhi-yuktā hi". So, when one works with "buddhi",
"buddhi-yuktā". "karma-jaṁ". Dovetailing one's karma, when one works "buddhi".
And what is the essence of the "buddhi"? "phalaṁ", "phalaṁ tyaktvā manīṣiṇaḥ".
One gives up one's attachment to the fruits. Such a person, Krishna says,
"manīṣiṇaḥ". He is a "manī", "manīṣ" is a common name. It has a deep meaning.
"mana", "īṣa". So, one who has conquered the mind. "manīṣiṇaḥ". What is the
meaning of con..., conquering the mind? Actually, it means that the mind always
looks at superficials. Mind does not see the deeper reality. When the mind does
not see the deeper reality, then, actually speaking, the mind cannot think
deeper. And when the mind cannot think deeper, then the person stays at
superficial level of, you know, thinking and living. But one who has conquered
the mind, that person can see deep truth. "manīṣiṇaḥ".
"janma-bandha-vinirmuktāḥ". When one, such person becomes "manīṣiṇaḥ". When we
are not attracted by external superficial results. But when one is attracted by
deeper spiritual realities. Then "janma-bandha-vinirmuktāḥ". We become freed
from the cycle of birth and death. And "padaṁ gacchanty anāmayam". Then, we
attain the eternal result. "padaṁ gacchanty". We get the supreme eternal result.
"anāmayam". What is that result? The place which is free from misery. "a...",
"mayam" is misery. "anāmayam" is free from misery. So, Krishna, because He has
not talked about Himself till now. So, He does not explicitly say that this is
the spiritual world. He simply says that that is the abode which is free from
all misery. "padaṁ gacchanty anāmayam". So, when we practice spiritual life in
this way, you know, by staying detached from the fruits. And by fixing the mind
on spiritual reality, then one will attain the destination that is free from all
misery. Now, after describing this, Krishna will again come to the point of how
this is actually, this attainment of "anāmayam", is beyond even the Vedas. It is
a reality, which is b..., actually richer and deeper than the reality that is
talked about in the Vedas. Now, Prabhupada connects this "padaṁ gacchanty
anāmayam". What is that? He says that is Krishna's personal abode. And
Prabhupada quotes here, the famous verse from the Bhagavatam. Which talks about
how the devotees attain Krishna's abode very easily.

        samāṣritā ye pada-pallava-plavaṁ
        mahat-padaṁ puṇya-yaśo murāreḥ
        bhavāmbudhir vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ
        padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām

So, "samāṣritā ye". Those who have taken shelter of "pada-pallava-plavaṁ". The
boat of the lotus feet of Lord Krishna. What is the characteristic?
"mahat-padaṁ". That is the great destination. "puṇya-yaśo murāreḥ". So, one
whose "yaśo", whose glories are all auspicious, that Lord, Murare. "bhavāmbudhir
vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ". "bhavāmbudhir". The ocean of material existence.
"vatsa-padaṁ". That vast ocean becomes as small as the bottle now, cow's
footprint. A calf's footprint, actually. Calf's footprint is very small. So, it
is tiny. That means that which is impossible becomes easily scalable. "paraṁ
padaṁ". They attain the "paraṁ padaṁ". They attain the supreme destination. Not
they do not stay in the place. "padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām". The place
where there is danger at every step, one does not stay over there. So, Srila
Prabhupada is using this to talk about "anāmayam". One does not stay in this
world, but returns back to the spiritual world. Now, after describing this,
Krishna will move forward, and then, He will say that, you know, you have to go
beyond the Vedas. That He will, with that, 53rd, 52nd and 53rd verse, we will
conclude this section.

        yadā te moha-kalilaṁ
        buddhir vyatitariṣyati
        tadā gantāsi nirvedaṁ
        śrotavyasya śrutasya ca

So, "moha-kalilaṁ". "mo...", "kalilaṁ" is forest. "moha" is illu..., illusion or
delusion. So, "moha-kalilaṁ" is the forest of delusion. So, Krishna is telling,
"buddhir vyatitariṣyati". When your intelligence goes beyond the fo..., forest
of delusion. It is interesting metaphor. Normally, we may say person is trapped.
If that person is in a forest. And he is lost in the forest. And that person has
to come out of the forest. But rarely do we say that, not just the person is
trapped. Actually, the whole, you know, if the person's intelligence is trapped.
So, material existence is the trap. It is not just a room for, which is physical
trap. You know, sometimes, we may, physical trap, not going, where to go. But
all of us, we are at an intellectual trap. In the sense that we do not know.
What should I do? What is the goal? What is the way to the goal? Sadhana and
sadhya is not clear. So, the intelligence is trapped in a forest of delusion.
The, and, but when "buddhir vyatitariṣyati". When one, "buddhir" go, "buddhir"
goes through that intelligence, crosses beyond it. "tadā gantāsi nirvedaṁ". So,
at that time, one will become, you know, indifferent. To what? "śrotavyasya
śrutasya ca". One will become to indifferent to all that one has heard in the
past. Or that one will hear in the future. Essentially, Krishna is saying over
here, that one will become free from misery. From how, what kind of misery? The
misery of false hopes. What are these false hopes? "śrotavya...". "śrotavyasya"
and "śrutasya". So, these refer actually to, the, not just worldly sensual
things, which are, we hear in the traffic of this world by traveling around. But
it also talks about scriptures. Even in the scriptures, there are promises of
sensual pleasures. There are promises of heavenly pleasures. So, "śrotavyasya".
You may have heard in the past about all these spiri..., pleasures which are
talked about in the scripture. And you may hear something more in the scripture,
also. But what is this? This is all in the Vedas. Then, Krishna had already
said. "nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna". Go beyond. Go beyond these. So, Krishna is
telling over here, do not get caught in these things. Go beyond these. And you
will, when you go beyond these, "tadā yogam avāpsyasi". At that time, you
will attain yoga. So, this world is always making us excited by hopes of
happiness. Yeah. This cellphone. This car. This house. This. This. This will
make us happy. And these promises come not only in the advertisements that we
see around us in the world. But they also come in the scriptures. In the
karma-kanda section, there are profuse promises of sensual pleasures. One
western scholar has called the Rigveda as the world's most materialistic
religious book. You know, why is it ma..., the most, most materialistic
religious book? Why? Because there are so many promises of material pleasures
given over there. Now, of course, there is spiritual things also talked about.
But the primary thing is that the, the Vedas, I have multiple levels of
teachings. And with kar..., Rigveda, the Vedas themselves are ka..., teaching
karma-kanda. And when they are teaching karma-kanda, the focus is on sense
gratification. So, "bhoga" and "aiśvarya". That is what we talked about it in
2.43 and 2.44. So, when one has these promises. Oh, I will get power. I will get
enjoyment. Then, once Krishna said that, once you actually are no longer excited
by these promises. Why? Because your vision is understood. You understood there
is a higher reality, there is a richer happiness. There is a deeper fulfillment.
And these promises are all peripheral as compared to that. So, when one is no
longer agitated by sensu..., by the promises of pleasure. Even if those promises
of pleasure a..., come in the sec..., scri..., in the scripture. If those
ple..., sections of, those scriptures are talking about better material pleasure
than other, other lokas. Then, that is all peripheral. And one should not get
caught up in that.

So, "śrotavyasya śrutasya ca". When one becomes indifferent to all that one has
heard. And all that one will hear in future. Then, one has "tadā yogam
av...". "tadā gantāsi nirvedaṁ". "yogam avāpsyasi", Krishna will say in the next
verse. But here, He says, when can you know that you have become free from
illusion? When your intelligence has gone to the forest of delusions. Killed
that forest. What does it mean to say the intelligence has killed the forest? It
means that the intelligence is no longer deluded. Should I do this? Should I do
that? Should I do that? Clear. I simply have to return to Krishna. And whatever
I have to do to return to Krishna, that is all I have to do. I do not have to do
anything else. That understanding when one gets. Then, one has gone beyond the
forest of delusion. In Kulashekhar Maharaja's prayers, he says, you know, what all,
how, how even religious rituals if one does without an understanding of their
ultimate purpose of attaining Krishna. If one does religious rituals also
without the remembrance of Krishna, then, they are useless. So, there, he says:

        āmnāyābhyasanāny araṇya-ruditaḿ 

He gives a long list of things. But the first thing, he says, even the study of
scripture is like "araṇya-ruditaḿ". Crying in the forest. If a child is lost in
the forest and cries in the forest. Nobody is there to hear. So, similarly,
there is no one to hear. "āmnāyābhyasanāny araṇya-ruditaḿ". So, Krishna, so, all
of us, our intelligence is lost in the forest of delusion. Should I do this?
Should I do that? Should I do that? And even when we practice devotional
service, it is not necessary that we have come out of that forest of delusion.
We may still be in that forest of delusion. We are trying to come out. When will
we come out fully? When we are no longer attracted by the promises of pleasure,
material pleasure. Either it be in this world or n the next world. Next world
does not mean spiritual world. Here, it refers to svarga. "śrotavyasya śrutasya
ca". Then, one will be free from temptation. And then, you know, now, Prabhupada
gives the example of this consciousness in the prayer of Mādhavendra Purī. How?
"śrotavyasya śrutasya ca". One does not care for anything, any worldly rituals.
Even if they are religious rituals. So:

        sandhyā-vandana bhadram astu bhavato bhoḥ snāna tubhyaṁ namo
        bho devāḥ pitaraś ca tarpaṇa-vidhau nāhaṁ kṣamaḥ kṣamyatām
        yatra kvāpi niṣadya yādava-kulottaṁsasya kaṁsa-dviṣaḥ
        smāraṁ smāram aghaṁ harāmi tad alaṁ manye kim anyena me

So, here, he is stating that all the normal activities which a person, who is
following Vedic dharma, should do. So, a pure devotee of Krishna, a person who
is constantly sleef..., constantly and spontaneously thinking of Krishna does not
have to do all this. So, "sandhyā-vandana". So, there is this "sandhyā-vandana".
The gayatri chanted three times a day. Sadhakas have to do it. But he says, once
one is, you know, I, I offer my, I do not. All glory to you. "bhadram astu".
"bhadram astu" means be good unto you. So, he is saying, yeah, you, you enjoy
good. But I will, I am not interested in "astu". "bhavato bhoḥ snāna tubhyaṁ
namo". He says that, the, ok, what about the practice of taking regular bath?
Yes. Oh, ways, since to go. I respect you. "bho devāḥ pitaraś ca
tarpaṇa-vidhau". So, what about worshipping the, the gods and the ancestors? He
says, you know, now, "nāhaṁ kṣamaḥ kṣamyatām". I cannot do it. Please forgive
me. So, he is not entirely rejecting them. He is respecting them. But he says,
respect from a distance. I will not do this. "yatra kvāpi niṣadya
yādava-kulottaṁsasya kaṁsa-dviṣaḥ". So, he glorifies Krishna in two ways. "kulo
dya yādava". "kulottaṁsasya". You know, He is the best in the Yadu dynasty. And
He is "kaṁsa-dviṣaḥ". Anyway, of the Yadu dynasty was Kaṁsa. And He killed
Ke..., Kaṁsa. So, and He is "aghaṁ harāmi". He is the destroyer of all sin. So,
"smāraṁ smāram". So, wherever I sit, you know, "yatra kvāpi niṣadya". Wherever I
sit, "smāraṁ smāram". Immediately, I remember that Lord Krishna. And "tad alaṁ
manye". I think that is good enough for me. Because He is the remover of all
sins. And remembering Him will remove all sins. So, therefore, "kim anyena me".
I do not need anything else. So, Prabhupada gives this example from a Vaishnava
acharya explaining how a devotee who is practi..., remembering Krishna does not
have to do any other activities. And the same thing, now, Krishna will, you
know, repeat and elaborate in the last verse of this section.

        śruti-vipratipannā te
        yadā sthāsyati niścalā
        samādhāv acalā buddhis
        tadā yogam avāpsyasi

So, "ruti-vipratipannā te". Even when one hears from scripture. And what one
hears? Something which is different from what has been taught till now. So,
"vipratipannā". There is a, one, till now, one has heard about the so many
fruitive activities and the results. Now, one, one's, hears about, the, etern...,
hears about the eternal spiritual truth. And after hearing about the, spi...,
eternal spiritual truth. Then, if the "śruti" is saying something else.
"vipratipannā te". You know, now, the, at..., if somebody hears something else
about the fruitive activities. "yadā sthāsyati niścalā". Actually, one stays
"niścalā". Fixed. Unshaken. Then, "samādhāv acalā buddhis". One is not shaken by
this. But one stays fixed. Like in "samādhāv acalā buddhis". So, it is
interesting. Krishna is not saying "acalā mana". "samādhāv acalā buddhis". So,
actually, you know, our mind becomes deluded because our intelligence is
deluded. Once our, becomes, intelligence is completely fixed. Then, the mind
will also not be able to shake us. The mind may shake a little bit. But the mind
will not shake us too much. So, you know, "acalā buddhis". You know, the waves
will come. The waves will shake the boat. But if the boat is strongly anchored,
then the boat will not shake so much. So, similarly, "samādhāv acalā buddhis".
Once, we are convinced that Krishna is the ultimate goal. Then, the intelligence
will never be shaken. "tadā yogam avāpsyasi". At that time, we can know that you
have attained yoga. So, here, Krishna is giving the characteristic of yoga. Be
undisturbed by everything material. Then, you can stay fixed in the spiritual.
And when you are understood by everything material. Then, you can also know
that you are fixed in the spiritual. So, in this way, Krishna has talked about
how to practice karma-yoga by staying equipoised among the material ups and
downs. And staying fixed in the spiritual reality. So, we will continue in the
next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
