Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CEXdp5BiZpg
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=CEXdp5BiZpg&redir_token=7eomSK4LrNxJCM0rijhGFG0f6Zt8MTU0ODQ4Njk5M0AxNTQ4NDAwNTkz&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_044_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_01_Text_08_to_14_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna.

So, today, we continue with our discussion on the Bhagavad Gita. We start with
1.8. We discussed till now about primarily the influence of Kurukṣetra, a pious
place. We discussed about the dynasty, before, before the Pandavas, going up to
Shantanu. And then we also discussed about the way in which Sanjaya got the
mystical vision to see the battlefield at Kurukṣetra. And to report that to
Yudhiṣṭhira..., to Dhṛtarāṣṭra. So, now, let us look from verse eight onwards.
Till now, Dhṛtarāṣ..., Du..., Duryodhana has been describing the power of those
on his opposite side. Now, he is starting describing powe..., the power of those
on his side. So:

        bhavān bhīṣmaś ca karṇaś ca
        kṛpaś ca samitiṁ-jayaḥ
        aśvatthāmā vikarṇaś ca
        saumadattis tathaiva ca

So, "bhavān bhīṣmaś ca karṇaś ca". So, "bhavān" is a respectful second person
address. So, "tvam" is a normal second person address, like "I" and "you". "I"
is first person. "You" is second person. So, "tvam" and "bhavān" are second
person addresses. And "bhavān", "tvam" is used in the more ordinary sense.
"bhavān" is used in the more respectful sense. So, now, because Duryodhana is a
ksatriya. And Droṇācārya is a brahmana. So, therefore, Duryodhana is referring
to Droṇācārya with respect address, "bhavān". Now, also, here, the acharyas have
described that Duryodhana is thinking. Bhishma is the commander. And on this
battlefield, he is also the seniormost. So, it was Bhishma in fact who, who
recruited Droṇācārya as the teacher for the Kauravas. So, both in terms of
seniority, in terms of hierarchy over here on the war field, and in terms of
course power. Bhishma is the greater than Droṇā. So, he is thinking now, already
come to Droṇācārya. And I am speaking. Now, when he is speaking, when the king
speaks, everybody else becomes silent. So, people are hearing what he is
speaking. So, even Bhishma is also close by. And Bhishma is also hearing. So,
he is thinking, now, I, when I am going to talk about the strength of the forces
on my side, whose name should I take first? So, normally, Bhishma is the
commander. His name should be taken first. But then, I am s..., right now,
standing in front of Droṇācārya. So, he is, normally, if we go to a person. And
right in front of that person, we glorify somebody else instead of appreciating
that person, it may be triggered as a snub of that person. So, he thinks. And
then, he, he is actually, whatever be the other hierarchies, Droṇācārya is a
brahmana. And brahmanas are to, always to be respected more than ksatriyas. Even
if  Droṇācārya is fighting as a ksatriya now. He is taking on the role of a
ksatriya here. He is born as a brahmana. And mostly, he has been living as a
brahmana. So, therefore, Bhishma will not mind if I address him first. Because
he will understand that he is a brahmana. And he is, I am a ksatriya. So,
Bhishma will not mind. On the other hand, if I mention Bhishma's name first. I
am standing in front of Droṇā, Droṇā may mind. So, therefore, I have already
slightly irritated Droṇā by mentioning Drupada's name also. So, I want to
agitate him enough so that he will fight wholeheartedly. But I do not want to
agitate him so much that he will become irritated with me and will be
disinclined to fight vigorously. Therefore, he starts with "bhavān". So, he is
standing right in front of Droṇācārya. And He says you. Now, in the previous
verse, he said, Lord, now I endless the:

        nāyakā mama sainyasya

The leaders of my force. You are a leader. Bhishma is a leader.

        bhavān bhīṣmaś ca karṇaś ca

Now, interestingly, Karṇa is not there anywhere on the battlefield at that time.
Karṇa is not there on the battlefield. But he is very prominently there in the
mind of Duryodhana. Because Duryodhana was confident of the full commitment of
Karṇa. He was not sure about the commitment of Bhishma and Droṇā. But he was
sure of the commitment of Karṇa. And that also, after Karṇa in a half had backed
out of the war saying that as long Bhishma is fighting, I will not fight.
Actually, before the war started, you know, Duryodhana had asked Bhishma to give
a comparative assessment of the two forces along with the f..., strength of the
specific individuals. So, at that time, while assessing various foldie...,
forced, Bhishma had ranked Karṇa very lowly. And Karṇa had become infuriated by
that. He said he always denigrate me. And he said I can, by my own single power,
my power alone, I can defeat the whole Kaurava..., whole Pandava army. And I
alone can attain victory. So, Bhishma has looked scornfully at him. And he said,
you know, when have your bones been translated into actions, Oh, Karṇa? He says, every
time that you have encou..., confronted, Kuntheya, you have been vested. So,
actually, many people think Karṇa was more powerful than Arjuna. And our Krishna
used deviousness. Deviousness means trickery to defeat Karṇa. But actually,
there had been several confrontations. And each of them, Karṇa had been vested.
Karṇa had been defeated by Arjuna. So, if we look back at the history, the first
encounter between the two of them was in the Marshall exhibition which
Droṇācārya had arranged on the outskirts of Hastinapur after the education of
both the Pandavas and Kauravas had been completed. So, there, Arjuna
excelled everyone else. And Duryodhana's heart burned in envy. So, just as
Arjuna was, you know, ex..., finishing the exhibition of his prowess, suddenly a
thunderous footsteps were heard outside. And a powerful f..., bodied person came
in. Then, that person asked, I, I can exhibit all that Arjuna has done. Am I
allowed it? So, Kripacharya, Droṇācārya looked at each other. They said yes. And
then, Karṇa equaled ev..., everything that Arjuna had done. And then,
Duryodhana's hearts welled in pride and joy. He said, now, he, he was, for him,
Karṇa became a tool to get back at Arjuna. He felt that I can get back at Bhima.
I can get a back, become, at Bhima. Eventually, there is going to be a war. And I
can get the better of Bhima bottom. Who will defeat Arjuna? Karṇa will do that.
And at that time, Karṇa said, now, I would like to have a st..., deal with
Arjuna. So, Arjuna stiffened. Arjuna wanted to put this arrogant warrior in his
place. And as they got ready, so Kripacharya said, ok, but deals can only be
among equals. You know, he is a son of a, he is a son of illustrious father in
the Kuru dynasty. Who is, whose son are you? Who are you? So, Karṇa's head fell
at that time. And then, when Duryodhana saw this, he spoke. Now, Duryodhana was
ve..., very eloquent. You know, when he wanted, he could quote scripture also
for his own purposes. He said, you know, oh, the scriptures say that actually it
is not birth alone which determines the varana of a person. It is qualities. Have
you not seen his marshall qualities? He is a ksatriya. And is it possible for a
cat to give birth to a lion? This person is a lion. Therefore, he must have
begotten by a lion. And even if you say, th..., that he is not a king. Then he
says, I will make him a king. And he said, I give him the Anga Prade..., Anga
Desh right now. I give, make him the ruler of Anga and bring the sacramental
water. And there itself, in the marshall exhibition, the water was brought. And
he sprinkled on Karṇa. And he was made the king. And Karṇa was overwhelmed by
this. So, now, Duryodhana did show kindness to Karṇa at that moment. But for
what purpose? He was not really benefactor of Karṇa. He just wanted to use Karṇa
for his own political purposes.

So, as Karṇa was anointed as the king, at that time, from the stands in the
assembly, an elderly person came running down to, towards Karṇa, to embrace him,
and see that Karṇa immediately bow..., bent down and bowed to him. And that was
Adhiratha. There, it was the sutha. It was one of the charioteers in the Kuru
kingdom. And he says, oh, father, he says, his fa..., Adiratha said, oh, I am so
happy to see that you have been anointed as a king. May you be blessed. You
are so fortunate. And saying that, now, oh, that he was a son of a sutha. Some
of the asse..., warriors over there said that, oh, he is a sutha, how can he
fight? How can he fight with Arjuna? So, Duryodhana said, he might have been
born as a sutha of a sutha. But he is now a king. He will fight. So, as they
were discussing, whether they should fight or not, the sun set. And they decided
that the co..., the, the co..., it would be a, end of the day. And after this
education when they were asked for, when both of them, Kauravas and Pandavas
went to Droṇācārya to say, what dakshine I can give you? So, he said, arrest
Drupada and m..., make him a prisoner. And bring to me. So, Duryodhana
immediately went with his full army. Both the Pandavas and Kauravas were there,
Arjuna said, no, let Duryodhana go first. We will go afterwards. So, then, at
that time, Droṇācārya, at Droṇācārya's behest, all the hundred Kaurava brothers
along with Karṇa went. And they were all defeated by Drupada and Dhṛṣṭadyumna
together. And they came back shamefaced. And then after that, the Pandavas went.
And the five Pandavas overcame Drupada and Dhṛṣṭadyumna. And then Drupada was
arrested and brought. So, at that time, Drupada felt humiliated to have been
defeated like this, and brought like a prisoner before Droṇācārya. But at the
same time, he admired the military prowess of the expertise of the Arjuna. And
he desired that, let me have a daughter who can become, whom, become his wife.
In this way, I will be related to this formidable warrior. And that is how
eventually when he did the yajna. So, at that time, Draupadī was born. He did
yajna actually primarily to take revenge against Drupada..., against Droṇā. So,
he got the sumon, and Draupadī borned. But anyway, the important point is here,
that time, that means Karṇa along with the Kauravas was defeated by Dr..., by
Drupada. And Drupada was defeated by Arjuna. So, in this way, Arjuna is superior
to Karṇa. Similarly, the second time that they took a, they had a direct,
indirect face of, or indirect comparison of strength, was at the svayaṃvara of
Draupadī. At that time, the Pandavas were in disguise as brahmanas. And all the
ksatriyas came and tried to show their prowess. Karṇa was not allowed because he
was not a ksatriya's, by birth. And then when Arjuna came as a, in the garb of
a brahmana, and he appears the fish eye and got Draupadī. All the ksatriyas were
in uproar. They said Drupada has arranged this assembly to humiliate all of us,
kings. And he has given his daughter to a k..., brahmana. They say, we should
punish Drupada right now. And they all took out their swords and cha..., start
charging toward Drupada. Drupada became alarmed. So, at that time, Yudhiṣṭhira
said to Arjuna and Bhima, he said that, now, he has become our father-in-law.
Protecting him is our duty. So, immediately, Bhima and Arjuna came in-between.
And then, at that time, Arjuna using the same arrow which he had used to shoot
the arrow in the svayaṃvara contest, he took the, took that same bow. And there
was face off. So, at that time also, there was a face off between Karṇa and
Arjuna. And they fought, and fought, and fought. And Arjuna expertly countered
all the weapons of Arjuna..., of Karṇa. And Karṇa said, who are you? So, he
said, just I, are you a God? Nobody else can counter my weapons like this. He
said, no. He says I am a faithful servant of my guru. He did not reveal that he
is Arjuna at that time. So, then, Karṇa put down his bow. He said that, he felt
that he is a brahmana and the military marshall power of ksatriyas is always
descended in the spiritual power of the brahmanas. So, even at that time, Karṇa
could not get the better of Arjuna. Then, later on again, when they were in
Kambivan, after the Pandavas had been exiled. So, there, Duryodhana came along
with Karṇa to try to flaunt his wealth in front of the Pandavas. And thereby
increase their pain. He, but then, at that time, the Gandharvas were there who
had been sent by Indra. And the Gandharvas told In..., Duryodhana, you are a
trust passing our, trea..., on a treaty. Get out of here. He said, this is my
kingdom. You get out of here. So, the confrontation. And the Gandharvas, at that
time, fought fiercely. And although Karṇa was by the side, Karṇa fled from
there. He was wounded. And he fled. And Duryodhana was arrested. And after that,
some of the soldiers from Dur..., Karṇa, from Duryodhana's camp, they ran over
to the other side of the lake, where Yudhiṣṭhira was performing sacrifices. So,
there was a lake on one side. Karṇa and Duryodhana had come. And they were, they
were flaunting their wealth. So that the Pandavas who were doing some yajna
could see. And their idea was they will burn in envy. But they were sat
completely turn. So, then, the soldiers came and told Karṇa. They told Duryo...,
Yudhiṣṭhira. Now, please, Duryodhana has been arrested. And all the ladies of
our family have been taken hostage. Please save them. So, at that time, at
Yudhiṣṭhira's behest, Arjuna got ready to go. The, Bhima said, you know, it
seems that last destiny has become favorable to us. What would have taken some
effort for us to do. Now, the Gods have done for us. So, at that, and
Yudhiṣṭhira said, no, no, no, you should not think like this. You know, we may
have our differences. But in front of the world, we are hundred and five. We may
be five and hundred. But in front of the world, we are hundred and five. And it
is the Kuru dynasty that has been insulted. If our ladies had been taken hostage
like this. So, you must go and save them. Bhima was not convinced. Then, at that
time, Yudhiṣṭhira knew how to a..., trigger Bhima. He said, you know, Bhima what
greater joy can you get than to show mercy on your greatest enemy, on one who
has hurt you the most? You know, what work can you get by that? Bhima said, yes,
now I go.

So, he, so, at, anyway, at that time again, Arjuna went. And Arjuna defeated all
the Gandharvas. And even the leader of the Gandharvas had to surrender, seeing
the fierce military power of Arjuna. So, again, here, the Gandharvas defeated
Karṇa. And Arjuna defeated the Gandharvas. So, again, Arjuna's power is greater
than Karṇa's. And after that also again, we see, that the biggest straight head
on confrontation was at Virata. At that time, at the end of the gnatavas, Arjuna
was acting as a maidse..., as a dance teacher, Brihannala. And he had come along
with the son of Virat to fight against the full Kaurava army. So, at that time,
all the Kaurava Mahartas were there. Duryodhana, Karṇa, Shakuni, Droṇācārya,
Bhishma, Duḥśāsana, Kṛpāchārya. All of them were, were there. And Arjuna single
handedly defeated all of them, single handedly. Not only were all of them, along
with them, their armies were there. But Arjuna single handedly defeated. And at
that time, Karṇa was also there. And Karṇa was also vested. So, the point is
that it is not at all true that Karṇa was stronger than Arjuna. No. Arjuna,
whenever there was a confrontation, Arjuna always got the better of Karṇa. But
eventually, when the battle took place, the final battle. So, in the Mahabharata
war, Bhishma was the commander for ten days, Droṇācārya for five days, Karṇa for
days, sheila for the last day. And Aśvatthāmā was like a self-appointed
commander for the last night in which he slaughtered. Not exactly
self-appointed. Duryodhana had only appointed him. But he was self-appointed in
the sense that, he, the strategy that he used was completely unethical. And he
came up with his own strategy. And killing a sleeping soldier was very very
castly. So, anyway, Karṇa was a commander for the, for last, for last, but, but
sixteen-seventeen days. Second last and third last days. So, at that time, on
sixteenth day, he, he exhibited his prowess. And he actually defeated all the
Kaura..., Pandavas, except Arjuna whom, with whom he did not meet on that day.
And the next day, there was a fierce head on battle. And they fought, and
fought, and fought, and fought, and when they turned for hours, and hours, and
hours.  And then at that time, by the will of destiny, Karṇa's chariot started
going into the ground. When Karṇa's chariot started going into the ground. So,
Karṇa told Arjuna. He says, do not entertain thoughts, which are cherished by
cowards. Wait till I am ready to fight, and then we will fight. So, at that
time, Karṇa..., Arjuna immediately put his bow down. So, when he put his bow
down. He waited. So, Krishna said, oh, Karṇa, it is surprising that today, you
remember the codes of morality and ask Arjuna to follow them. You know, where
were these codes of morality when you along with all the Kaurav..., when you
suggested that Draupadī be brought into the assembly and be disrobed. Where were
these codes of morality when you through Shakuni participated in the cheating
gambling match? Where were these codes of morality when you connived with the
Pan..., Kauravas to burn the Pan..., Ka..., Pandavas alive? Where was this code
of morality when you along with, fired the maharathas, killed the sixteen year
old Abhimanyu? Was it morality by which you did all these activities? And he had
listed of all the atrocities that the Kauravas had performed. And which Karṇa had
been a part. He says, if it is morality at all that time, Arjuna will use sa...,
the same morality and kill you today. Arjuna, shoot. And then Arjuna shot the
arrow. And Karṇa was killed. So, actually, what did Krishna want to demonstrate?
In a fair fight also, Arjuna could have defeated and killed Karṇa. But the point
that Arjuna wanted to make wa..., that Krishna wanted to demonstrate was that:

        Satho Sathyam

"Satho Sathyam" means that with the cunning, one has to be cunning. Whenever
it is required. One cannot let oneself in the name morality, in the name of
following a small morality, sacrifice a bigger morality. You know, in the
history of India, subsequently, this lesson was forgotten. And the forgetfulness
of this lesson pl..., led to very expensive c..., co..., very severe
consequences. For example, many times when the, when the muslims would attack
India. They would know attack the Hindu kings. They would know the Hindus
consider cows to be very holy. So, what they would do is, when they would be
attacking, they would have a whole herd of cows in front of them. And the hindu
warriors would think, oh, how can we shoot cows? And then, they would see that
there are cows, they will not shoot the cows. And behind the cows were the
muslim warriors. And then, they would shoot, and shoot, and shoot. And the
hindus would not shoot back. That was their idea. That we should not hit the
cows. And then they would get slaughtered. Or sometimes, when the two war, two
armies would be on, one hindu army, one muslim army would be on two sides of
the, of, of the, of a river, where they are fighting. And what the muslims would
do is that kill the cows and put the cow flesh into the river. And the river
would become filled with cow blood and cow flesh. And then the hindus would
come. And oh, there is cow flesh over here. How can we drink it? And then they
would not drink it. And then if there is no other water, they will become weak.
Then they become weak, they will lower power by that. So, now, the point is that
"Satho Sathyam". In the Vedic culture, at times, at, ksatriyas are allowed even
to eat meat. You know, normally, meat is not recommended. In fact, in the As...,
in the Mahabharata, it is very clearly said that there are these four
activities. Intoxicant, gambling, womanising, and hunting, which inebriated a
ksatriya, which madden a ksatriya. And what a person does, and this, as per
these activities, should not be taken seriously. So, Vikarṇa says this when he
is, tells, even he is in the asatsabha, in the Hastinapur assembly. He is trying
to say that, he was saying that Draupadī would be dragged for, disrobing should be
spared, and normally should be spared. But Yudhiṣṭhira should be returned his
kingdom. Because what a person does under the influence of gambling is, is not
to be taken seriously. Because a gambling, intox..., maddens a person. So
anyway, there are many references like this which point this out. So, the r...,
critical point for us to understand is the Mahabharata teaches morality, that is
lofty, but at the same time, that is practical. So, Krishna, what he
demonstrates in the Mahabharata is that when the enemies cunning, when the
enemies devious, one can be devious. You know, Krishna Himself tried His very
best to avoid the war. And how did He try to avoid the war? By Him going as
Shanti Doot. He tried everything possible. But when that did not work, Krishna
said, you know, we have to do whatever it takes, So, "Satho Sathyam". So, the
point which we are making over here is that Krishna did not encourage Arjuna to
do immorality. And what was done was just, re..., was just paying immorality
back in the same coin, paying degradation back in the same coin. "Satho
Sathyam". So, it, it, when it is required, when the enemy is devious, one can
use deviousness. That is what the Mahabharata demonstrates over here.

Now, coming back to this particular section, what we are discussing, Karṇa. So,
I was talking about how Duryodhana had asked Bhishma to assess the forces on
both sides. And because Bhishma had said that Karṇa's prowess is very less. So,
K..., Bhishma basically studied. He says, when have you actually turned both
your sin to actions? Every time you have confronted Arjuna, you have been
defeated. You have come out of the losing side. You have never become on the
winning side. So, Karṇa became very angry. And further, he said that, actually,
now you have been lost, lost your kavach and your kundal. This is long story.
Basically, he was born with a k..., impregnable armor and an earrings. And it
was arranged that Surya came. And for India came ac..., as a brahmana and took
charity from him. And then he gave the shakti weapon. So, the point which we are
making over here is that as long as he had that impenetrable armor, he was
considered to be almost undefeatable. Although, of course, he had become
wounded. And he had to flee. But that was a formidable v..., formidable defense
on his side. So, Bhishma said now that he has lost that, he has become even
weaker, So, this infuriated Karṇa. And he said, you know, I can bring victory
for the whole Kauravas by defeating the entire Kau..., Pandava army. But,
normally, in a battlefield, in a battle, the glory for the victory goes to the
commander. Just like, you know, in a, if there is a cricket match. You know, one
particular player may play, play very well. And that person may be glorified.
But then, it is the, afterwards, it is remem..., it is India won the world cup,
under the captaincy of so, and so. There might be somebody else who might be the
man of the match for that ma..., particular, say, final, or semi-final, or
whatever, important matches. But people always remember, yeah under the
captaincy of this captain, India won the world cup. So, he is, Karṇa says that
similarly, the glory for winning the war will go to Bhishma. But because Bhishma
has denigrated me, I will not give him any glory. And therefore, he said, as
long as Bhishma is there on the battlef..., battlefield as the commander, I will
not fight. And he walked off in half. Now, at that time, Duryodhana was caught
in a dilemma, you know, whom to choose between Karṇa and Bhishma. Karṇa or
Bhishma. Now, he felt he needed both. He thought and thought. You know, his, his
diplomatic mind was working. He said that, actually, Karṇa is committed to me.
And Karṇa will fight with me till the end. So, even if Karṇa goes temporarily.
If Bhishma v..., attains victory for me, well, in good, if Bhishma does not
attain victory. Somehow that does not happen, then Karṇa will surely come. But
if I choose Karṇa now. And if Bhishma goes way because of that. And if something
happens to Karṇa, Bhishma will not come back. Because Bhishma is older.
And Bhishma was born as ksatriya. He is my elder. He is my elder grandfather. He
will feel snubbed. So, he thought, ok, let loo..., let Karṇa go now. Let Bhishma
be here right now. But then, he is, mind was always there. Oh, Karṇa is there on
my side. And, in fact, it is said that, actually, you know, another reason why
Bhishma spoke so strongly to Karṇa was, later on, Karṇa, when after Bhishma fell
on the tenth day, that night, the next morning, Karṇa went to meet Bhishma, and
offer his respects to him. So, at that time, Bhishma told him, actually, I know
I spoke strongly against you. But my reason was that, you are a formidable
warrior. And the reason I spoke strongly ag..., a..., a..., about you, I assist
you weakly was because I was trying even, at that time, to get Duryodhana to
stop the war. So, Duryodhana had too much confidence in you. And I wanted to
decrease that. My intention was to avoid the death of all of you, to avoid this
battle, fatricidal war. That is why I spoke like this. So, Karṇa, at that time,
did a reconciliation with Bhishma. And, and he, Bhishma again requested me. Let
the hostilities end with my fall. That there is no way that you can win. So,
Karṇa said, I know I cannot win. But I, but Duryodhana has trusted me. How can I
give it up?

So, you see here in many ways Karṇa immerse as a hero, immerses as a heroic and
a tragic figure from the Mahabharata. Karṇa is virtuous in many ways. He is a
very charitable. He is very powerful warrior. He is also an adherent to dharma. He
is the worshipper of Surya. But then, his example for good person who becomes
spoiled by bad association, by attachment to bad association. You know, he
becomes attached to Duryodhana. Because Duryodhana helps him at his time of
need. Yes, if somebody is helping us at the time of need, we should help them.
But helping others does not mean that we have to join in their mora...,
immorality. Certainly, actually, Karṇa, he himself rea..., he says, you know,
I felt si..., his total, Bhishma also, you know, I have regretted the time when
I suggested that Draupadī be brought into the assembly and be disrobed. He said,
I spoke that because I just wanted to please Duryodhana. This is what happens.
Sometimes, when we are in bad association. There are, suddenly, things that we
do not like to do. But we crack some vulgar jokes. We speak certain words.
Because we want to feel respected, accepted in that association. That is how bad
association contaminates us. So, Karṇa, he was contaminated by bad association.
And when Kr..., when Krishna actually tried His very best. Now, it is, just
before Krishna left from Hastinapur, after His mission as shanti doot was
rejected by Duryodhana. The next morning, Krishna met Karṇa. And when Krishna
met Karṇa, at that time, Krishna told Karṇa that you are the oldest among the
Pandavas. And you can become the king. And all the Pandavas will follow you.
Just as the devatas follow Indra. And you can, you know, you do not have to
fight on the side of. So, you will get the glory also. You will get, you will
get this folding glory. And you will get dharma also. There will be credits.
Otherwise, you will have to fight on side of adharma. And you know that you
will be killed. You know, there is no chance for you to win in this war. Because
you are on the side of adharma. So, Karṇa said, you know, uttered gravely, he
said, yes, I know that. I had a dream last night. In that dream, I saw that,
Yudhiṣṭhira was seated on a magnificent chariot dressed in white. And he was
rising upward towards the heavens. And I saw Duryodhana. His head was shaven.
You know, for ksat..., for ksat..., for renunciates to shave their head is
considered good. But for ksatriyas to have their head shaven, it is not, it is
considered dishonor. And he says, his head was shaven. And he was dressed in
black. And he was being driven on a car, he was being driven on a cart drawn by
donkeys towards the lower regions. So, this indicates that he was going to be
destroyed. He was going to die. And he said, yes, the gambling dice that Shakuni
threw in the a..., in the wicked gambling match. That dice is going to come back
to us as the arrows of Govinda, of Gāṇḍīva, of Arjuna. And those arrows will
destroy the whole Kaurava army, he says. Duryodha..., Duryodhana will be by
Bhima. And I will be killed by Arjuna. I know that. But then, he said, but how
can I be unfaithful to a friend who has helped me in the time of need? So, he
says, because of his faith in my assistant, Duryodhana has agreed to fight this
war. And it is because of him that I have enjoyed sovereignty over anga. How can
I desert him at the time of need? I know I will die. But still, I will not
desert my friend. Now, at one level, we may say, this is so laudable. That one
is ready to lay down one's life for one's friend. But the point is who is that
friend? You know, that friend is a person who is the personification of adharma.
Laying down one's life for the sake of adharma is, makes one terribly adharmic.

So, Karṇa did not think that, he thought, he thought he was thinking based on
dharma. But his dharma was not deep enough. He did not think that how did
Duryodhana give the kingdom of Angar to him. How? Actually, the kingdom of Angar
did not bring..., begun..., by, belong to Duryodhana. It had belonged to the
Pandavas. But by sending the Pandavas off to varana, by, by some jugglery of a,
by various arrangements, he had got them preposition of the kingdom. And he had
gi..., given it a, a section of that to Karṇa. So, what was not actually his.
What he had maneuvered, often by diplomatic and immoral ways to acquire, a part
of that, Duryodhana had given. So, even, from the, this worldly point of view,
what Karṇa had got was not actually belonging to Duryodhana. So, secondly, if
you are, think more deeply, Krishna is the Supreme Lord. And everything belongs
to Supreme Lord. So, if the Supreme Lord is telling him to do something, Supreme
Lord is the proprietor of everything, then, he has to do that. You know, it is
ultimately the Lord who gives things to different people. And through one of
these people, may give something to us. So, actually speaking, Karṇa was, he
was, he had some understanding of dharma. But his understanding was not deep
enough. And he said, I will not give up. I will not give up deceit of Karṇa.
So, now, here, sometimes people say that, Krishna tried to somehow seduce Karṇa
so that he would come on His side. Now, that is a very superficial
understanding. Actually, Krishna was a well-wisher of everyone, even the
well-wisher of Karṇa. And His point was this, that one who is a virtuous person,
who has some virtues, why should such a person be on the side of immortality?
And why should such a person, persons die? And why should such a person's
presence lead to the war becoming bloodier? Because Duryodhana, if he did not
have Karṇa have on his side, Duryodhana's obstinacy would have been lesser. So,
Krishna was not just seducing Karṇa. Krishna was trying to decrease the
unnece..., the violence. But Karṇa was not ready to listen. So, at that time,
Krishna embraced Karṇa. And He said, ok, then we will meet on the battlefield.

        vinash kale vipreet buddhi

So, the, all the calculations got skewed for Karṇa. So, Karṇa emerges as a
heroic, but tragic figure. Karṇa is not there on the battlefield. But Karṇa is
still there on the mind of Duryodhana. Because he is thinking, thinking,
thinking. Oh, actually, Karṇa will be there. So, he is thinking, among my
foremost warriors:

        bhavān bhīṣmaś ca karṇaś ca

And then:

        kṛpaś ca samitiṁ-jayaḥ

It is saying, Kṛpa. He, "samitiṁ-jayaḥ". So, now, of course, this is set at one
level, at. He is glorifying the warriors in different ways. Kṛpa is
"samitiṁ-jayaḥ". He is always victorious. So, how is he always victorious? Now,
actually, Kṛpacarya, before the war started, there was two interruptions. One
was Arjuna's speaking, Arjuna's getting overcome by emotions and that the
Bhagavad Gita being spoken. Then, Yudhiṣṭhira. He actually went toward the
enemy's side and sought blessings from his elders. So, when he sought blessings,
he offered obeisances to Bhishma, Droṇā, Kṛpa, and Shalya. Shalya was like a
father figure for him. So, he was the brother of Madri, who was mother, who was
like a stepmother for him. So, now, when he asked for the blessings, he asked
Bhishma. You know, how will we be able to defeat you? So, he said, the time has
not yet come. When it happens, you come again. And another time, I will tell
you. Then, he asked Droṇā. Droṇācārya said that, you know, when I hear some
disagreement news from a trustworthy source. Then, I will myself lay down my
arms. As long as I am fighting, nobody can defeat me. But when I lay down my
arms, you will be able to overcome me. And when he went and asked Kṛpacarya.
Kṛpacarya said, I am undefeatable. Knowing this, go and attain victory. Nobody can
defeat me in war. Now, what does it mean? Actually, Kṛpacarya, as far as he was
a warrior, he was formidable. Then, a one-off conflict, he would not be
defeated. But he did not know any mystic pow..., mystic weapons. So, he was
undefeatable means, he had been gi..., he had been granted a very long lifetime.
And he could not be killed. Undefeatable now does not mean that he could not be
defeated when that he could not be killed. He says, I cannot be killed. But
knowing this, go and attain victory. Although, he could not be killed, because
he did not have knowledge of mystic powers, he was not a very great threat. So:

        kṛpaś ca samitiṁ-jayaḥ

So, Kṛpa was one of the survivors at the end of the carnage that happened in
Kurukṣetra. So, and they, Kṛpa was a part of the carnage that happened at
night when under Aśvatthāmā's evil behest, they went and slaughtered everybody
in the Ka..., Pandava camp while everybody was sleeping. So, at that time, Kṛpa,
Kŗtavarmā, and Karṇa were there. Sorry, and Aśvatthāmā were there. So,
Kŗtavarmā, and..., was the only, Kŗtavarmā was the Yadava prince, Yadava
commander who fought against the Kauravas, sorry, against the Pandavas. When
Duryodhana and Arjuna both had gone to Dwarka to seek Krishna's assistance. So,
Arjuna asked for Krishna. And Duryodhana asked for the Dwarka army. So, the
Yadava army came along with its commander. And that kŗta commander was
Kŗtavarmā. The other, Balaramji said I will not fight because both of you are
equal to me. So, I will not take sides. And, so, when they said, when Balaram
said this, all the other Yadava warriors also followed suit. And they also
refused to fight on either side. The only other person who fought, only, the
other prince was Sātyaki. Sātyaki was a younger K..., Kaurava, a younger Yadava
warrior. And he had been trained by Arjuna. He had been a disciple of Droṇā. But
he had received special further training from Arjuna. And he was a formidable
warrior. And he was also eventually one of the survivors on the Pandava side.
So, the Pandava side also, everybody was killed eventually when the night
slaughter took place. So:

        aśvatthāmā vikarṇaś ca
        saumadattis tathaiva ca

So, "vikarṇaś ca". So, "Vikarṇa" is not again a very formidable warrior. So, he
is definitely not in the class of Aśvatthāmā, or even Saumadatti. Saumad...,
son of Saumadatti was Bhūriśravā. And Bhūriśravā was a formidable warrior who
checked Arjuna's very severely on the thirteenth day when Arjuna was trying to
reach Jayadratha and kill him. And finally, Bhūriśravā was killed. But he was a
Maharatha. So, so, Vikarṇa is not in that class. He was not such a formidable
warrior. But still, Duryodhana mentions his name. He says one of my formidable
warriors. Why? It is surprising that he does not mention in this, his own
brother, Duḥśāsana. You know, for politician, everything that he speaks is based
to calculations. And he has no doubt about Bu..., Duḥśāsana's commitment. So, he
does not mention any of his other brothers also. But Vikarṇa, when Draupadī was
being disrobed, the only Kaurava who opposed him was Vikarṇa. So, that is why he
had some doubts whether Vikarṇa would be fighting committedly or not. And in
order to seal, to ensure Vikarṇa's commitment, he counted. Oh, he is one of my
important warriors.

        nāyakā mama sainyasya

So, that is why he is mentioning Vikarṇa's name also over there. So, let us go
to the next:

        anye ca bahavaḥ śūrā
        mad-arthe tyakta-jīvitāḥ
        nānā-śastra-praharaṇāḥ
        sarve yuddha-viśāradāḥ

"anye ca bahavaḥ śūrā", apart from them, there are many other powerful warriors.

        bahavaḥ śūrā
        mad-arthe tyakta-jīvitāḥ

Now, this is a verse which has received lot of commentary. And the point is:

        tyakta-jīvitāḥ

If we will take it literally. It is the past tense. So, what he tends to say is,
they are ready to sacrifice for me. But Sarasvatī Devi speaks through me. They
have sacrificed their lives for me. So, it becomes like a past tense. That
means, he is, Sarasvatī Devi speaks through him indirectly, saying that,
actually, they are all going to die. In fact, they have already died for me. Now,
why, why did they die for me? That means by taking the side of adharma, they
have sealed their own packt with death. They are themselves, chosen the
defeating pa..., chosen defea..., decide to be defeated. And they are going to
die. But he is not thinking like that. That the words are spoken through him by
their innocent Sarasvatī. So, mother says that, he wants, whatever he wants to
say is, oh, they are all so committed to me that they will be ready to die for
me. "bahavaḥ śūrā", and there are many like that.

        nānā-śastra-praharaṇāḥ

And they are all expert in various weapons. And:

        sarve yuddha-viśāradāḥ

They are all so "viśāradāḥ". They are all expert in fighting. After describing
this, then he says, this is again an important verse which illutrates some
scriptural principle.

        aparyāptaṁ tad asmākaṁ
        balaṁ bhīṣmābhirakṣitam
        paryāptaṁ tv idam eteṣāṁ
        balaṁ bhīmābhirakṣitam

So, "aparyāptaṁ tad asmākaṁ", he says now, the word "aparyāptaṁ" can mean two
things. "paryāptaṁ" means sufficient. So, first, I tell the meaning of the
verse. And then we will discuss the specifics. What he is saying is, he is
com..., he is now giving a summary comparison of the two forces. And he is
telling that, actually, the force, my forces under Bhishma is "aparyāptaṁ". And
the forces under Bhima are "paryāptaṁ". Now, "paryāptaṁ" means sufficient, or
measurable, or, or adequate. So, now, whenever prefix comes before a, before a
adjective, or before a describer, that prefix can emphasize that particular
quality. Or it can completely negate that quality. For example, we have
valuable. And in front of valuable, you put in. Then, it becomes invaluable.
That means, it is so valuable. Its value is so great that we cannot measure it
only. So, "in" becomes an intensifier of valuable over here. Whereas if you have
the word, see, substantial. And then you put the "in" over there, insubstantial.
That means that actually that has no substance only. So, here, "in" is not an
intensifier. "in" is a negator. So, the prefix, prefix means something which
comes before a word. So, the prefix can either intensify the sense of the word,
or it can negate the sense of the word. So, "aparyāptaṁ", the "a" that comes as
a prefix over here, before "paryāptaṁ", it can intensify the sense of the word.
Or it can negate the sense of the word. So, if we consider "aparyāptaṁ" as an
intensifier. Then, "paryāptaṁ" can say it is measurable. And "aparyāptaṁ" means
that our forces are immeasurable. So, this is Bhi..., under Bhishma. Our forces
are immeasurable. And theirs are measurable only. They are under Bhima. They are
under Bhima. They are measurable. So, the idea there is that he is after
competencies assess..., assess..., assessment saying that we are stronger. So,
this is, of course, what he would have intended to say. And this is Baladeva
Vidyabhushana's explanation of "aparyāptaṁ" and "paryāptaṁ". And Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura in his commentary in the Bhagavad Gita gives slightly
different i..., meaning. And he takes the "a", not as an intensifier, but as a
negator. So, he takes "paryāptaṁ" to mean meas..., to mean adequate. And
"aparyāptaṁ" to mean inadequate. So, "paryāptaṁ", "aparyāptaṁ". So, what he is
saying is, oh, the forces of Bhima, forces of Ka..., Pandavas under Bhima are
adequate. But ours are inadequate. Now, why would he say something like this?
Actually, the point here is f..., this is again, the words are being spoken
through him by Sarasvatī Devi. So that the double meaning of the words is
there, what he intends to say and what he ends up saying. So, now, he is
comparing Bhima and Bhishma. Now, from the external point of view, you know,
Bhishma is far more expert, far more experienced, far more learned than Bhima.
So, Prabhupada takes this prospective which Baladeva Vidyabhushana also takes.
And, and from that perspective, you know, Bhima is a fig in front of Bhishma.
So, if our forces are protected, protected by Bhishma, then surely, we will be
having the upper hand. And we will win. However, if we good look from the
internal perspective. From the internal perspective, you know, what determines
the strength of the warrior is the, is the zeal of the warrior to fight. Now, a
person might be a very strong warrior. If that person's heart is not there, then
that person's expertise may not come out.

So, now, as far as the heart being there in the war, you know, Bhishma's heart
is not there. He would much rather have preferred if the war not take place. And
somehow, there have been a whole history of circumstances because of which
Bhishma is there in the war. But as far as Bhima is concerned, his full heart is
there in the war. In fact, he has been breathing fire right from the time when
Draupadī was attempted to be disrobed. And the whole vanavas was a period of
intense fury for him. He is waiting for the battle to take place. So, Bhima's
heart is fully there in the war. And because Bhima's heart is there in the war.
So, his power in that sense is greater. And Bhishma's is lesser. So, in this
reading, which Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura gives, the point is that a
person's, so he..., Duryodhana is actually addressing not just Bhishma's, he is
telling his other warriors. Actually, so if he is set to be addressing Bhishma,
he is saying, under Bhishma, our power is immeasurable. But if he is addressing
the others, then he is saying, actually, Bhishma alone is not enough for us. You
know, all of you are also important. Bhishma alone is not enough. All of you are
important. Then, adeq..., so, under Bhishma alone, we are not adequate. When all
of you are together, then we will become adequate. And this reading gives also a
contextualised from the, it can also be justified, from, it is also backed by
the next verse. Which we will see now shortly. But here again, we see, there is
example of contradiction between the acharyas. So, Baladeva Vidyabhushana is
disciple of Bha..., Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura. But he gives a meaning that
seems to be different from that of Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura. Why is that?
Actually, there is no essential difference. But the focus may be different. And
because the focus is different, that is why the analysis is given differently.
So, Baladeva Vidyabhushana talks generally in terms of tattva. And Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura often talks in terms of rasa. So, now, from the point of
tattva, from the point of a, facts, yes, it is true that Bhishma is former to
be more formidable than Bhima. But from the point of view of analysis, from the
point of view of inner feelings, Bhima's hunger for the war is far greater than
Bhishma's. So, from that perspective, we can rec..., understand the two meanings
of the words, "paryāptaṁ", and "aparyāptaṁ". So, now, after he sees that, oh, I
have glorified Bhishma as my commander. But I should make sure that others do
not feel neglected. Therefore, he speaks in the next verse.

        ayaneṣu ca sarveṣu
        yathā-bhāgam avasthitāḥ
        bhīṣmam evābhirakṣantu
        bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi

"ayaneṣu ca sarveṣu", so, now, all of you are situated in different places.
"yathā-bhāgam avasthitāḥ", which are, strategic places are situated in "bhīṣmam
evābhirakṣantu", all of you should protect Bhishma. "bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi", so
now, he, so, now, we can visualise, Duryodhana is there on his chariot. He has
looked at Bhishma. And now he is looking at all the other warriors. He says,
"bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi", so, again, he is using "bhavantaḥ", respectful
address. He says, all of you, warriors, now all of you are also going to have a
very important role in this war. And what is that role? You have to make sure
that you have your strategic points. And you defend your strategic points. And
you attack from them. So, Bhishma is our, is our, is our commander. But he may
get caught up. And fighting a particular war at a particular point. And then, he
may not be able to pay, pay attention to all the other points. All of you also
pay important roles. So, he is trying to get everyone involved. So, we see, from
the political point of view, Duryodhana is expert. So, that expertise, even we
see, his s..., he is spiritually also thoughtful. We think, oh, we may think,
oh, he is impressive character. He thinks so much before speaking each word.
Yes, that is true. But we have to see, you know, a person's caliber is
determined just not by the expertise of the person's speech, but by the purity
of the person's motives. And what are his motives? His motives are not pure. His
motives are actually filled with greed, filled with anger, filled with envy. He
is, "ma vartapid" even. First, he is personification of other "ma". The "ma
vartapid" says, he is actually the incarnation of Kali, who came to accele...,
who came to start off Kali Yuga actually. So, the point is amsa of Kali, in,
one, some ways. So, now, the point which we are making over here is that when a
person thinks, you know, if the person has expertise in thinking, expertise in
speaking, that is good. But more important is what is the person's heart, what
is the person's intention. So, if a person has good intentions and then has
goo..., expert qualities in speaking also, that is the best. But if the person
has expertise in speaking, but has evil intentions, then:

        mani nam bhusanam sarpah
        kima sauna bayan garah

That if a jewel was decorated. If a jewel, if s..., serpent is decorated by
jewels. Jewel is attractive. But the serpent is still dangerous. And instead of
being cautious because of seeing the serpent. If we become attracted by seeing
the jewel, and we go towards, and away from there. Sometimes, when people
with demoniac propensities have certain material skills and expertise, we can
get enamored by that. And becuase of that, we may lower our guard down, and start
appreciating, admiring them, and become contaminated by their godless
materialistic, immoral ideas. So, we have to be cautious. We have to be cautious
in our daily. That we just do not see the qualities. We see the intentions. And
from that, we actually just have character, not just through the, not, when we
talk about qualities, I am here more referring to not intrin..., intrinsic
qualities, like humility, tolerance. I am talking in terms of ac..., abilities.
The ability to speak in a way as to captivate others, to commandeer others. The,
all that is all known not a characteristic of somebody who is spiritually
advanced, or somebody who is very advanced in God consciousness. So, we should
not mistake just glib speech, good speech as a sign of spiritual advancement. In
fact, Kali Yuga, one of the characteristics of Kali Yuga is that, that,
expertise in word jugglery will be con..., considered a sign of scholarship. So,
"shabda chapalyam", which are expertise in word jugglery. That is considered to
be a sign of scholarship in Kali Yuga. So, he is now doing all this balancing
and act. It is like walking on a tight rope and trying to balance everything.
So, now, seeing this, Bhishma is close by. And Bhishma is feeling pity for him. He
says, you know, what is the use of all this? Now, the time for war has come. Let
us fight.

        tasya sañjanayan harṣaṁ
        kuru-vṛddhaḥ pitāmahaḥ
        siṁha-nādaṁ vinadyoccaiḥ
        śaṅkhaṁ dadhmau pratāpavān

So, "tasya sañjanayan harṣaṁ", so, his "harṣaṁ", his joy increasing. To, who is
the "tasya"? That is Duryodhana. So, increaing the joy of Duryodhana,
"kuru-vṛddhaḥ pitāmahaḥ". So, "kuru-vṛddhaḥ" is, he is the elderly.
"pitāmahaḥ". So, "pitāmahaḥ" refers to the grandsire, the grandfather. So, we
discussed how he is the grandfather. He is the same generation as the
grandfathers. Although, he is not, he does not have any sons. So, he has not
begotten anyone. But he is in the generation of the grandfathers. So,
Duryodhana, the Kauravas and Pandavas, their parents were Dur..., Dhṛtarāṣṭra
and Pandu. And the older generation from them is Bhishma, the one generation
above. So, "pitāmahaḥ". And "siṁha-nādaṁ vinadyoccaiḥ". So, he blew his
"śaṅkhaṁ". "pratāpavān", he is valiant, he is, he is "pratāp", he has got
tremendous courage and power. And when he blew his conchshell, "siṁha-nādaṁ".
The sound that came out was like a r..., roar of a lion. So, now, Bhishma is
also a fascinating character in the Mahabharata. We see that Bhishma actually,
you know, he is in one sense an extraordinary example of sacrifice. Although, he
was living amidst as a ks..., he was living as a ksatriya amidst royal opulence.
And in the ksatriyas' palace, there are, there are so many material pleasures
available. And there are so many beautiful women. The ksatriya women are
themselves beautiful. And they have some maidservants also. So, to live there
and to maintain celibacy is nearly impossible. That is why generally:

        vivikta-deśa-sevitvam
        aratir jana-saṁsadi

For those who want to make spiritual advancement, the Bhagavad Gita is also
saying literally, 13.11 that one should go to secluded place. Stay away from
m..., worldly association. Because then, the contaminations are lesser. But
Bhishma stayed right in the cities. Not just in the city, in the capital, but
in the palace. The place where there is a maximum material opulence. And where
everybody else is enjoying. And there, to maintain celibacy is a herculean task.
And his maintaing that is indicative of his enormous willpower. So, he had taken
a vow when Shantanu, his father, had become attracted to Satyavati, the fisher
woman. So, Satyavati's father, he said that, you know, actually, for him, it was
like an honor, great honor that his wi..., his daughter would become a princess
and become the queen in one sense. You know, you know, from the point of view of
that family, it was a prize catch. It was a great honor. But still, he insisted
further that, you know, that my dau..., the son that you will get from the
daughter, my daughter, he should become the next king. So, Shantanu had, he was
agonised to hear this. Because he had already decided that Bhishma would be the
king. And he proclaimed that also. So, he came back. And, and he did not want,
he was torn between his attraction for Satyavati. At the same time, his, you
know, his commitment to his son. At that times, his, his birth name was
Devarata. So, Bhishma saw that his father was very morose. And then he wondered,
what is the reason. Then he inquired, inquired. And he went to the f..., to
Satyavati's father. And when he heard the whole story, he said, that, you know,
actually, I will, do not worry, I do not want the kingdom. He said, if you c...,
you can have the ki..., her son can have the kingdom. So, now, we may wonder at
this point. You know, what is this, you know, the father should be arranging for
the marriage of the son, not the son do the arranging for the marriage of the
father. The point is that, when the, when the Lord's pastimes are going to
happen, at that time, the characters over there are moored in many different
ways. And when they are moored in different ways, we have to understand that
this is not just ordinary material. There is a higher plan also involved over
there. And in general also, for the ksatriyas, to marry many wives is not
considered wrong. Polygamy was accepted in Vedic culture for several reasons.
One was, the primary reasons was that, in Vedic culture, every woman is, it was
considered necessary for her to be married. You know, woman can also be
brahmacarini in spirit. A brahmacari is not just an external varana. Brahmacari
ultimately, essentially, it means "brahmacarati ti brahmacari" that one who lives
in Brahman. So, even women can live spiritually. And they can be brahmacarinis
in spirit. But in terms of ashram, women are always in the Vedic culture to be
married. So, now, because in the Vedic culture, the, a, a, a s..., a good
num..., not very large, but still a small, but significant number of men would
take to the renounced order. They would become brahmacaris or sannyasis.

So, therefore, there would always be, the number of women would be more than the
number of men. Another reason was also that, in the Vedic culture, it is
understood that, you know, to get a, get a son requires, a little speaking, more
punya. So, sometimes, when the population would not be so punyavada, then the
number of women would also be more than the number of men. So, the, that is how
they would beget the progeny. So, now, because the women, all the women had to
married, so, sometimes, in some cases, polygamy was allowed. So, in some case
was allowed means that not everybody had many wives, but those who could
maintain them. So, it was very important that all the wives, who, should be
treated very properly. You know, they should be taken care of adequately. And
they should be cared for. They have, so they, that was, when the king,
especially the kings and the ksatriyas, they were able to do. And that is how
they were allowed to have many wives. So, of course, Srila Prabhupada, when he
was asked about this, he said that, you know, according to Dritari's law, there
is, polygamy is considered illegal. And therefore, we should, we should not have
this at all. Although, it is a Vedic practice. It was accepted in Vedic culture.
And in today's culture, it is not practical. And in Kali Yuga, even to maintain
one household is often, as the Bhagavatam says, even that, it is actually more
difficult than to maintain a kingdom also. Especially as Kali Yuga w...,
becomes more and more complex, and more degraded, things become more and more
difficult. So, our goal is not to complicate our material life more and more.
So, in terms of, but the point is polygamy was allowed. So, here, when the,
something is happening in the Lord's pastimes. Now, this is, we can say this is
not Lord's pastime directly. But this is all the precursor to the Lord's
pastimes. So, it is not entirely transcendental. But we do not see it entirely
mundane also. So, Bhishma then said that, he, you know, he can, his, her son can
be the king. I do not need the kingdom. Then, his father, he, he, you know, he
was also expert. You know, if we want something, the intelligence becomes expert
to think about this, all sets of future possibilities, he said. You know, you
may not want the kingdom. But what about your sons? They will want the kingdom.
He says, no. He then, at that time, he took a vow, this is, I will not have any
sons. I will stay unmarried. He said, Bhishma, and at that time, that was such
a fierce vow for ksatriya to do. That even the devatas, they said, Bhishma, that
is a very fierce vow, and took that vow. And that is how his name became Bhishma
therereafter. So, at that time, he also took a vow that I will protect the
rul..., not only will I not, now, I or my desc..., st..., I, I not, not only
will I not serve the kingdom. Not only will I not have children who will want to
a, serve the king. He said, as long as I live, I will protect the ruling king of
Kun..., of K..., the Kuru dynasty, of Hastinapur. So, when he took that vow, he
could not a, conceive that, in the future, the ruler of Hastinapur would be a,
as spineless, as weak hearted a person as Dhṛtarāṣṭra. And that would hiv...,
would have begotten such an evil-minded son as Duryodhana. And he would have to
fight on the side of Duryodhana. So, Bhishma having to fight on side of
Duryodhana was unfortunate. Now, he had taken a long ago. And he had to stick to
that vow. And moreover, he also says himself in the Mahabharata that actually, I
am, I am conquered by money. So, he says, I have been f..., I allured on the
money of the Kauravas. And therefore, I have to fight on the side of the Kauravas.
Now, these are all external reasons. Ultimately, we understand that the Lord
wanted Bhishma to be, to fight on the side of the Kauravas. Why? Because through
Bhi..., the Lord, through Bhishma, the Lord wanted demonstrate an extraordinary
lesson. The lesson that no matter how powerful a person may be, if that person
opposes the plan of the Lord, that person f..., cannot succeed. That person will
be destroyed. So, Bhishma had tremendous power. You know, he had actually
defeated all the world ksatriyas in a svayaṃvara within which he got the brides,
not for himself. He got the brides for his brother, Vichitravirya and
Chitrāngada. He got Amba Ambikā and Amba Ambālikā. And then, he battled with,
for twenty-seven days, with that person who had defeated all the ksatriyas of
the world twenty-one times. That was Paraśurāma. And while there, practically,
he defeated Paraśurāma. Paraśurāma was his spiritual master in many ways. He had
learnt from Paraśurāma. But he coun..., not mar..., spiritual master, you could
say. He was his guru. He was his marshall teacher. But he not only exc...,
equaled him. But he excelled him. And finally Paraśurāma was overcome. And
Paraśurāma was about to be defeated. So, at that time, the sages came and told,
do not kill him. He is a brahmana. So, Bhishma resisted from killing. So, he was
so formidable. But the Lord wanted demonstrate that if anybody goes aganst the
plan of the Lord, that person will have to, will, will not succeed.

So, Bhishma took up that s..., that thankless task. You know, the task which
could lead him to be misunderstood for all time to come. He took up that task.
And he fought on the side of the Pandavas, against the Pandavas, on the side of
the Kauravas so that he could be used as an instrument for demonstrating a very
important teaching by the Lord. So, now, Bhishma is taking that. Now, I have to
fight. Let me start fighting. So, enough of this politicking. We have had enough
talking. Now, I want things are going to happen, let us fight. Then he, when he
blew it, or blew the conchshell. He knew. Bhishma knew that ultimately, Kauravas
are not going to win. Dhṛtarāṣṭra was, Duryodhana was going to die. But he said,
let us get on with it. I want to see how Krishna protects his devotees. And that
is why he said, let us start, begin. And, but when Duryodhana heard this, he,
blowing the conchshell, oh, Bhishma is eager to fight. So, my speech has been
successful. Yes, I offer respect to Bhishma. And Bhishma has become en...,
enthused to fight. So, actually, Bhishma had become impatient. What is this
politicking going on? But Duryodhana thought, oh, my speech has enthused him.
"tasya sañjanayan harṣaṁ". So, his "harṣaṁ" became more. His "harṣaṁ" increased.
And then this was, Bhishma was the commander. So, that was the signal. When the
commander signals the blowing of the conchshell. The blowing of the conchshell
shall indicates beginning. Just like at the start of the e..., aarti also, we
have, we are blowing a conchshell.  Similarly, there is a blowing of conchshell
over here. So then, what happened? There is a blowing of conchshell. Let us look
at the next. So, immediately, everybody else started blowing.

        tataḥ śaṅkhāś ca bheryaś ca
        paṇavānaka-gomukhāḥ
        sahasaivābhyahanyanta
        sa śabdas tumulo ’bhavat

So, then, all the different warriors started blowing their instru...,
conchshells. And when they started blowing the conchshells, there were, you
know, the, it was actually the war was not just a war. You know, it is often
fought in sporting spirit. You know, you have your skills. I have my skills. And
let us fight. So, when they are fighting with these kind of skills, at that
time, the whole mood was, they knew that we are im..., indestructible. You know,
we may die here. But if we die heroically while fighting, then, we will attain
auspicious destiny in the future. So, the ksatriyas, when they fought in battle,
that was, it was, although there was bloodshed. And there could be death also.
But the f..., spirit was of fighting. In a, in a s..., in a heroic sporting
way, and that, that is why they all became j..., jubilant. They said, let us
fight. "tataḥ śaṅkhāś ca bheryaś ca". The Kauravas blew the "śaṅkhāḥ". But along
with that, there were different people, different, there was other backups,
backup staff also, you could say. They were blowing, they, they were beating
kettle drums. And they were blowing drums. And they were all different
instr..., instruments. "tataḥ śaṅkhāś ca bheryaś ca". So, "bheryaḥ" is a large
drum. "paṇavānaka-gomukhāḥ". So, "paṇava-ānaka" is small drums, kettledrums.
"mukhāḥ", horns. "sahasaivābhyahanyanta", so, just now, 01:06:14
