Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JDeq6EjpcEs
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_045_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_01_Text_15_to_25_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=_STS2MJI8nguQRRnkoKCjsJovNd8MTU0ODQ4NzAyOUAxNTQ4NDAwNjI5&event=video_description&v=JDeq6EjpcEs

Hare Krishna.

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna.

So, today, we continue with the first chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. We discussed
till verses four, verse fourteen yesterday. So, first, Bhish..., you know,
Duryodhana spoke, assessing the strength of both the armies. Then, Bhishma blew
his conchshell. The remaining Kauravas blew their conchshells. And now, Krishna
and Arjuna, the focus is on them. And they are blowing their conchshell. So, let
us look at the verse. Let us see here.

        pāñcajanyaṁ hṛṣīkeśo
        devadattaṁ dhanañ-jayaḥ
        pauṇḍraṁ dadhmau mahā-śaṅkhaṁ
        bhīma-karmā vṛkodaraḥ

So, both of them are blowing their conchshells. "pāñcajanyaṁ hṛṣīkeśo". Lord
Hṛṣīkeśa blew his Pāñcajanya, his conchshell. And Dhanañjaya is Krishna...,
is Arjuna. And he blew his conchshell, named Devadatta. And then similarly,
"pauṇḍraṁ dadhmau mahā-śaṅkhaṁ". So, the giant "śaṅkhaṁ", "mahā-śaṅkhaṁ". You
know, Bhīma himself was giant-bodied. His strength was like that of a giant. And
his paraphernalia was also like that of a giant. So, "mahā-śaṅkhaṁ", his
conchshell was giant. So, "pauṇḍraṁ dadhmau", and its name was Pauṇḍra.
"bhīma-karmā vṛkodaraḥ". So, "Bhīma", the name itself means her..., let us say,
hercules. One who is extremely strong. So, in English, there is a word called
Herculean. So, Hercules is a character from the Greek tradition. Greek or Roman
tradition. And there, the idea is of a person who could get giant strength. And
he could do huge amount of work. So, many of the characters in the Greek or
Roman tradition, they are derivatives from the Vedic tradition. And in fact, if
we look at the thoughts of Socrates. You know, When Socrates' brother, Socrates'
friend's wife passes away. And his wif..., brother is lamenting, Socrates
consorts him by giving five reasons for the immortality of the soul. And those
reasons are practically identical with the first chap..., with the second
chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. Where Krishna is telling Arjuna about the
immortality of the soul. So, basically, after the Kurukṣetra war, from the
Indian mainland, there were expatriates. You know, which went away. People who
left the country. And they went to various parts, settled down in various part.
And they, they were settled in various parts. But over the centuries as the
power of the Kurukṣetra king, power of the king of Hastinapur became weaker
and weaker, the connection with the parent culture became more tenuous. And then
some local cultural derivatives also came out. That is why there are
similarities between the Vedic culture and the other cultures of the world. And
there are differences also. So, the Vedic patriarchs considered the Greek or
Roman culture to be an expatriate Vedic civilisation. Srila Prabhupada was
tal..., talks about this. And it is mentioned in līlāmṛta also. So, you know,
he, "bhīma-karmā", so, his name is Bhīma. But he was, karma was also Bhīma. And
here, he is referred to as, not by the name of Bhīma. He is referred to by
another name, "vṛkodaraḥ". "udaraḥ" means stomach. And then, "udaraḥ", "vṛka" is
giant, huge. So, "vṛka-udaraḥ" refers to, as Prabhupada translated, voracious
eater. So, voracious eater. Now, Bhīma, he was extremely powerful. And now,
power does not come out of thin air. You know, a person who does a lot of
powerful work, need, gets that power by eating. So, after Draupadī's svayaṃvara
was performed, in which Arjuna won her hand. And then, they came back. And when
they came back, then Arjuna told her, his mother Kuntī was waiting anxiously. He
says I have got a special gift for you. So, he said, so, Kuntī, she was doing
her prayers. And without looking, she says, whatever you have got, share it with
your brothers. And take it. So, he was shocked. He did not know what to do. All
of them were stunned. And seeing the numb silence. And seeing the numb silence
behind her, Kuntī turned and asked, what is the matter? And then, she saw
Draupadī. You know, princesses dressed in the royal, robes of, for the occasion
of marriage. He says, I have got a bride for you. I have got a wife. He says,
they are all shocked. That Kuntī said that, you know, my words have never been
false.

And Yudhiṣṭhira also started thinking about it. And then, he said, some, I have
never contaminated sinful activity. But unless I feel that, what you have just,
what you have said should be done. And then afterwards, there is a long story.
Vasudeva also came there. And Vasudeva also said that actually, Draupadī had
performed austerity in a previous life. And she had, was desperate for a
husband. So, when Lord Shiva appeared, she asked Lord Shiva. I want a husband. I
want a husband. I want a husband. I want a husband. I want a husband. She said
five times. Lord Shiva said because you asked five times, you will get five
husbands, next life. And then, Drupada was also convinced. And then, basically,
the marriage wa..., the, with all the five was done. But the important point for
our context is, so, when Draupadī had come there, then Kuntī trained Draupadī.
You know, how, now, you should serve your husbands. So, how should you serve
them? How to serve the Pandavas? He says, whatever food we get, you know, if,
divide it into two parts. And take one part, and then divide it into fou...,
five, we were dividing it into five parts, now, we will divide it into six
parts. So, one part for each of the four Pandavas. One part for you. And one
part for me. And, so like that. And the one giant part, she says half part, that
is for Bhīma. So, Draupadī could not resist the smile. So, that is how, now,
actually, Bhīma was "bhīma-karmā vṛkodaraḥ". He was, he used to eat a lot. And,
you know, his appetite was giant. But then work, he do was tremendous also. When
they, Kauravas would be, when, when the Kauravas had conspired to how the
Pandavas burnt in Varanavartha, in the house of lac. So, at night, through a
tunnel, on, before the house was burnt, the Pandavas escaped. You know, when
they came to the forest, the wilderness, they were making their way alone. You
know, the five of them were there, b..., the six of them were there along with
their mother, the five Pandavas. They are just making their struggling along.
So, at that time, they became exhausted. So, what did Bhīma do? Bhīma said, all
of you sit on my shoulders. So, he took his four brothers as well as mother. He
got all of them to sit on his shoulders. And he started running. You know,
actually, the others were stumbling on branches and other things. When he was
running, whatever was there, it would just break apart. And he would keep
running. So, when it came to work, also, he did tremendous work. So, he was very
very energetic. So, different people depending on their capacity, depending on
their nature, their body, so, body type, their kind of work, even people may eat
in different amounts of food. You know, sometimes, if we are eating less. And
somebody is eating more, we should not think that I am more sense-controlled.
That person is less sense-controlled. You know, it is not so much the quantity
that a person eats, but is the consistency. It, just because today, was a nice
food, I eat a giant quantity. And next day, I eat, because I do not like it,
very less. Then, that sort of alternation, just naturally, something is real...,
at, to our taste, we may take a little more than usual. But if we are just
alternating depending on the taste, and then, then that is more of like a sense
control. Some person, on a regular basis, that person needs a, more food. That
is not necessarily lack of sense control. You know, in the Vaishnava culture, we
also have Raghunatha Goswami who eats once in three days. Who take a little bit
food. You know, take just some butter milk, two or three days. And we have
Bhīma. Bhīma, who would eat so much. And for Bhīma, fasting was nearly
impossible. And it is, actually, this whole Pandava Nirjala Ekādaśī, it, it, we
get it because of the kindness of Bhīma. And it is not the kindness of Bhīma. It
is the giant appetite of Bhīma. Bhīma told Vasudeva who was like his
grandfather, you know, in a sense, in that, actually.

He was Pandu's, Pandu's father. So, generally speaking, you know, because the,
so this was a particular system in the Vedic culture. That if the woman, the
dynasty has to go on. And if a woman in a dynasty does not have a husband, then
the brother-in-law can impregnate her. But when the brother-in-law impregnates
her, actually, that brother-in-law, the offspring that are born, are not
considered to be the sons of that brother-in-law. They are considered to be her
sons. And they are considered to be descendents of the deceased husband. So,
the, if the brother-in-law, the, he is inseminating, so that is just as a, the
dynasty can go on. Then, it is not considered that the brother-in-law is the
father. So, that is why, in the Mahabharata, although it was Vasudeva through
whom, Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pandu are born. Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pandu do not refer to
Vasudeva as father. Nor do the Pandavas refer to him as grandfather. Because
that is a contin..., that is a, it is a contingent arrangement. It is a, because
of an emergency, that particular arrangement has been done. And there is, the
focus is not so much on, in modern times, this idea may seem controversial. You
know, it may seem scandalous also. How can a brother-in-law inseminate his, his
bro..., bro..., his brother's, brother's wife? But the point is that in our
culture, the focus is too much on lust and sex. In the past, the V..., lust and
sex have always been a part of human culture, an important part, quite a, a,
quite a significant part. But nowadays, it is dominant, predominant in fact. And
because of that, all relationships, we just cannot, many people cannot think of
anything beyond the carnality of those relationships. But in the earlier
culture, the dynasty was very important. And continuing the dynasty was also a
very important function. So, the focus in this thing is not on the immorality or
the sensuality. You know, there was just one-time contact between Vasudeva and
Amba..., Ambikā and Ambālikā. And after that, there is no other contact at all.
And Vasudeva also did not con..., he, nobody considers him to be contaminated.
Vasudeva is still respected as a great sage, as the author of the Vedas, now, as
the au..., compiler, the purposefully put and written form of the Vedic
literature. And, he, the, Ambikā and Ambālikā are not considered unchaste in any
way. The point in this is the continuation of the dynasty. So, although, from
the seminal point of view, we could say that, Vasudeva is the grandfather of the
Pandavas. But they never referred to him that way. They referred to him
primarily as a great sage. And they respect him accordingly. So, Bhīma tells
V..., Vasudeva. Vasudeva is telling, extolling the glories of Ekādaśī. See, how
you must fast on Ekādaśī. So, Bhīma says it is impossible. He says I cannot
fast. What to speak of fast a whole day? Even for one minute, the next minute is
difficult for me. I feel so hungry. Imagine a lot of work also. So, then, he
says, no, but you must fast. He says, then please, arrange for, you know, one
Ekādaśī where if I fast. I can fast once a year. Fast, then please arrange that
I will get the benefit of all the Ekādaśīs. So, then, Vasudeva says, yes.
Vasudeva has that potency. And then, he says, this is a special Ekādaśī. And he
fast on this particular Ekādaśī. Then, by fasting on the one Ekādaśī, you will
get the benefit of fasting on all of the rains of the year, all of the Ekādaśīs
of the year. That is how the Pandava Nirjala Ekādaśī has originated.

So, the point again is "bhīma-karmā vṛkodaraḥ". He used to be a giant eater. And
Prabhupada elaborates on the names Hṛṣīkeśa and Dhanañjaya over here. So,
Krishna is the controller of the senses. What does it mean He is the controller?
Now, there are two l..., levels of meaning to that. One, He is objectively
always the controller. And the other is, subjectively, we accept Him as a
controller. And then we voluntarily agree to be controlled by Him. So,
objectively means, right now, I am speaking. So, I think, I am speaking. And I
have the power to speak. But suppose, I develop a bad throat. Then, I have, I
still, I am still sitting here. My throat is also here. But I will lose the
power to speak. So, objectively, it is through reality that my senses are not
under my control. Although, my senses are, I call them as mine. And although
frequently, I am able to control them. But at the same time, there are times
when I am not able to control them. Sometimes, people get paralysis. And then,
when they get paralysis, they just cannot control any of their limbs. You know,
people may get Parkinson's and diseases like that. So, therefore, the point here
is that we have limited powers. And even those powers can be taken away at any
time. So, Krishna is, objectively speaking, the controller. And based on our
past karma, he gives us certain level of control over our body and our senses.
And, so, now, our perfection is to recognise the objective reality. And then
subjectively, accept Krishna as the controller. That means, Krishna, you are my 
master. And my senses are yours. I am meant to be yours. So, please, engage me
in your service. Please accept me as your servant. So, when we understand this
and accept this principle, then we are moving towards spiritual reality. So,
that is how, you know, this definition of bhakti is:

        hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-
        sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

"ucyate". "hṛṣīkeṇa", with our senses, we serve the Lord and the senses. Then,
there is "Pāñcajanya". There is a whole story in the Bhagavatam about how the
demon, "Pāñcajanya", and Krishna killed him. And then, his bo..., he was in the
form of a conch. He had a conch with him. Which is like his defining
characteristic. And Krishna took that conch. Now, this is just a hystorical
narrative. When Krishna appeared how He got the conch. But actually, conch is
His eternal associate. And it is also, it, paraphernalia. It is always there in
the spiritual world with Him. But when He appears in this world, there is a
particular, hystorical narrative, by which, His, His associate comes and meets
Him. And His paraphernalia becomes His. Now, Arjuna is called as Dhanañjaya.
Dhanañjaya means one who gets Dhana, one who has acquired Dhana. So, actually,
when Yudhiṣṭhira Maharaja wanted to perform a big yajña. So, he needed, yajñas
are expensive affairs. You need a lot of gold for it. So, he went to the North
and searched in the remote areas, and found a lot of gold over there. And that
is how he got the name, Dhanañjaya. And in the context of the Bhagavad Gita,
we will see that by through Krishna's instructions, he also got the Dhana, the
know..., wealth of spiritual knowledge. That is also the ultimate wealth. So,
let us look at the next verse. Now, after describing this, now the remaining
kings are described, remaining people who blow their conchshells.

        anantavijayaṁ rājā
        kuntī-putro yudhiṣṭhiraḥ
        nakulaḥ sahadevaś ca
        sughoṣa-maṇipuṣpakau

        kāśyaś ca parameṣv-āsaḥ
        śikhaṇḍī ca mahā-rathaḥ
        dhṛṣṭadyumno virāṭaś ca
        sātyakiś cāparājitaḥ

        drupado draupadeyāś ca
        sarvaśaḥ pṛthivī-pate
        saubhadraś ca mahā-bāhuḥ
        śaṅkhān dadhmuḥ pṛthak pṛthak

So:

        anantavijayaṁ rājā
        kuntī-putro yudhiṣṭhiraḥ

So, it is interesting that on the Pandavas' side, first Krish..., Krishna and
Arjuna are described. Then, Bhīma is described. And after that, Yudhiṣṭhira is
described. Although, Yudhiṣṭhira is the king. From the point of view of
significance on the battlefield, the most influential warriors, first of all,
was Arjuna and Krishna, the combination. Then, the most, the second most
influential was Bhīma. And then after that was Yudhiṣṭhira. And then Nakula. So,
his conchshell was "anantavijayaṁ". And similarly, Nakula and Sahadeva had their
conchshells, Sughoṣa and Maṇipuṣpaka. And then, you know, whole list of this,
"kāśyaś ca parameṣv-āsaḥ". So, "kāśyaḥ" is described once again. He is a very
famous wa..., archer. "śikhaṇḍī ca mahā-rathaḥ". Now, Śikhaṇḍī had been Amba in
a previous life. And he had been this time to be the cause of, the ins..., cause
of by, cau..., cause of, instrument of, the death of Bhishma.

        dhṛṣṭadyumno virāṭaś ca
        sātyakiś cāparājitaḥ

So, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, as I mentioned yesterday, was the, was a formidable warrior on
the side of the Kauravas. Then, Virāṭa is there. The king and whose palace the
Pandavas served. And whose kingdom deluded gyatvas. Then, "sātyakiś
cāparājitaḥ". So, this can be translated, it can be split in two ways. The
sandhi vigraha, sandhi is combination. It can be "ca", "aparājitaḥ". That, that
Sātyaki also who was "aparājitaḥ". Or, it can be "cāpa", "rājitaḥ". "cāpa" means
bow. So, one who is decorated with a bow. And then, "drupado draupadeyāś ca".
All of them are "pṛthivī-pate", "sarvaśaḥ". They are all kings of the world. And
"saubhadraś ca mahā-bāhuḥ". Then, "saubhadraś". So, here, "sau...", "saubhadraś"
is Abhimanyu. Abhimanyu is referred to specially. Because he is a formidable
warrior. And they all blew their conchshell. "śaṅkhān dadhmuḥ pṛthak pṛthak".
They all low the conchshells. Now, after they blew it, then let us see what
happen.

        sa ghoṣo dhārtarāṣṭrāṇāṁ
        hṛdayāni vyadārayat
        nabhaś ca pṛthivīṁ caiva
        tumulo ’bhyanunādayan

So, earlier was set, it was described as "tumulaḥ". There was, the sound was
tumultuous. That was described. Here, also, in 19D, it is described the sound
is "tumulo ’bhyanunādayan". And the tumult, "nabhaś ca pṛthivīṁ caiva", it is
extended all the way f..., all the way from the sky to the earth. So, as it
extended like this, all the way. So, but the important point here is "sa ghoṣo
dhārtarāṣṭrāṇāṁ". This is "ghoṣaḥ", this proclamation, this sound. What is the
affect of that on the Dhṛtarāṣṭra, sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra? "hṛdayāni vyadārayat",
their hearts were shattered. Why were the hearts shattered? Because the sheer
volume, the, of the conchshell, conch sound, conchshell blowing. And the
confidence that it conveyed. It shook and shattered the confidence of the
Kauravas. So, the, when the Lord was blowing the conchshell. And His associates,
the devotees were blowing the conchshells, the combination of the Lord and the
devotee are unf..., are undefeatable. And that is why the Pa..., Kauravas
realised. You know, we are in deep trouble. They realised in what great trouble
they were. They, immediately, started feeling shaken. That is how their heart
was shattered. So, actually speaking, these are all signs that the victory is
actually going to be the Pandavas', not to the Kauravas'. Yet, at the same time,
the Bhagavad Gita illustrates how, although everything may be set for victory,
you know, at the least expected moment, things can go wrong. The Pandavas have
prepared for victory, but let us see what happens now. You know, Pa..., pre...,
prepared means, they prepared for battle. But they expected to win. Now,
Prabhupada writes in the purport:

"One who takes shelter of the Supreme Lord has nothing to fear, even in the
midst of the greatest calamity."

So, how does a devotee become free from fear? F..., actually, courage is not
necessarily the absence of fear. It is the awareness of a presence that dwarves
fear. Courage comes not by the absence of fear. So, I have no fear. No. How, if
we have fear, the fears, we cannot just wish them away. We may have fear, fear
of future. We may have fear of getting some terrible disease. Then, we may have
fears of some, un..., misunderstandings. So, the whole, the adhyatmik,
adyabatik idea, all of these can cause us fear. So, when we want to hold
courage, courage is not just the absence of fear. You know, a person who is
f..., having no fear, often that may be because of ignorance. You know, a
drunken person may just drive, may just run into traffic, and fearlessly. Now,
that is not fearlessness. That is stupidness. That is foolishness. So, you know,
fear is not, fearlessness is based not on ignorance of the dangers around us.
But actually, fearlessness of a devotee, so there can be fearlessness and
ignorance, where one is so lost in one's own thoughts and one's own
il..., hallucinatory world that one is not aware of the dangers. Then, there is
fearfulness because one is dependent so much on the material world, and wants to
enjoy here. And one feels fearful. Oh. How, how, how, how will I enjoy? What if
this goes wrong? What if that goes wrong? What if that, that, that? There is so
much anxiety that comes because of that. And then, beyond that, there is
fearlessness which comes from knowledge. You know, I understand that actually I
am not the body. I am the soul. And Krishna exists. And Krishna cares for me.
So, fearlessness comes by the awareness of a presence that dwarves fear. A
presence that dwarves fear. That means when we understand that God is there. And
in front of God, whatever be the causes of fear, whatever be the problem that
are there. They are all insignificant. You know, as compared to God. By the
awareness of a presence that dwarves fear, then, fearle..., courage comes. Dwarf
means to make it very small, like a dwarf. So, normally, if we are alone, and we
see some danger, we will feel fearful. If we are going on a dark street, and we
see that there is some, you know, dangerous-looking giant person coming along.
We feel this, this person will come to rob me. I may feel fearful. But then, I
just look behind. And I see an even bigger bold policeman there with a gun in his
hand. I feel peaceful. You know, what has happened is, it is not that the thief
with that particular thief is not there. And thief is not threat. But I know,
there is somebody bigger who can protect. So, similarly, in our mind, there are
so many fears that are th..., lurking. And those fears, we cannot wish them
away. You know, but if they are there, what we have to do is, we have to
increase our Krishna Consciousness. You know, we have to become aware of a
presence that dwarves fear. And then the fear goes away. So, that is how we move
forward in our spiritual life. So, the Pandavas were not fearful. Because
Krishna was with them. Whereas the Kauravas were fearful because God was not
there. They had no awareness of a presence that could dwarf fear. In fact, that
presence was on their opposite side. Or rather, they had chosen the side
opposite to the Supreme Lord. And that is why their inauspiciousness, their
destruction was guaranteed. Now, till this was, that actually, the description
is going on.

Now, Arjuna starts some action. This is the first time Arjuna is doing
something. Until now, in fourteenth verse, just Arjuna entered. And now, he
starts acting.

        atha vyavasthitān dṛṣṭvā
        dhārtarāṣṭrān kapi-dhvajaḥ
        pravṛtte śastra-sampāte
        dhanur udyamya pāṇḍavaḥ
        hṛṣīkeśaṁ tadā vākyam
        idam āha mahī-pate

So, "atha vyavasthitān dṛṣṭvā". "vyavasthitān", the, when he is, the, as they
were situated, they observed. "dhārtarāṣṭrān", so as the "dhārtarāṣṭrān", then,
son, the army of Dhṛtarāṣṭra was arranged, he saw them. Who saw them? That
person who was "kapi-dhvajaḥ". "dhvajaḥ" refers to flag. "kapi" refers to
monkey. So, "kapi-dhvajaḥ" means the person with a monkey flag. So, actually, in
the later on, in the battle, it is said that, when the Kauravas would look at
Arjuna's chariot, they would feel as if that monkey standard, that monkey on the
flag, you know, standard, it is actually real. And this monkey is screaming. And
that monkey is causing terror into the heart of the enemies of Arjuna. What,
what is this? So, when we, the "kapi-dhvajaḥ", what does it actually mean?
Actually, the Arjuna always had a standard. Every warrior would have his own
flag by which other warriors would recognise him. So, different warriors had
their distinctive flags. And Arjuna had a flag, just, it is called the standard.
The standard was actually a monkey. Now, that has always been a standard. But
for the Kurukṣetra war, Hanuman, at the request of Bhīma had agreed to enter
into that, into that flag. So, "kapi-dhvajaḥ". That means there was a monkey
flag. And in that monkey flag, Hanuman had entered. And that is why that monkey
just, was just supposed to be a flag. Now, it seems to be alive. And the
Kauravas are horrified by seeing that. So, so, long story when the Pan..., when
the Pandavas were in the forest. At that time, the Kauravas, at that time,
Arjuna had gone to heaven to get heavenly pow..., energy, powers and heavenly
weapons. So, he had one mystic power as well as the "dhārtarāṣ" from heaven.
When he had gone, at that time, Bhīma decided to go up from badrikash upwards
and into the Himalayas more and more. And there, he met a monkey who humbled him
with the sheer strength of just his tale. Bhīma was not able to lift up that
tale itself. And we recognised it was Hanuman. And Bhīma requested him. You
know, you are my older brother. Both of them are the sons of Vayu. So, I offer
my obeisances. And I request your blessings. He said, because you are present on
the side of the, you know, forces of Lord Rama, they are victorious. So, we
request that, I request that you also be present in the war that is going to
take place. So, Hanuman agreed. And he said, I will be present in the standard
of Arjuna. So, in this way, there was Arjuna's magnificent chariot which are
described earlier "mahati syandane sthitau". And that chariot had
"kapi-dhvajaḥ", a flag for monkey. And this is also a sign of victory, of
auspiciousness.

        pravṛtte śastra-sampāte

So, "śastra-sampāte", they were all equipped with weapons.

        dhanur udyamya pāṇḍavaḥ

"dhanur udyamya", that means Pandava, he, Arjuna. He had, he, "pāṇḍavaḥ" refers
to Arjuna. Arjuna had taken up his bow. And he was ready to fight. So, then what
did happen?  

        hṛṣīkeśaṁ tadā vākyam

At that time, he spoke to Hṛṣīkeśa. What did he speak?

        idam āha mahī-pate

So, "mahī-pate". So, here, "mahī-pate" refers to "O King". So, this is Sanjaya
speaking Dhṛtarāṣṭra. He says, O King, this is what Hṛ..., Hṛṣīkeśa, to
Hṛṣīkeśa, and the Pandavas spoke. So, let us see what he spoke.

        arjuna uvāca

        senayor ubhayor madhye
        rathaṁ sthāpaya me ’cyuta
        yāvad etān nirīkṣe ’haṁ
        yoddhu-kāmān avasthitān

        kair mayā saha yoddhavyam
        asmin raṇa-samudyame

So, here, in this verse, we will see that there are six lines instead of four,
normally from the English point of view. So, we have just, we normally have A,
B, C, D. We had E and F also. So, sometimes, the verses are split differently
depending on the continuity of thought. So, that is why sometimes in different
renditions of the Bhagavad Gita, the verse numbering may be different. So, here,
Srila Prabhupada is actually putting towards us together in a sense. Or one
point, five verses as one verse. Because there is a continuity of thought over
there. And later on, we will see that, another verse, which will be, that which
will be actually point five verse. Which will be considered a one verse. We will
see that when it happens in the fourth chapter also. So, by that, the overall
numbering of the verses remains seven hundred. But in some cases, the, depending
on the continuity of thoughts, some verse may be slipped, slipped partially. And
that is how certain messages are preserved in their continuity. So, Srila
Prabhupada focuses more on continuity of meaning rather than technicality of
divison. And that is why we will see six lines in this verse over here. So, what
is Arjuna telling?

        senayor ubhayor madhye
        rathaṁ sthāpaya me ’cyuta

Acyuta please, please, the "rathaṁ", the chariot in-between the two armies. And
why? "yāvad etān nirīkṣe ’haṁ", that by which I will be able to see. "nirīkṣe",
I will be able to do observation. "yoddhu-kāmān avasthitān", that, those who are
situated here to fight, I will be able to see them. What exactly do I want to
see?

        kair mayā saha yoddhavyam
        asmin raṇa-samudyame

With whom do I have to fight? I want to see that. So, now, this raises an
interesting question. Obviously, the Pandavas knew, even Arjuna, being the
center of warrior, he also knew, who were the people who were there on the
opposite side. You know, before the war, the alliances were formed. And when the
alliances were formed, both the parties had their own spies. And even the
kings would join, each their alliances. They did not have, keep their alliances
in secret. So, it is not that, suddenly, Arjuna was expecting, oh, some new
audience will be there. New alliances have been formed. And some warriors did
not expect other. The whole strategy had been planned. And it had been said,
this warrior will fight with primarily this warrior. This warrior will fight
with this warrior. This warrior will fight with this warrior. So, then, if that
is the case, then what exactly does Arjuna want to see? He knows who are the
warriors on the opposite side. And they have made plans also that how each of
them will be countered. So, what exactly does he want to see? You know, for the
Pandavas, for the extremely mortifying, because they are going to fight against
their own brothers. They never wanted such a war. And even Bhīma, who throughout
the forest exile had been breathing fire, finally, when the war became
imminent. And Krishna said, I will go a peace messenger. And I will try to avoid
the war. So, at that time, Bhīma said, Oh, Krishna, try your best. If the war
can be avoided, that will be good. So, Krishna was surprised. Krishna said, Oh,
Bhīma, it is indeed true when war approaches, even the courageous become
cowardly. That is why even you are talking about peace. Then, Bhīma said, I am
not cowardly. He says, I am ready to fight. But why should there be unnecessary
bloodshed. So, Krishna said, then, yes, I will try my best. But I know that
Duryodhana is obstinate. And he is not going to listen to me. But still, I want,
Krishna's intention was, I want the world to know that my devotees were not
in..., instigators of the war. They tried everything possible to avoid the war.
But still, in spire of that, the war took place. Because they were left with no
alternatives. So, the greatest extents of Krishna's compassion was that he said,
Pandavas were satisfied with five villages also. Just give them five villages.
But Duryodhana obstinately replied. I will not give enough land through, pass
even the tip of a needle through. Then, Krishna said, then war is inevitable.
So, here, the point is, the Pandavas, th..., even when they were on the
battlefield, they are, they did not really want the war. Of course, once the war
started, it was a deadly conflict. It was a wa..., battle, war to death. But
still, they did not want it. So, Arjuna wanted to see, you know, how inimical
are they. What is their mentality. So, that was his idea. He knew who were
there.

        kair mayā saha yoddhavyam

That means, who all have come to fight with me? What is their disposition? Now,
how are they going to fight with me? So, it was a difficult war to fight. He was
trying to understand it. Now, Prabhupada's purport focuses largely on the word
"acyuta". So, what is the signi..., the one significance of the word, "acyuta"?
The, truly speaking, the word "acyuta" means, "cyuta" means to fall. "acyuta"
means one who never falls. That Lord who never falls or fails. So, one who never
fails in keeping His promise. You know, sometimes, the Lord may be asked to do
something, which is not actually befitting His position. Just like, He is doing
now. He is the Supreme Lord. And He is meant to receive worship from everyone.
But he has become the charioteer of His devotee, and as become charioteer, not
only has he become the charioteer, he has also become the an..., a part of the
non-fighting contention in the battlefield. Charioteers do not fight. Therefore,
for a ksatriya to become a charioteer itself is, is in many ways denigrading.
Later on, when Karṇa requests Shalya to be his kari..., charioteer. And
Duryodhana is shocked. Shalya is a formidable warrior. How can he be the
charioteer? Then, he says, no, no. Actually, I need somebody who is equal to
Krishna as my charioteer. Then, he asked for him. Then, Duryodhana goes and asks
Shalya. And he is furious. He says, you know, I am now the king. And if you want
me to, if you feel that I have not s..., fought my battle vigorously, then you
tell me, who are your enemies you want me to kill. And I will kill them. You
know, that is such a dishonor for me to become a h..., ch..., for you to ask me
to become a charioteer of anyone. Or a king to become a charioteer, it is such a
great dishonor. And worse than all, you are asking me to become a charioteer of
a suta-putra. You know, a, for a person who is not even a proper born ksatriya,
king. He says, it is so, such an insult. I should leave right now and go away.
So, the, he was furious. The point is that to take the position of a charioteer,
it is quite a, a, humiliating in many ways. In some ways, it is like a big
beaner who has hundreds of cars, and he was under the chauffeur for the cars.
Suddenly being told to become a chauffeur of some other millionaire. So, he feel
irritated by that. And raging for him, infuriated, so that was, so, his reaction
was. And here also, Krishna, why has he done so? We call out of love. So, there
was Duryodhana's ever-skillful diplomacy. Duryodhana says, oh, no, no, actually,
my intention was not to denigrate you. My intention was to appreciate you. He
said that the greatest of all warriors in the whole battlefield, on all, both
sides, is Keshava. And it, Keshava has taken up the mission of charioteer. And
actually, there may be many charioteers, but there is no charioteer who is equal
to Keshava. The only person who can be equal to Keshava is you. And then, in
this way, this turned the whole thing around. And then Karṇa got Shalya is his
charioteer. So, the point is, still, to become a charioteer is quite a low-down
position. And why did Krishna accept it? Because Arjuna requested it. And the
Lord never fails to keep His promise.

And now, not only was that an extraordinary request, that become my charioteer.
But now, there is a bigger extraordinary request. That the war is about to
start, and saying, please, take me in-between. Charioteer can have hundreds of
question. What is the matter? Are you going to sign a ... ? Are you going to
surrender? Are you going to travel, a peace, peace agreement? Or, what about
the, the enemy starts shooting and you get slaughtered? And after the
conchshells are blown, then it is alright for the enemies to start shooting. And
then, you can be butchered also because you will be defenseless, all alone
in-between the two armies. So, He could ask hundreds of questions. But when
Krishna's, He gets this, this request. Krishna follows that request, as we will
see. So, He never fails in giving protection to His devotees. And then, Arjuna
continues his request. Why does he want to go there?

        yotsyamānān avekṣe ’haṁ
        ya ete ’tra samāgatāḥ
        dhārtarāṣṭrasya durbuddher
        yuddhe priya-cikīrṣavaḥ

"yotsyamānān avekṣe ’haṁ", "avekṣe" means to see. So, I want to see those who
have come to fight. "ya ete ’tra samāgatāḥ", those who have assembled over here.
And he says, "dhārtarāṣṭrasya", here, it refers to sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, but
especially, not just all the sons, his, at one obstinate s..., evil son,
"durbuddher". That is Duryodhana. "yuddhe priya-cikīrṣavaḥ", desiring his
success. So, who could it be, how, how, how could they be siding on the side of
such a person who is so personification of religion, siding on his, on his party
in such a large numbers and ready to fight? Is it really true? That all these
people are fighting on his side? I want to see it. "avekṣe ’haṁ". So, we will
see here. The word eyes are coming so much. "iksa", "avekṣe" means to see. That
has the root "iksa". Then, we will see the previous li..., verse, was, set was,
what was it? "nirīkṣe ’haṁ". So, "avekṣe" and "nirīkṣe". So, we had "avekṣe" in
twenty-one, D..., 21C. And, so, actually, here what Srila Prabhupada has done
is, rather than making one versus one point five. He has made one point way
versus two. That is why we have twenty one and twenty two over here. And then,
on the twenty-third verse, this one, so, we have got reference to eyes twice.
Now, there will be one more significant ref..., more reference. And then, we
will discuss what is the import of these references. So, now, then, the
discussion is going on. So, rather said, the Bhaga..., the Mahabharata is like a
nested dialogue. Nested dialogue means, the dialogue happening at multiple
levels. So, there is a dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna which is about to
start. Then, there is a dialogue between Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Sanjaya. Which is the
second level. And beyond that, the whole Mahabharata is described as a
conversion between Janamejaya, who was a, was descendent of the Pandava vamsa,
who was the son of Parikṣit. And Vaiśampāyana rishi. So, Vaiśampāyana rishi is
narrating the full Mahabharata to Janamejaya. So, now, the narration is going
backwards. And he is saying that Sanjaya is speaking. Sanjaya says. What does
Sanjaya say? He says to Yudhiṣṭhira. So, now, the camera was sort of, you know,
you can imagine camera moving forward and back. The camera was in Kurukṣetra.
And what is happening in Kurukṣetra is described. And the camera has moved from
Kurukṣetra back to Hastinapur. And in Hastinapur, what is being reported, is
being described.

        sañjaya uvāca

        evam ukto hṛṣīkeśo
        guḍākeśena bhārata
        senayor ubhayor madhye
        sthāpayitvā rathottamam

So, "evam ukto hṛṣīkeśo", having spoken, now, being spoken to Lord Hṛṣīkeśa.
"guḍākeśena bhārata". So, there is, how he is, Arjuna's name is "guḍākeśo". So,
"guḍākeśena" has many meanings. One is that, it is, one who has conquered sleep.
"guḍākeśena", another meaning of the word is, "guḍāk", "eśe". So, "guḍāk" is
jaggery. And it is special kind of jaggery, it is very delicious. So, "ke" is
Brahma. "eśe" is Shiva. So, "guḍākeśe" refers to that Lord who gives nectar.
Nectar that is like jagglery, delicious jagglery to Brahman and Shiva. So,
Brahman and Shiva are great controllers. But when they see how their controller,
how their master has become controlled by love. He has become the o..., obeident
charioteer of his devotee, Arjuna. Then, seeing this extraordinary love of the
Lord for his devotees, the Pandavas, the, even Brahmaji and Shiva, Shiva, Sujit,
they feel delighted. They feel touched. And that is why they start saying, oh,
what is this? It is so wonderful. So, they also feel as if they are getting a
flow of nectar. "guḍākeśena bhārata". So:

        senayor ubhayor madhye
        sthāpayitvā rathottamam

So, Arjuna is rep..., repeating the request which he had made in verse
twenty-one. Say, please establish the chariot between the two armies. So, now,
what happens. Let us look at the next verse.

        bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ
        sarveṣāṁ ca mahī-kṣitām
        uvāca pārtha paśyaitān
        samavetān kurūn iti

So, now, what happened? Krishna took the chariot in-between the two armies. So,
these two armies are assembled. Krishna is the charioteer in-between. And then,
he takes the chariot in front of Bhishma and Droṇā. "bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ".
So, they are the chief of the Kaurava army. "sarveṣāṁ ca mahī-kṣitām", and there
are so many people who are just kings, lord, "mahī-kṣitām". And "uvāca pārtha
paśyaitān". So, Krishna, as spoke, oh, Pṛthā, you wanted to see. Now, see.
"pārtha paśya...", "paśyaitān". See this. And what happens? "samavetān kurūn
iti". Just see, how everybody is assembled over here for the sake of fighting.
Bhishma, "sarveṣāṁ ca mahī-kṣitām". So, in this way, the, the indication is
given over here that everybody should be ready to fight. And everybody is
actually ready to fight. So, Arjuna, what do you exactly want to see? "uvāca
pārtha paśyaitān". Oh, Pṛthā, what is exactly that you want to see? Actually
speaking, the warriors are there. And you have to fight with them. This is a
time for ac..., up..., action, not for just seeing. So, Arju..., Krishna is
surprised. But He is saying that "pārtha paśyaitān". Oh, Pṛthā, please see. This
is what I wanted you to see. I have fulfilled your desire. So, in this way, the
point that has been made over here is that, actually, there is great power of
illusion that comes through the eyes. And when this powerful illusion comes
through the eyes, then anyone and everyone can get bewildered. So, now, we will
see how Arjuna will get bewildered just by seeing. "uvāca pārtha paśyaitān". So,
when he sees, "paśya", then by that "paśya", he gets illusioned. So, actually
speaking, in this verse, generally speaking, generally speaking, maya comes
through the eyes. Krishna comes through the ears. So, of course, this is very
general statement. Sometimes, Krishna can also come through the eyes when we
take darshan of the deities. And maya can also come through the ears when we
hear gossip and blasphemy. But in a broad sense, what we see, pratyaksha, that
has a load of capacity to drag us into illusion. So, when we look at the things
of this world and we say, oh, there is so much pleasure here. And I start to get
it. You know, just work hard, make some arrangement, and get the pleasure. And I
will enjoy it. So, it appears the pleasure is readily available. And we just
have to do a little bit things. And we will get the pleasure. So, that is one
aspect of the illusion. You know, pleasure is so readily available, easily
available. On the other hand, there is also the illusion that, oh, where is
Krishna? 45:12
