Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EiaMq-RHlrg
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_074_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_04_Text_38_to_42_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=EiaMq-RHlrg&redir_token=siZe0EKG-XvTVhWFWxkN4YA6tih8MTU0ODQ4Nzk5OEAxNTQ4NDAxNTk4

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the Fourth Chapter. Concluding part. The Fourth Chapter is entitled
"Transcendental Knowledge". And this last section talks about the glory of
transcendental knowledge. So, Krishna has talked about the glory in four
verses, from 35 to 38. You know, 35, He said that, this will free one from
illusion. And grant one spiritual vision. Second is, it says that, you know, it
can elevate even the most sinful people. Third is, it burns away all karmic
reactions. And fourth is, there is nothing as pure as this. And this will enable
one to relish happiness within. Now, Krishna will talk about the role of faith
b..., in two verses. Which instruct by contrast. So, the first verse talks about
the glory of having faith. The next verse talks about the folly of not having
faith.

        śraddhāvāḻ labhate jñānaṁ
        tat-paraḥ saṁyatendriyaḥ
        jñānaṁ labdhvā parāṁ śāntim
        acireṇādhigacchati

So, "śraddhāvāḻ". The person who is faithful. "labhate jñānaṁ". That person
acquires knowledge. So, the faithful acquire knowledge. Is faith alone enough?
No. Along with that, there are two other requirement. "tat-paraḥ". One who is
dedicated. One who is devoted. "paraḥ". One who is attached to it. "tat-paraḥ".
One who is attached to that. "saṁyatendriyaḥ". And one who has regulated one's
senses. And then, when one does this, when one acquires knowledge by doing these
three things. Be, having faith, being spiritually attached, and being materially
regulated. Then, you know, what will happen? "jñānaṁ labdhvā parāṁ śāntim".
Then, after one acquires "jñāna". Then, one get supreme peace. "parāṁ śāntim".
"acireṇādhigacchati". "acireṇa" means not a long time. Soon. "ādhigacchati". We
will get the peace. So, now, there are several significant points of this, about
this verse. You know, just the previous verse had used the word "kālena".
"kālena" mean due course of time. Now, Arjuna may wonder of how long on due
course of time, "kālena". How long will it take? Will it take many many
lifetimes? So, Krishna is reassuring in an express. "acireṇa". It will not take
a long time. It takes th..., its due course of time. But it is not infinite.
"acire...", a, "acireṇa". Soon, it will happen. So, another point that Krishna
makes is that, once we get "jñāna". Then, "śānti" comes soon. So, actually, once
we become situated in our spiritual platform, then peace and bliss quickly
follow. So, it is the situating in the spiritual platform, that is challenging.
You know, so, these are another point here, in these verses, Krishna is saying,
you know, you know, the faithful acquire knowledge. So, what exactly is the
relationship between faith and knowledge? So, is it that, you know, we now would
normally think that, ok, when the mo..., more I study scripture, then my faith
will increase. So, our idea might be that. If I ask questions. Get answers.
Then, my faith increases. So, knowledge increases faith. But here is, Krishna is
saying, faith g..., leads to knowledge. So, what exactly is the cause? And what
is the effect? The relationship between the two is symbiotic. Initially, we need
to have some faith. "ādau śraddhā". We discussed the stages of, you know,
bhakti. Nine stages. In the purport of 4.10. "pūtā mad-bhāvaṁ", "’dhigacchati".
So, He says "bhāva". So, in the purport, Prabhupada talks about sh..., the nine
stages of prema. Nine stages. So, first is "śraddhā". So, Krishna also sa..., so
Rupa Goswami also seconds what Krishna is saying by sa..., you know, stating
that spiritual life begins with "śraddhā". That to have at least so..., some
faith. Ok, there is some higher dimension to life. You know, so, then, we will
explore, inquire about it. So, similarly, when we study the Bhagavad Gita. We
should have some basic level of faith. That this must be a book of wisdom. So
many great thinkers all over the world have appreciated. What is, what is the
reason that they have appreciated? There must be something of substance in it.
What is it? I want to know about it. So, that is "śraddhāvāḻ labhate jñānaṁ".
Similarly, when we go to some spiritual master or spiritual teacher. It has some
faith. Ok. You know. This person has been practicing for some time. This person
will have some knowledge. Or more knowledge than we. So, let me have some faith
and inquire. So, there is initially some preliminary faith that is required.
With that, we start. "śraddhāvāḻ". Then, we will get knowledge.

Now, when the knowledge comes, by that knowledge, doubts will become clarified.
Faith will further increase. And when the faith increases, then that will lead
us to inquire more deeply, more seriously. And that will also increase our faith
further. So, the relationship between faith and knowledge is symbiotic. Faith
begets knowledge. And knowledge begets faith. So, here, Krishna is emphasising
that, we have to have "śraddhā" to start off this process. It is symbiotic. But
there is, some starting has to be with faith. And this faith, when it matures.
So, in the, among the stages of bhakti, "śraddhā". "sādhu-saṅgo".
"bhajana-kriyā". "’nartha-nivṛttiḥ". And "niṣṭhā". So, "niṣṭhā" is also a form
of faith. But "niṣṭhā" is much deeper faith. And in that sense, if we see the
ninth stage, "premā". "premā" is also faith. When we love per..., someone,
naturally, we f..., have faith in that person. We trust that person. So,
actually, love is the deepest level of trust that we can have in a person. So,
in that sense, all the nine stages of bhakti, they are all, so, if we start from
here, so, all the nine stages are basically progressions in "premā".
Progressions to, in, progressions of faith. So, initially, there is a little
faith. Then, in the intermediate stage, first stage is "śraddhā". Initial faith.
Fifth stage is "niṣṭhā". That is deep faith. And, ninth stage is love. That is
implicit faith. When we love someone, there is no question, only. We have faith
in that person. You know, so, implicit faith. So, it is a..., it is, so, the
wh..., whole process of spiritual advancement is a process of deepening of
faith. And this whole process begins with, you know, "niṣ...", "śraddhāvāḻ
labhate jñānaṁ". With faith. So, wha..., how do, how does it progress? Actually,
once we have a little faith, we are going in the association of devotees. Hear
from them. Then, they tell us about chanting Hare Krishna. "sādhu-saṅ...",
"sādhu-saṅgo". "bhajana-kriyā" happens. We start "bhajana-kriyā". Then,
"’nartha-nivṛttiḥ" happens. When "’nartha-nivṛttiḥ" happens, when we become
purified. We see for ourselves the practical beneficial effects of what we are
practicing. And naturally, we move forward. And we develop, at that time, a
deeper faith. Just like if I take a treatment and it cures me, then, or improves
my health, then hmm, he act..., it, then, it actually, it then inspires us to,
deepen our faith. It naturally deepens our faith. You know. Naturally, it, it
makes us feel, yes, this works. Let me try this more. So, like that, Krishna is
telling, this whole process of the organic growth, growing of spa..., faith will
begin with "śraddhā". Now, "śraddhā" alone is not enough. You know, I will say,
I have got faith in God. Yes, ok. If you have faith in God, then that should be
reflected in our actions. See, here, when Krishna is talking about faith. We can
have faith at various levels. One is faith in the existence of God. Yes, God
exists. I believe in God. So, many people have this faith. But this is nominal
theism. Nominal belief. Yes, people, ok, God exists. He is there somewhere out
there. I believe He exists. But I do not bother much about Him. So, that kind of
faith is c..., very preliminary. But when we move upwards, and when we
understand. God exists. And He loves me. You know. And then, the perfection of
my life is to return His love. You know, it will be, in return, love Him. And by
that, and that, there is a greatest happiness. That is the ultimate perfection
of life. That is what is the purpose of existence. When I understand this. Or
when I develop faith in this, that is a much deeper, higher-level of faith.
There is not just in the faith, in the existence of God. But faith in the
Supreme Benevolents of God that He is our well-wisher. And not just benevolents,
but He is, He is, He is, that He is my love. He, He is my Lord. He is my lover.
He loves me. And I want to love Him. So that God is a supreme object of love.
That is a far deeper faith. So, these are progressions of faith.

So, the Bhagavad Gita, when it is talking about "śraddhā", it is not just
talking a..., about faith in existence of God. It is talking about f...,
existence at least, a, at a, a, existence of a benevolent God. Not just a God. A
benevolent God. That God is my well-wisher. And God, what He is telling me is
for my good. So, that faith in the benevolence of God is reflected through our
actions. So, those two actions are talked about in the next part of the verse.
What does it say? "tat-paraḥ" and "saṁyatendriyaḥ". "tat-paraḥ". So, when one
actually understands, a, the higher spiritual reality, one becomes attracted to
it. One becomes attached to it. I want to know more about it. What is this
spiritual life actually like? I, I, how does it, a, how does it f..., feel to be
truly connected with Krishna? To experience Krishna's grace in our heart? I
wanna know these things. "tat-paraḥ". One becomes attached to it. And then,
along with "tat-paraḥ", "saṁyatendriyaḥ". So, I regulate my interaction with
this world. Why? Because if I am unregulated and enjoying the things of this
world, then my consciousness cannot be a, be fixed on spiritual things. We will
get caught up in material things. So, that is why "saṁyatendriyaḥ". There has to
be regulation. So, this is the difference between academic knowledge of
scripture and devotional knowledge of scripture. You know, devotees, when they
study scripture, or those who are seekers. Even if they are not devotees. They
are spiritual seekers in general. They will come to the devotional path,
eventually. But when seekers study scripture, they a..., their st..., car...,
study is accompanied by redirection of the heart. You know, so, they are trying
to become attached to the Supreme Lord. And they are trying to regulate their
attachment to the world. So, only when this is there, then they make tangible
spiritual advancement. Academic scholars, many of them, they may have brilliant
intellectual skills. And to the extent they have those skills, they can be
respected for their acquisition of in..., intellectual skills. But that does not
give them, you know, authority into the inner aspects of spiritual knowledge.
So, when he knows the, you know, inner aspects of our, you know, you know, so,
when Krishna, actually, you know, so, so, I am sorry, I am talking about
academic scholars here. So, academic scholars, when they han..., know about the,
you know, they do not, cannot know the inner aspects because they are not
experiencing anything internally. The whole process of academic scholarship is
based on objectification and non-environment. They say, if you are studying a
tradition, do not get involved emotionally in it. Because then, that will mix up
with your, you know, coo..., you know, cool clinical judgement. But then, the
whole process is studying Bhagavad Gita, the whole process, purpose of studying
Bhagavad Gita, Srimad Bhagavatam is a transformation. So, somebody says, I do
not want transformation. Then, they really cannot get into the inside of it.
Now, somebody, the many sim..., many examples to illustrate this point. Somebody
says, I want to understand the full process of cooking and what is the joy in
it. But I will not eat a single morsel. Ok. Then, I am, I am, I am even
memorised the recipe. You know. I am, I am memorised the recipe better than what
the cook is there. But still, I will not get the taste of anything. So, like
that, actually, when we practice spiritual li..., when somebody studies
scripture, but when that person is not "tat-paraḥ". That person is not
"saṁyatendriyaḥ". Then, that person cannot get an insider understanding. So, the
understand that they get is superficial. It is nominal. It may be impressive in
terms of, you know, informational content. Oh, this is said in this book. That
is said in that book. This is said over here. That is sad over there. But that
is not having any transformational potency. So, "tat-paraḥ saṁyatendriyaḥ".
There are many academic scholars who may be, who, you know, who are, say, double
doctorates in Chaitanya Charitamrita. But they are smoking and drinking while
they are studying Chaitanya Charitamrita. So, it is anyhow, these postdoctorates
study spirituality. And the beginning of the spiritual life is to understand
that I am not the body. I am the soul. And when I understand I am not the body.
I am the soul. Then, you know, I follow the regulative principles which, you
know, minimise my bodily entanglement. So, if we just academically study, then
we will not get much transformational benefit. So, Krishna is talking about the
"jñānaṁ". How will we acquire? It is, we have to have faith. But along with
that, we have to be ready to transform ourselves. "tat-paraḥ" and
"saṁyatendriyaḥ". We are attached to the Absolute Truth. And we are ready to
regulate our in..., in..., indulgences in the world. And then, Krishna says, in
this way, when we acquire knowledge, when we understand that, actually, I am a
part of God. And I am to live in harmony with God. You know, then we get peace.
Yes, the ups and downs in the world will go on. But what will be our peace based
on? I under..., whatever happens, I am the servant of Krishna. And I will keep
serving Krishna. Hmm. He, so, whatever happens. Yes, I may be wealthy. I may be
poor. I may be healthy. I may be sick. I may be surrounded by people. I may
be completely alone and desolate. I may be in a good mood. I may be in a bad
mood. You know. I will keep serving Krishna. Because that is the ul..., that is
my very nature. That is what I will do. So, once we become pea..., situated in
that consti..., you know, understanding of a constitutional position that I am a
servant of Krishna. And I will serve Krishna. Then, "parāṁ śāntim". We get the
supreme peace. Yes. We will have challenges in our service, also. But we will
understand nothing can t..., actually shake the platform of service, only. See,
there is, there is a difference between wanting to be a servant and wanting to
be an enjoyer. When I want to be an enjoyer, I have to depend on so many
conditions. Oh, this has to work out. That has to work out. That has to work
out. Then, I will be able to enjoy. You know, if I, if I have to eat a delicious
feast, then first of all, there has to be somebody who cooks the feast. And that
person cooks it well. And then, there is a servant who c..., as, person who
cooks, serves this feast. And person's feast, person, serve it adequate quantity.
And I should have good health. And somebody should not insult me before I take
the feast. And then, some disturbing cellph..., phone call should not come while
I am eating the feast. So, there are so many conditions which are required. But
our digestive system should be working well. Then, I can enjoy the feast.

When I want to be the enjoyer, then I have to depend on so many conditions. So,
as long as I want to be the enjoyer, I cannot have peace. Because I depend on so
many external conditions which may go wrong at any moment. And immediately, my
peace will go away. But then, I understand and accept that I am a servant.
Whatever happens, I will keep serving Krishna. Then, that itself bring a deep
inner peace. That peace which comes by knowing God. It is talked about by seers
of, from various traditions. You know, the Bible says that the peace that
pass it all understanding. That this is a peace that pass it all understanding.
We cannot understand with our, you know, external material vision how a devotee
may be in turbulence. But still, he is peaceful. Because the devotee is strongly
connected with God. Now, this is the "parāṁ śāntim" that Krishna is talking
about. "śraddhāvāḻ labhate jñānaṁ". By faith, we will acquire knowledge. So,
now, hmm, I would like to, you know, talk a little bit about faith from a
broader perspective. We may, we may say that, ok, we should have faith. We need
to have faith. But how do we develop faith? Actually, you know, faith, it
depends also on intelligence, use of our intelligence. When we study the
philosophy, we will find that the scriptural knowledge that we study, we fall in
several different categories. Hmm. So, here, so, as I said, here, I was talking
about faith. First is, initial faith is just favorable curiosity. Maybe, there
is something in Bhagavad Gita I want to read. Then, it leads to knowledge. That
leads to stregthening our face. Now, I am talking about the various aspects of
knowledge of Krishna Consciousness. So, we can put them in four broad
categories. There can be subca..., many subcategories, also. So, some aspects,
they strike us as true on first hearing. For example, h..., maybe, we have had a
lot of suffering in our life. And we have had a lot of troubles. But all around
us, people were telling, yes, you know, actually, everybody is enjoying. We just
have to keep fighting. We are fighter. And things will, you know, en..., look
up. You will enjoy life. And then, we hear in Bhagavad Gita. This world is
"duḥkhālayam". Yah, that is true. That is true. Yes. It is "duḥkhālayam". So,
then, maybe, that is what convinces us. Or, you know, w..., in the Bhagavad
Gita, we hear that. You know, actually, there is some evil force inside us.
L..., the, the, let this lust. There is, in general, the mind which drags us
down. And then, we understand, yes, there is some insi..., en..., enemy inside
me. And that enemy is pulling me down. Yes, that makes sense. So, there are some
aspects when we hear the first time, oh, that makes sense. And then, that is one
kind of, one aspect of spiritual knowledge. Another is, some aspects are, some
that we understand is true after contemplation and discussion. That means we
hear. And when we c..., after that, we contemplate. We discuss. Somebody says, I
am not th..., you are not the body. You are the soul. How is that possible? You
know, when my hand gets cut, I feel pain. I am my body. When the body will die,
I will die. So, I am the body. Then, you know, we think, oh, ok, my hand gets
cut. Hand feels pain. I feel pain. But who am I? You know, am I the nerves? Am I
the brain? But the brain is also just nerves like this. Where is the
experiencer? The br..., expe..., the brain is just made of essentially the same
components that the nerves are here made up of. So, now, this is not
experiencing. I am experiencing. So, who is the I who is experiencing? We do not
know. So that, we may say, yes, this, this, a, source of consciousness is
something different from all these nerves, and neurons, and all the cells in the
body. That is the soul. And then, that way, by contemplation, by discussion, we
may hear, also, about people who remember their past lives. People who have
their out of, out of body experiences. And by this sort of discussion, ok, yes,
I am not the body. I am the soul. So, some, we have to discuss, we have to
contemplate them, we understand. Or for that matter, we may find that, God is
not impersonal. But personal. Now, if we had been, say, if we had been brought
up in background, where we had t..., we had consumed God is impersonal. Then, it
may take some time. So, we have to contemplate, discuss. Then, we will ge...,
develop that faith. Now, there are some that we will realise after years of
practice and purification. So, for example, if we want to know how the gopis'
love for Krishna is not material, but spiritual. You know, now, gopis, they look
like beautiful young woman. Krishna is beautiful young man. And they are both,
you know, a, going out at night, in the middle of night, alone, with nobody to
shepherd, nobody to supervise. And what are they doing? You know. They are
dancing and singing. You know, this is what many people do in parties. What
people do in, not just parties. But people do this, what people do in, you know,
immoral fantasies, also. So, you know, Go..., how is Krishna's love for the
gopis transcendental? How is it pure? So, now, we may initially theoretially
accept it, you know, in principle, accept it. Because the great saintly devotees
are saying so. So, ok, I accept, it is pure. But over a period of time, as we
become purified, you know, we start under..., seeing. We do not see the gopis
first as woman and Krishna as man. We see the gopis as devotees and Krishna as
a Lord. And then, we understand that what is happening is the reciprocation of
love. So, just as Krishna may embrace Hanumanji. You know, in Lord Ramayana, it
is Hanumanji. Similarly, the law, Krishna may embrace Radharani. The gopis. And
there is, there is actually simply reciprocation of love. That is the essential
aspect of that Lo..., there is the Lord and the devotee. Now, the forms are not
unimportant. They are important. Because there is the rasa being reciprocated
over there. But it is all pure and transcendental. When we understand this,
then, this, it takes purification, also. Because as soon as we see male and
female. That is what we per..., per..., first see. Male and female. We do not
see Lord and devotee. So, it may take some time. But over a period of time, we
will understand it. Or another aspect may be, sense gratification leads to
misery. You know. We all hear it. But internally, we secretly disbelieve it. No.
I said sense gratification leads to enjoyment. Yeah. I have got some misery. But
actually, that is an exception. Actually, sense gratification leads to
enjoyment. Maybe, I did some things wrong. That is why I am going to, got into
misery. But when I do it right, then there is so much enjoyment available. So,
it takes purification to see how m..., sense gratification will lead to misery,
always. It is intrinsic in it. You know, sense pleasure will always lead to
misery. Because it is foreign to our nature. And it alienates us away from our
innate spiritual joyfulness. So, therefore, this will take purification to us.
We may follow right now because it is a regulative principle. But to become
convinced, convinced of it, it may take time. Now, I am just giving these as
examples. But the point is that, there, spiritual knowledge falls in different
categories. And there may be some f..., which we may never understand. We may
never actually understand. So, for example, a, we may say that, you know, why
the soul rebel against God? Now, there are many th..., solid reasons. The soul
has free will. Soul has not explored life apart from Krishna. The soul wants to,
you know, you know, a, enjoy in a way, you know, serve in a way that is not
possible in the spiritual world. So, the soul becomes Brahma. And then, after
that, the soul comes under illusion and falls. Or the soul actually is in a
dream state. And soul is actually, it is just a consciousness that projected.
The soul is not actually fallen. The consciousness only is projected. Whatever.
There are different explanations like that. And they are, to some extent,
satisfactory. But ultimately, we cannot know it. Or for that matter, how exactly
is Vedic cosmology? That is described in the Fifth Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam.
We may not be able to understand it. So, now, when we start studying scripture.
If we start questioning everything and having doubts about everything, we will
get outselves into a lot of trouble. Why? Because doubts can just, you know, a,
a, suck our energy. So, how will we develop faith? Ok, let me focus on what is
important. What is central. What is essential. Let me focus on that. And let me
put other things aside for the time being. So, how do we do this? By recognising
that this is the way we work in every field of knowledge, practically speaking.

If a student starts studying quantum physics. It is not that, on the first day,
the student will understand everything about quantum physics. Even if the person
is a doctorate stu..., a, student, and that person is, even doctorate students
are still struggling to understand the concepts of quantum physics. It is so
complex. So, we understand some basic things which are vital for us. And as I
understand these things. Ok. These things, we will understand in second year.
These things, we will understand in third year. These things, we will understand
in forth year. So, there is a structure given to us. And we also accept that
there has to be a progression in understanding. So, similarly, we have to
understand that there are some things which will, we will have to, their
understanding, we will have to postpone. So, often, our faith will get checked
and choked if we do not, you know, categorise the knowledge in this way. Ok,
this is, not, it will take me some time to understand this. Let me put this
aside for the time being. Let me focus on this right now. Let me focus on this.
Let me focus on this. And like that, we will advance. So, once, Srila Prabhupada
was asked by some devotees. Prabhupada, when we t..., preach, when we speak with
the scholars and we tell them that, you know, ug..., Maharaja Agrasen, the
grandson, grandfather, the g..., ruling, of Krishna, indirectly, the grandfather
of Krishna. You know, that generation. And who was the ruler of the Yaduvamsha.
He says, he had so many large number of soldiers bo..., as body guards. You
know, tu..., millions and millions. Billions. Trillion. Whatever. Acc...,
astronomical number it is. There can be some technicalities about his
translation. But the number is huge. So, when they, when we tell this to the
scholars, the scholars laugh. And they say. Where did they live? Where did they
have their toilets? Dwarka is such a small place. How did they manage? So, now,
Prabhupada could have replied. Prabhupada could have said, you know, God can do
anything. God's potency is supreme. You should have faith in God. But
Prabhupada's reply was very pragmatic. He said, you know, among all the
thousands of verses in the Bhagavatam, was that the only thing that you found to
speak to the scholars? Was it the only thing that you found to speak to the
scholars? It is not essential to speak that. There are so many more universal
and more intelligible things to speak. For example, human, a, pure love is what
will satisfy the heart.

        sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

1.2.6 is there or so many other p..., sections are there. Where dharma is meant
for not sense gratification, but for liberation. Many sections of the Bhagavatam
are such that deep thinkers can appreciate it. So, what is Srila Prabhupada
saying? That actually, there are certain aspects which are not central. They are
not critical. So, they are a part of the pastime. They are a part of the
Bhagavatam. But they are not necessarily of central importance. So, we do not
focus on them. So, in every tradition, there are things that are central. And
there are things that are peripheral. So, when we focus on the central, we move
forward, make piritual advancement. If we, when we obsess about the peripheral,
then we cannot make spiritual advancement. We cannot keep moving forward. So,
therefore, when we want to develop our faith, we have to understand, what is
central. And let me focus on that. Let me try to understand it. Let me develop
myself accordingly. "śraddhāvāḻ labhate jñānaṁ". So, we are not necessarily
expected to have unreasonable faith. The faith that we need to have is
reasonable. But reasonable faith does not mean that everything will be
understood immediately. It will take time. And there is a, a step by step
progression is also entirely acceptable. As it is and any of the branch, branch.
So, now, Krishna wi..., will talk about the consequences of faithlessness. Let
us look at that in the next verse now. So:

        ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca
        saṁśayātmā vinaśyati
        nāyaṁ loko ’sti na paro
        na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ

So, "ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca". One is who is ignorant. One who is faithless. One
who is dubiou..., doubtful. "saṁśayātmā vinaśyati". Such a person will be
destroyed. Will fall away. Fall back. So, the spiritual prospects of such a
person will be destroyed. "nāyaṁ loko ’sti na paro". Neither in this world, nor
in the next world. "paro". "na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ". The person will not make
spiritual advancement. "na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ". So, "ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca".
So, let us look at this. Krishna talks about three categories of people over
here. "ajñaḥ" is people who have no knowledge. "aśraddadhānaḥ" is people who
have knowledge, but no faith. And "saṁśayātmā" is people who have knowledge.
They practice, also. But they are always filled with doubt. And because of being
filled with doubt, they, the doubt, you know, sabotages their spiritual
advancement. So, "ajñaś", so, Krishna is saying, that these three kind of
people, they cannot make spiritual advancement. First is "ajñaś". When people
just live like animals. They just do not bother, only, about spiritual life.
They do not think about God. You know. I have come to this world. I will leave.
And die. And that is all. The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad laments the kind,
this kind of life. Those who:

        aviditvāsmāḻ lokāt praiti sa kṛpaṇaḥ

We discussed this in the purport of 2.7. You know, so, those who just live like
animals, not inquiring about spiritual life at all. That is the first level. The
second level is "ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca". Those who know. They acquire
knowledge. But they do not have faith. Yes, I know about Bhagavad Gita. But I
cannot believe all the stuff. Soul stuff. Core stuff. I do not care about this.
"aśraddadhānaḥ". And then, "saṁśayātmā". "saṁśayātmā" means that people
practice. Hey, I chant Hare Krishna. So, will this chanting really work? So,
some people, you know, w..., we, they have some doubt. We address the doubt.
Again, after week, they will come, one week, they will come back with same
doubt. But will this chanting work? You know, this is just sound vibration,
uttering, uttering again and again? What is it going to do? Or, this deity, how
can it be God? "saṁśayātmā". "saṁśayātmā". So, they are practicing the process.
But their doubt, just like, suppose, somebody is walking along a path. But there
is a shackle tied to their feet. Then, what happens? They move forward. And as
soon as the shackle's, a, extreme length is reached. They, tuck. They are
checked. And it pulls them back. They are pulled back. Then, move forward.
Again, shackles and come. And they are pulled back. So, like that, some people
are checked by their doubts. So, their a..., a..., attempts to make spiritual
advancement are sabotaged. So, you know, "saṁśayātmā". And Krishna says, "nāyaṁ
loko ’sti na paro". That means, neither in this life, nor in the next, people
can, actually, these people can make spiritual, you know, they can be happy.
Why? Because happiness is ultimately a fruit of spiritual health. The soul is
happy when, by nature. By nature, the soul is happy. And when the soul is
resituated in its original nature, then the soul will live happily. But when the
soul is situated in its proper nature. Soul is living unnaturely misidentifying
with the body, at that time, happiness just depends on the flickering of the
modes. Sometimes, there is happiness. Most of the time, there is boredom. S...,
sometimes, there is misery. So, that is how we live. Now, when a person is
trying to return to the state of spiritual health. At that time, there is some
rigor that is required for the treatment. But if somebody says, I will not take
the treatment. Then, the person stays in the diseased condition. And the
diseased conseado..., condition, there is no happiness. So, if a patient does
not put faith in the doctor, who is the loser? It is the patient that is a
loser. Not the doctor. So, "saṁśayātmā vinaśyati". Krishna says, such a person
falls back. Such a person cannot make spiritual advancement. So, now, here, when
we talk about doubt. Let us understand one important principle of elimination
versus suspension. So, now, there, there are certain cases when by
understanding, by purification, doubts will become eliminated. But till the
doubts become eliminated, it is he..., it is helpful to suspend judgement. To
suspend the doubts. Just like in a court, c..., so, in a court, when a ju...,
when a case is going on. If a..., all the parties are not presented a proper
evidence, then the court decides to suspend the judgement. So, in some cases,
when the, all the evidence is crystal clear, then there is elimination. Ok.
Decides, th..., a, please, thrown out. So that, so, there is, can be
elimination. And there can be suspension. So, what we should be able to do in
our spiritual life is at least be able to bring about suspension of judgement.
Suspension. Yes, if there are important..., I do not understand. How is it
possible that Krishna is, actually, five thousand years ago, the academic
scholars say actually, you know, Krishna was probably two thousand, two
thousands, five hundred years ago. Bhagavad Gita was spoken at that time. So,
and those scholars are intelligent people. How can they be wrong? So, then, ok.
Now, does it really matter as a central principle that chanting Hare Krishna
will benefit me, will purify me, whether Krishna appeared f..., two thousand,
five hundred years ago. Krishna appeared five thousand years ago. And, you know,
because the process of purification through connection with God in devotion is
an eternal process.

So, now, so, if, now, actually, if we study the evidence seriously, and talk
with a, a, the concerned, you know, devotee scholars, we will find that, the
basis for the scholars' claims are quite tenuous. There is nothing, you know,
very solid in their claims over the dates. But whatever it is, if we are not
able to make the judgement right now. If we are not able to eliminate the doubt,
suspend it. Is it really important? No. I am not practicing Krishna
Consciousness because Krishna appeared five thousand years ago. I am practicing
Krishna Consciousness because the process of Krishna Consciousness is helping
me. It is making me better, a, making me a better human being. It is helping me
to become m..., m..., m..., more self-controlled. It is helping me to be more
responsible, more committed, more compassionate. So, it, whatever ways we have
found Krishna Consciousness helps me. That is why I am practicing it. So, when
we understand this point that, ok, this really does not matter for me. So, let
me just suspend it. And now, suspending does not mean that we have to put it in
perpetual suspension. You know, when we meet some concerns, some devotees who
are expert in that particular field, we can talk with them. And we will be able
to get, a, move the doubt from the category of suspension to the category of
elimination. This will happen over a period of time. But the important point is
not let doubts choke our spiritual life. We keep on practicing spiritual life
irrespective of what doubt, doubts we have. And we focus on what are the aspects
that give me faith. And by addressing those, one by one by one, we develop
greater faith. And the more, the greater the faith that we develop, the more is
a spiritual advancement that we are inspired to make. More we commit ourselves,
the more spiritual, spiritual advancement, we become purified. Our understanding
increases. Our doubts go away, also. So, in this way, we move forward. But
Krishna gives a warning over here. That if a person is faithless, the person will
not get happiness in this life or the next. Then, person will be lost. So, here,
Krishna, you know, talks, instructs by contrast. By u..., use instruction by
contrast. By saying that we should have, by, He telling that, we should faith
and not have doubts. Now, another question that may come up is, you know, when
we say, we should faith. So, is faith really a matter of choice? Is, is, a, so,
faith something that I just have? Or is faith a matter of grace? Is faith
something which is given by God? Or is faith something which is chosen by us?
So, actually, it is both. It is both. Now, we could say that faith is like
muscles. Now, some people have a very healthy body by birth, or by destiny, or
whatever. But there are others, who can also develop their muscles by exercise.
By ru..., by rigorous discipline. So, same way, with respect to our spiritual
life, also, you know, some of us, based on the past karma that we may have done,
we may have more faith or less faith. But we can choose to increase our faith.
How do we increase our faith? By doing the activities that give us faith. Yeah.
So, this is an article on this topic. Is faith in Krishna a matter of human
choice or divine grace? So, now, for example, Krishna will talk that, a, in this
section, Krishna is telling have faith. And when we see in 4.42.

"Krishna refers to faith as a matter of human choice when he urges that we use
the sword of knowledge to cut doubts to pieces."

So, we will see this. Krishna says have faith. So, faith is defintely matter of
choice. As I said, it is like muscles. We, you know, do exercise. Our muscles
will develop. So, we know there are certain activities if you do it, you will
develop faith. By studying scriptures properly, you know, that will help me
develop my faith. If I study, you know, the, if I hear the classes attentively.
That will help me develop my faith. If I associate with devotees and see their
commitment. See their, you know, detachment. See their devotion. That also helps
me develop my faith. So, we all know which are the activities which help me to
develop faith. And as we also know which are the activities that cause doubt.
Hmm. If I just go on internet and type, ISKCON controversies. You know, there, I
will find so many controversies. That this happened over here. That fall down
happened over there. This is wrong. That is wrong. Now, I have to decide for
myself. You know, did I come to ISKCON for gaining Krishna or finding
controversies? You know, if I have come for finding controversies, you know,
Krishna will give me that. The..., so, Krishna is a kalpataru. He is a desire
fulfilling tree. Krishna's institution is also like that. You know, if we want
controversies, Krishna will give so many controversies, more than what we will
find in the material world, also. So, m..., it depends on us. What do I want?
So, we know that there are certain dou..., activities which are, increase our
doubts. So, somebody may say, no, but I should be well-informed. Well, if, you
know, well, is reading gossip on the internet the way to become well-informed?
No. Anybody can write anything on the internet. How much of it is true, who
knows. And actually, to be truly, truly well-informed, we should be
well-informed about the principles that Krishna is telling in the Bhagavad Gita.
They are eternal principles. And they are transformational principles. It is not
that, say, some news of du..., dubious authencity on the internet is, you know,
o..., o..., of greater authenci..., of great value? It is not. It is not going to
make us well-informed. It may well make us mis..., misinformed. So, therefore,
we know certain activities cause us doubts. Then, put those activities aside.
And focus on the activities that help us to develop faith. So, by choosing
activities which promote sp..., ha..., faith. And avoiding activities that cause
doubt, we will move forward in spiritual life. You know, that way, we can
develop our faith. Now, of course, some doubts are a, critical. And they have to
be adjusted. And they have to be addressed. Then, we should, you know, u...,
address them through the proper sources. Or find out, who is de..., which
devotees are learned in any particular field. Are there any books written on
that field? So, for example, if we have a ques..., question about dating. Or the
Vedic scriptures. Then, we can, Devamrita Maharaja has written a book called
"Searching for Vedic India". Vedic civilisation, quite detailed. Great detail.
If we had doubts about, say, cosmology. Sadaputa Prabhu has written a book
called "Vedic Cosmography" and then the "Mysteries of the sacred universe".
Which are good books again. Which explain how the Vedic cosmos is even i..., is
intelligible even from those who have been born, brought up with modern
scientific education. If we have questions about theory of evolution, then there
are books like "Forbidden Archeology", on "Human devolution" written by
Drutakarmā Prabhu. So, there are books which are written by specialised
devotees. And we can read those books. And we get the doubts addressed. So, by
doing activities which nourish our faith, our faith will grow. So, with this
aspect, fai..., in this sense, faith is a matter of human choice. But along with
that, faith is also a gift. Faith is also a result of grace. So, m..., Krishna
says in 7.21, we will come to that later. Krishna says:

"he bestows faith according to our desires."

        yo yo yāṁ yāṁ tanuṁ bhaktaḥ
        śraddhayārcitum icchati
        tasya tasyācalāṁ śraddhāṁ
        tām eva vidadhāmy aham

So, now, hmm, in, in the Bhagavatam, also. In the famous, you know, divinity and
divine service verses, in the Srimad Bhagavatam, 1.2.21, it is, it is said that,
we, as we keep practicing devotional service. Then, what will happen?

        bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś
        chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ
        kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi
        dṛṣṭa evātmanīśvare

So, it says that "chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ". All our doubts will go away. Our
faith will become rock solid. So, so, then, there are certain times when we will
get some spiritual experiences. We will get some brilliant inspiational
insights. And they will remove our doubts in just amazing, of amazing fleshes of
insight, or deepening of conviction. You know, this can happen sometimes, a, in
certain specific moments of, spec..., special moments. Or that can also be a
gradual transformation that happens. So, either way, faith is, or both a matter
of human choice and a matter of grace. So, for grace, we have to wait. But
choice, we can exercise right now. All of us can choose to do activities that
enhance faith. And Krishna's grace will come. And that time, our faith will
become extremely strong. So, in this way, we can all move forward in our
spiritual life by, you know, developing and strengthening our faith. So, let us,
you know, look at the last verses of this chapter. So, Prabhupada says:

"One should therefore follow in the footsteps of great ācāryas who are in the
disciplic succession and thereby attain success."

What does it mean following in the footsteps of "ācāryas"? You know, we put
faith in them. And more importantly, we put faith not just in them, but in the
process that they have given us. And experience the transformation that they are
telling. They are pointing towards. And then, our faith will develop. Now, you
know, now, Krishna will talk about how Arjuna should act. So, He has talked
about "jñāna" until now. Now, He is talking about acting in "jñāna".

        yoga-sannyasta-karmāṇaṁ
        jñāna-sañchinna-saṁśayam
        ātmavantaṁ na karmāṇi
        nibadhnanti dhanañ-jaya

So, "yoga-sannyasta-karmāṇaṁ". So, by the practice of karma-yoga, one, who does
"sannyasta-karmāṇaṁ". One who gives up doing karma, doing fruitive activity.
That does not man, mean one gives up all karma. But one gives up doing fruitive
activity. "jñāna-sañchinna-saṁśayam". And all of one's doubts will actually,
doing karma-yoga purify me? That kind of doubts in this context. Krishna says,
"jñāna-sañchinna". By knowledge, the doubts get removed. And then, "ātmavantaṁ
na karmāṇi". When one becomes situated at the spiritual platform. "ātmavantaṁ".
Then, for such a person, "na karmāṇi nibadhnanti", such a person will not be
bound by "karmāṇaṁ", by karma. So, "dhanañ-jaya". Arjun..., Arjuna, you are the
accumulator of wealth. You will attain the supreme wealth if you do like this.
Now, it is interesting. Krishna uses the word karma twice in this. In, you know,
41A, He is using. "yoga-sannyasta-karmāṇaṁ". "karmāṇaṁ". And then, He says,
"ātmavantaṁ na karmāṇi". So, He is saying that, you know, actually, at a
superficial reading of it may say that, Krishna is saying. By yoga, do sannyas
of karma. But if one is doing sannyas of karma. Then, there is no question of
"ātmavantaṁ na karmāṇi". So, what is Krishna saying over here? Here, first,
karma refers to fruitive activity. And second karma refers to karmic reactions.
Do you remember? We discussed about the four meanings of the word karma. Karma
can mean action. Karma can mean reaction. Karma can mean the system of
action-reaction. Karma can mean the, you know, fruitive activities, sukarma.
47:26
