Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yNOEUpGZIMA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=psA5oxRcJ-y-3JmPT5n4GaGbMVx8MTU0ODQ4NzEwOEAxNTQ4NDAwNzA4&v=yNOEUpGZIMA&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_047_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_01_Text_37_to_46_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome. So, we will be discussin the B..., last part of the
Bhagavad Gita's first chapter, starting from 1.37. And we will go till 1.46
today. So, let us look at the sections of the Bhagavad Gita. Here, we will see.
Bhagavad Gita has two parts. Observing the armies, Sanyan Vikshan Yoga. 1 to 26.
And Arjuna Vishada Yoga is 27 to 46, Arjuna's lamentation. And in this, we have,
the first reason was compassion, which we discussed. Then after that, the next
reason is enjoyment. So, compassion was, Arjuna is feeling, how can my, how, how
can I let my "sva-janaṁ" die? They are all going to die. And they are all my
relatives. Then, the next is, then, enjoyment is what will be the enjoyment for
me if m..., those with whom I would want to enjoy, they are all dead. And then,
36 is:

        pāpam evāśrayed asmān

That is we discussed, started discussing of, with sinful reactions. These are
"ātatāyinaḥ". They are aggressors. But they are also relatives. And it is my
duty to protect my relatives. That is the reason we discussed. And then 39 to 43
is destruction of family traditions. And after that, 44, 45, 46, last three are
more or less, he is saying that I cannot fight. That is the conclusion of the
chapter. So, let us look at 36 onwards now. So, we will see that:

        yady apy ete na paśyanti
        lobhopahata-cetasaḥ

"yady apy ete na paśyanti", Arjuna is speaking over here in 37th verse.

        yady apy ete na paśyanti
        lobhopahata-cetasaḥ
        kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ
        mitra-drohe ca pātakam

        kathaṁ na jñeyam asmābhiḥ
        pāpād asmān nivartitum
        kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ
        prapaśyadbhir janārdana

So, this is the only verse in the Bhagavad Gita, a set of verses where the same
line is repeated in successive verses. So, there are four parts. So, twenty...,
37C and 37D are the same. 37C is "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". And 37D is also
"kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". And there are other sections also in the Bhagavad Gita
where parts of the verse, verses are repeated. For example, most famous example
9.34 and 18.65. 9.34 is:

        man-manā bhava mad-bhakto
        mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru
        mām evaiṣyasi yuktvaivam
        ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ

So, actually, two point five parts of the verses are the same. In 18.65:

        man-manā bhava mad-bhakto
        mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru
        mām evaiṣyasi ...

Till here, two point five part of the verses are same. And then, after that, two,
two, two point five out of four, it is, it is more than in, you know, sixt...,
or more than sixty-two percent of the verses are, is the same.

        mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te
        pratijāne priyo ’si me

So, "pratijāne priyo ’si me". Actually, what is being described here is that the
verses are the same, but import is more on, in 9.44 is, emphasize more on the
devotee staying committed to practice of devotional service. And in 18.65, the
emphasize is more on Krishna expressing His affection for the devotee. And
reassuring that the devotee will surely be protected. So, now, in this case,
Arjuna is contrasting to people. The same line is used because he is contrasting
to st..., s..., kinds of thought. And their perception of the same event. So,
the event is "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". So, "kula-kṣaya", the destruction of
"kula", destruction of dynasty. "kṛtaṁ", those who do it. "doṣaṁ", they are
faulty. In fact, the destroying one's dynasty itself is a fault. Now, there are
two different people, the Kauravas and the Pandavas who are going to perceiving
this differently. So, Arjuna might be sensing that there is a possible
anticipation to his o..., o..., objection to his argument. So, we will get sin
if we kill these aggressors. Then, thereafter, if you do not kill them, they
will kill you. And that is what they have been trying to do for so long. Arjuna
is also acknowleding that when in the previous verse, he said, "ātatāyinaḥ".
They are aggressors. So, if they are getting k..., they are getting ki..., they
are going to kill. Then, what to do? "yady apy ete na paśyanti". So, he is
saying that they are actually blinded. Because they are blinded. "yady apy ete
na paśyanti". "ete", these people. Even if they are not able to see "paśyanti".
What are not, what, why are they not able to see? "lobhopahata-cetasaḥ". So,
"lobha" is greed. "upahata" means abducted away. "cetasaḥ", their
consciousness is abducted away by greed. So, Duryodhana is blinded by greed. And
he is not thinking of transgressing the "kula-dharmāḥ". He is meant to protect
his relatives. But he is out here to destroy his relatives.

        lobhopahata-cetasaḥ
        kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ

So, "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". That the "doṣaṁ", the fault of killing one's
relatives, "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ". What, "mitra-drohe ca pātakam". And what is the
cause of this? Actually, this is all resulted from quarrel, friendly quarrels,
actually. You know, Duryodhana, the Kauravas and Pandavas grew up as cousins. Of
course, they gr..., they did not, they did not born as babies together. They
were together for some time, you know, only after they had grown up a little
bit. So, Duryodhana actually, there is a background to Duryodhana's infatuation
with the kingdom and he is being a spoiled child. Pan..., because Dhṛtarāṣṭra
was blind. So, Dhṛtarāṣṭra did not become the king. Pandu became the king. Pandu
went around and conquered the world, got a lot of treasure. But then his mind
shifted. He felt no longer any charm in world..., in the role of a king. So, he
said that I want to go to the forest, to the foothills of the Himalaya. Then,
stay there in ascetic way of life. So, his wives felt they could not live
without him. So, both Kuntī and Madri said that we will also come with you. So,
then both of them went with him. And at that time, Pandu made Dhṛtarāṣṭra the
king. You know, not exactly the king, but the in-charge, like regent. So, now,
when he was the king over there, acting king, so, at that time, he got attached
to the kingdom. He had more or less reconciled to the faith that he would never
officially be the king. But he was getting the honor of the king. And then as
Pandu was living in the forest. At that time, Pandu had no attach..., no, no
attachment to the kingdom. But then he felt that I have responsibility. I have
to am..., make sure that the dynasty goes on. And I have to beget children. And
then, there is a long story. But eventually, the Pandavas were born. And then
later on, after the birth of the Pandavas. This will, the Pandavas were staying
in the forest only. And Duryodhana, along with his 99 brothers, were born. And
they were staying in the palace here. So, now, because Pandu had left the wo...,
left more or less. And there was no indication that he had given that he was
coming back. So, everybody in the palace thought that Duryodhana was going to
going..., become the next king. And because he was like, he was like the
prince who was going to become the king, he was, he was pampered and spoiled.
And he got every single desire of his fulfilled. And he became very proud,
arrogant, and very demanding because of becoming a spoiled child. And although,
Bhishma saw the faults in him. But he felt that he will grow, outgrow those
faults. So, he is, the child is going to become the king. So, they indulged him,
quite a bit. However, when the Pandavas came back. So, because of an unexpected
misfortune, Pandu passed away. And then, Madri went in, went with him in the
funeral fire, in sati. And then, Kuntī came back. Now, when Kuntī and the
Pandavas came back, then, you know, they were welcome back. Of course, it, they
were, everybody was grief struck. But they were, after the g..., morning period
was over, then they all welcomed the Pandavas. And they found that the behavior
of Yudhiṣṭhira in particular, and the Pandavas in general, was a, was a very
pleasant contrast to the behavior of Duryodhana in particular, and the Kauravas
in general. You know, the Kauravas were haughty. While the Pandavas were gentle.
The Kauravas were insensitive. The Pandavas were very sensitive. The Kauravas
were demanding. The Pandavas were accommodating. The Kauravas were, would care
only for themselves. The Pandavas would care for others. And the Kauravas were
ungodly. The Pandavas were godly.

So, because of this contrast, soon, the Pandavas became en..., became endear to
the citizens, the courtiers, and Bhishma Pitamah also. Everyone fell almost in
love with the Pandavas. And as this progressed, Duryodhana has started resenting
at. He said I was the center of attention. So, Duryodhana realised that not only
he have, was he no longer the center of attention. But even his future claim as
the king was threatened. So, he felt as if the Pandavas had usurped his claim to
the kingdom. He had expected to become the king. But now the Pandavas had come
back. And because Yudhiṣṭhira had been born earlier than Duryodhana. So,
Yudhiṣṭhira's claim was there. And anyway, Yu..., Pandu was being the king. So,
his son would normally have become the king. But even if there had been some
conflict because Dhṛtarāṣṭra was the older brother. But among the generation
ration, Yudhiṣṭhira was older. So, from that time onward, Duryodhana nursed
envy and greed in his heart. And because of that, he felt practically no
affection for the Pandavas. He felt only anger, only envy. And he wanted the
kingdom at all cost.

So, "lobhopahata-cetasaḥ". You know, actually, although the Kaurava..., Pandavas
were the brothers of the Kauravas, cousins. But Duryodhana never saw them as
brothers. He saw them as enemies. Enemies whose downfall, humiliation, and
destruction became the goal of his life. And he was living in this way, he did
conspiracy after conspiracy. And finally now, there is a final confrontation.
So, co..., the, Arjuna is thinking that Duryodhana has been blinded. And his
brothers also similarly are blinded. But, although they are not able to see,
"mitra-drohe ca pātakam". Actually, they were cousin..., they were friends. They
were cousins. Childhood, they could have gone as friend. But "mitra-drohe ca
pātakam". Quarrel, and their quarrel had grown, grown, grown, grown. And it had
become intorable.

        kathaṁ na jñeyam asmābhiḥ
        pāpād asmān nivartitum

So, he says, they are blinded. They are blinded. "lobhopahata-cetasaḥ". But
"lo...", "jñeyam asmābhiḥ". we know by "asmābhiḥ" is us. We are "jñeyam", we
know. So, when we know that "pāpād asmān nivartitum". So, when we know, "ku...",
the "ku...", "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". We know the fault of destroying our
dynasty. We are able to see. "prapaśyadbhir". So, there is a contrast between
"opahata-cetasaḥ" and "prapaśyadbhir". "opahata-cetasaḥ" is in 37B. And there,
he is saying that, they are, they are con..., they are not able to see. "ete na
paśyanti". So, there is "na paśyanti" there. And here, there is "prapaśyadbhir".
So, "paśyad", the same word is there. They are not able to see. But we can see.
So, when we can see, how, "kathaṁ", "pāpād asmān nivartitum". How can we engage
in the sinful activity? We can see. And because we can see, we must not engage
in this perc..., sinful activity. So, Arjuna is taking the high moral ground
over here. And he is saying that even if it is true that the Kauravas have, are
blinded by greed, we are not blinded. And even if they do wrong, we should not
wrong. So, we should, we should see. "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". And not act
accordingly. No matter, Arjuna is thinking that, yes, you know, because we will
get "pāpād asmān". We can see this is "pāp". And because we can see this "pāp",
we will get the reactions more. And they are doing "pāp". But they cannot s...,
they are blinded. So, they cannot see this "pāp". They will also get the
reactions. But when we can see that the reactions are coming, why should we do
it? Now, as he is thinking about "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ", at the fault of
destroying the dynasty. And the thought comes in mind. He starts thinking, not
just in terms of the next life. What is going to happen to them when they get
the sinful reactions? He starts thinking what will happen to the dynasty itself,
after, after this generation? What will happen to the successive generations? He
starts thinking that there will be chaos over there also. So, his thought is
now, is four-fold. First, he thinks, first thing, compassion. Oh, why should my
relatives die? Then, second question says that, why, if my relatives die, how
will I enjoy? And he starts thinking. Ok, now, this is, that, the, so, now, this
is in this lifetime. Or this is in the present, or in the near future, near
future. That, ok, we will all die. Why should they die? They, I love them. How
can I kill them? How can I be the cause of them dying? Then, if they die, how
will I enjoy? That is also in the near future. Now, after that, he is thinking
about a slightly more distant future. Or, of their next life. He says, we will
get the "pāp". We will do the "pāp" and get the reactions. How will we deal with
this? And now, he starts thinking, apart from us, what is the legacy that we
will leave? What will happen to our dynasty? And he talks about it in the next
verse. So, now, he talks about what will happen in this dy..., our life after
the dynasty is destroyed.

        kula-kṣaye praṇaśyanti
        kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥ
        dharme naṣṭe kulaṁ kṛtsnam
        adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta

So, "kula-kṣaye praṇaśyanti". So, when the "kula-k...", "kula", when the dynasty
is destroyed.

        ... praṇaśyanti
        kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥ
        
So, along with that, what will happen? The "kula-dharmāḥ" will be destroyed.
"sanātanāḥ". "praṇaśyanti". So, "kula-kṣaye" is the destruction of family. And
then "kula-dharmāḥ" means every dynasty has its own duties, their "dharmāḥ". And
that will also be destroyed. Now, here, there is a, there is a sort of
antithesis or contrast over here. He is using the word "praṇaśyanti", which
refers to destruction. And "sanātanāḥ", that which is eternal. So, how can that
which is eternal be destroyed? So, actually, that, that which is eternal cannot
be destroyed. And that which is destroyed is not eternal. So, here, Arjuna is
overcome by illusion. And he is thinking that the "kula-dharmāḥ" is "sanātanāḥ"
"dharmāḥ". The "kula-dharmāḥ" is not "sanātanāḥ" for the atma. It is only the
bhakti, the seva "dharmāḥ", the bhakti "dharmāḥ" that is "sanātanāḥ". So, in
that sense, that is, actually, "kula-dharmāḥ" is not "sanātanāḥ". But at the
same time, "kula-dharmāḥ" is important. Because the, in the Vedic culture, there
are two levels of "dharmāḥ". There is apara "dharmāḥ". And there is para
"dharmāḥ". apara "dharmāḥ" is subordinate religion, lower religion. Para
"dharmāḥ" is superior religion, supreme religion. So, apara "dharmāḥ" is also
important. You know, the, for the spouses, to be faithful to each other. For the
parents, to take care of the children. For the children, to care for their
elderly parents. For people, for relatives, to care for each other. This is also
"dharmāḥ", this "kula-dharmāḥ". One has to do this. Because that is also a part
of our, not just familial duties, but it is also part of our apara "dharmāḥ"
level of duty. So, "kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥ". It is not "sanātanāḥ" in the sense
that it is not the eternal nature of the soul. But some kind of obligation has
to be there in life. Some kind of dutifulness has to be there in, in society,
for society to, to go on. So, when people's lives are destructed, what will
happen? 

        dharme naṣṭe kulaṁ kṛtsnam
        adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta

So, when the "kula-dharmāḥ" is destroyed. So, "kula-dharmāḥ" is important. And
there has to be some kind of "kula-dharmāḥ" in society. So, in that sense, it is
also eternal. Eternal sense, as long as creation is there. Some kind of
"kula-dharmāḥ" is there. Now, that may be according to scripture. That may not
be according scripture. That is different. But when "dharme naṣṭe kulaṁ
kṛtsnam", when that "dharme", which is according to scripture, which was there
at the time of Pandavas:

        ... naṣṭe kulaṁ kṛtsnam
        adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta

Then, "adharmaḥ" will raise. So, actually, in the world, "dharmaḥ" and
"adharmaḥ" are always in a conflict. "dharmaḥ" and "adharmaḥ" are always in a
conflict. And "dharmaḥ" is always under attack from "adharmaḥ". And if "dharmaḥ"
becomes weak. If "dharmaḥ" is destroyed. And immediately "adharmaḥ" will take
over. This happens in our heart. This happens in society. This happens all over
the world. Not just all over the world, it happens all over the universe. Not
just all over the universe, it happens all over all the universes. There is
always a battle between "dharmaḥ" and "adharmaḥ". So, now, "adharmo ’bhibhavaty
uta", "adharmaḥ" will become predominant. Now, for us, "dharmaḥ" and "adharmaḥ"
may just be concepts. Now, ok, what is the social consequences? What is the,
what will happen if "adharmaḥ" becomes predominant? Then, he describes in the
next:

        adharmābhibhavāt kṛṣṇa
        praduṣyanti kula-striyaḥ
        strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya
        jāyate varṇa-saṅkaraḥ

So, "adharmābhibhavāt kṛṣṇa", when there is no dharma, then "praduṣyanti
kula-striyaḥ" that the "striyaḥ", the women who are in the "kula", they will be
"praduṣyanti". They will become contaminated. They will become polluted. And
when they are polluted, "strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya", "Vṛ...", Ar..., Krishna is
a descendant of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty. So, He is called as "vārṣṇeya".

        strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya

Then:

        jāyate varṇa-saṅkaraḥ

Then, "varṇa-saṅkaraḥ" will be born. This is a very deep of c..., thought, which
we may not think about in our, with our current co..., conceptual and cultural
framework. Actually, in the Vedic culture, bringing, bringing forth good
dynasty, good progeny, and continuing the dynasty is considered a very important
responsibility. And for that purpose, having good marriages, and having healthy
families is important. Now, if the, when the dharma is not protected. What
does that mean? That means say, it can happen in various ways. Here, the
ksatriyas are going to fight. And ksatriyas will kill each other. And the
ksatriyas are killed, then unscrupulous men will assume power. And when they
assume power, they will exploit the women. And when they exploit the women, from
that, what will happen is, "varṇa-saṅkaraḥ" will be born. So, what is
"varṇa-saṅkaraḥ"? This unwanted progeny. Now, what do we mean by unwanted
progeny? Nowadays, people think unwanted progeny means, oh, you know, we did
some birth control. But then, the baby we did not expect came up. And then, we
decided that we could not do abortion. So, the child was born. So, people think
unwanted, unwanted child means that we lose some birth control. And when birth
control does not work, and the child comes, that is unwanted. But that is not
the context of Krishna and Arjuna at the time, five thousands years go. Unwanted
progeny means, actually, progeny with poor consciousness. Progeny with degraded
mindsets. So, actually, it is a profound science about, you know, how children
are born. That science is not just material. Yes, even from material point of
view, how the, you know, sperm through the semen enters and then impregnates the
woman. And then how the embryo grows. And how from that, a child is born. It is
a fascinating science. And how from one small cell, a whole human being, like
even me, is born. It is a, it is actually miraculous. It is a miracle that only
God can do. And he does it repeatedly. In fact, all of us are miracles like
that. All of us means our bodies, at least. So, it is quite a miraculous
process. But here, the, the talk that is over here, is about the contact. You
know, how the consciousness of the soul is determined by the consciousness of
the couple during their contact, during their union. So, it is described in the
Vedic scriptures that the kind of souls that impregnate the mother of womb
through this womb, they are determined by certain important factors. And those
are the consciousness of the mother and the father. So, if they are completely
in the throes of passion, then, because they are in the throes of passion, then,
a passionate soul is attracted over there. If they are in ignorance, then there
is a, you know, European mov..., music star, who said that, most people are born
over a bottle of whiskey on Saturday night. So, that is how it is
"varṇa-saṅkaraḥ". You know, most people, you know, people just get along for
fulfilling their carnal desires. And then, they, so, begetting of children is
just a side o..., side product of that. So, when that is the case, then that
actually leads to, you know, leads to a, souls of degraded consciousness
appearing. When souls of degraded consciousness appear, at that time, it is very
difficult for them to be regulated.

Now, we may wonder, actually, the souls are going to be born somewhere or the
other. You know, souls need body. So, they are going to get the body. So, what
is the difference? This is like saying that, you know, actually, there are going
to be criminals. So, why not criminals be there in my house? You know, who will
want criminals in my house or my city? Sometimes, when the person is, you know,
very, where the citizen is very troublesome, that citizen may be executed. Or if
not executed, he may be exiled. So, exile is one level below execution. You are
a troublemaker. We do not want you in our kingdom. So, now, it is not our
problem that where all the souls, who are there, where they should get their
bodies? Our problem is how we can liberate ourselves. And how we can liberate
others. Those who are dependents. Those who are our progeny. And while we are
liberating them, then how we can further also take the, do good in the world
while we are here? Follow "dharmāḥ" and do good here as much as it is possible.
But when there are children with low consciousness, then it becomes very
difficult to maintain the kind of order in society. So:

        praduṣyanti kula-striyaḥ
        ...
        ... varṇa-saṅkaraḥ

So, actually, when the man and the woman unite in a prayerful consciousness,
after having done due prayers, Garbhā..., it is called Garbhādhāna saṃskār,
then, I, actually a, a wonderful child is born from there. Now, the purport of
Srila Prabhupada can be here quite provocative and inflammatory from the point
of view of today's cultural milieu. You know, Prabhupada's, writes, he quotes
Cāṇakya Paṇḍita that women are less intelligent. And:

"According to Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, women are generally not very intelligent and
therefore not trustworthy."

So, now, you know, you may, what is the, what is this, a blanket statement? They
are not very intelligent. And how do we understand this statement? So, there is,
there are various ways of looking at. Now, if we look at, that is, is this
referring to spiritual intelligence? Actually, as souls, the souls are neither
male, nor female. At least, not, the bodily gender does not apply to the soul.
So, the same soul can today be in a male body, tomorrow in a female body. And
vice versa. So, therefore, it is not that the soul is less intelligent. Then, is
the body less intelli..., is the, at the per..., is this referring to material
intelligence? Are women less intelligent at the material level? You may say
that, actually, when women are given career opportunities, they are excellent in
so many fields. You know, they are often the topper in schools and colleges. And
they are excellent in so many fields. So, how are they less intelligent? So, if
materially, we do not find women to be less intelligent. Spiritually, we do not
find the souls to be of at any different levels of intelligence. Then, where is
this r..., r..., referring to? Actually, it is referring to the interaction of
soul and body. See, the word intelligence is used in a different sense in
different contexts in different cultures. We often use intelligence in terms of
our capacity to manipulate, to control, organiser matter. And IQ scores are
basically to organise concepts. So, that is one understanding of intelligence.
However, in the Vedic context, intelligence refers to understanding a, the
fundamental truths of life. And those truths of life are I am not the body. I am
the soul. That is the beginning. It is ABC of spiritual life. So, generally
speaking, in the female body, the bodily i..., misidentification is far greater
than in the male body. Because for a woman, practically speaking, her whole
sense of self-worth and self-identity comes from the body. You know, how good do I
look. How many heads do I turn. How many people do I attract. So, that is a very
important, in fact, defining, in many ways, criteria for a woman's
self-conception. And, of course, once a person becomes a devotee, things may
change. But the important point is that the body, the bodily misidentification
is much stronger in a female body. And not only that, along with that, there is
certain level of, in the female body, the sentimentality is more on the
rationality. That is not necessarily bad. Prabhupada says that you know, women
can become devotees more easily. They have a tendency to accept God and bow down
to God. And they can practice spiritual l..., they can practice especially
devotional life more easily. But, they, we, we have, that sentamentality can
also lead to them being misled, being misguided. So, when, when people can speak
some sweet words to them. And tell them how beautiful you are, and flatter them,
and then exploit them. So, sen..., their sentamentality is there. And the
counterbalance in the sentamentality, there has to be rationality. Now, the
rational faculty is more, relative speaking, in men. And the rational faculty is
foundational for philosophical inquiry, for metaphysical study. And that is
actually the, in one sense, the beginning of serious spiritual search. So, here,
the context is from the point of view of these two things, that b..., the
greater bodily misidentification, that is why less intelligent. And because
there is a, there is the female body itself has, female psychology has a greater
level of sentamentality than, than rationality. That is why it is said that
women are not to be trusted. But now, if we see, these are statements, which
are, w..., which are given. But along with that, we also understand there are
exceptions. So, the exceptions also have to be understood carefully. And
especially, this is not apply to me. Sometimes, Srila Prabhupada used an
argument that, actually, the female brain is smaller than the male brain. And
that proves that men are l..., wo..., women are less intelligent than men. So,
now, subsequent research has shown that that is not always true. First of all,
there is several problems with this argument. That, firstly, whether the brain
size itself is indicative of intelligence. It is not necessarily that. Just
because that person has a big brain, that means that person big intelligence.
Secondly, the brain size also is dependent on the overall body size. So, in
general, males have a bigger body than females. So, naturally, the whole body is
bigger. Then, the f..., when the brain will also be bigger. So, both ways,
whether the bigger brain size correlates with a bigger intelligence. And the,
and whether males have a bigger brain than females, that is not very clear. And
if you take the proportions, then it turns out that, actually, male, women can
have bigger brains than males also. So, then, what is Prabhupada using this
argument for?

See, in general, we have to understand that there is pratyaksha anumana and
sabda. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita was actually not sabda. Prabhupada quotes him as a moral
and social authority. Prabhupada never quotes him as a s..., spiritual
authority. He never quotes him as an authority for atma jnana, for bhagavat
jnana. He talks about him for a, social purposes. So, now, he is not infall...,
he is, even, his words are not infallible like scripture. Because Cāṇakya
Paṇḍita is not considered an incarnation or anything like that. So, anyway, the
point is, Prabhupada quotes him. So, there is some authority over here. But the
important point to un..., recognise is that, actually, when the scriptures are
quoting such statements, at that time, when Prabhupada is quoting such
statements and he is giving some examples. So, the examples are contextual. And
examples are based on pratyaksha anumana. So, actually, Srila Prabhupada was in
his college. He was, he studied in Scottish Church College. And in Scottish
Church College, th..., his prof..., Christian professor, he made a statement
that actually women are less intelligent because a female brain is smaller than
the male brain. Now, that was the belief, scientific belief at that time. Now,
Prabhupada is quoting that scientific belief in his purports. So, now, that
means, this knowledge, which Prabhupada is quoting, is not coming from sastra. It
is coming from his pratyaksha anumana. So, when an acharya can learn something from
sastra. And then, the acharya may use pratyaksha anumana to substantiate that
point. Now, pratyaksha anumana are necessarily unreliable, not nec..., not
necessarily unreliable. This must be always false. But they are necessarily not
always reliable. They can go wrong. And that is why now Prabhupada quotes the
scientific authority of his time. So, scientific autho..., that scientific
authority is no longer authority. Somebody else is saying something else. So, we
have to understand that the principles are eternal. The examples are contextual.
And examples may change. So, when Prabhupada uses this kind of arguments, we have
to understand that, actually, the, it is not the principle. It is the
centrality. We have to unders..., differentiate between the principle from the
scripture and the example that come from the context. So, Srila Prabhupada was in
Philadelphia. And at that time, he was talking into some journalist. And then,
this whole topic of women being less intelligent came up. So, one of the
matajis, Viśākhā mataji, she came there. And Ravindra Svarupa was the president
of the temple. So, he was there with Prabhupada. He tells this st..., anecdote.
And he says that, the mataji asked, you know, Prabhupada, the, the men are
telling that, we, women are less intelligent. Because our brains are lesser. Is
that true? So, Prabhupada smiled widely. And he said, when you chant Hare
Krishna, your brain becomes bigger. So, do not worry. So, what does it mean? The
point was, Prabhupada was, now, if, if somebody asks, chanting Hare Krishna,
does it increase the size of the brain? No. Prabhupada was not using this as a
serious argument. Prabhupada, you know, when, there, there is certains things
which he quotes from sastra. Certain things which he quotes from conversations.
So, Prabhupada's point here was that, actually, if one becomes a devotee, one's
intelligent expands. Because one starts understanding that I am not the body. I
am the soul. And one starts us..., understanding metaphysical concepts and using
those metaphysical concepts. So, in the scriptures, the general point is that
there is a social arrangement in which both male and female contribute. Both,
and male and female cooperate. And both male and female make spiritual
advancement.

So, here, the central point is that, "praduṣyanti kula-striyaḥ". If women are
unprotected. The protection is not just in terms of males having physical,
providing the physical connection. But it is also in terms of religious
arrangements. You know, if, and this principle applies, not just for women. It
applies for everyone, actually. We will see that if we have unstructured time,
if we have lot of time in our hands and nothing to do, then our minds start
going towards a..., lower activities. So, same happens with women also. So, when
there is proper social arrangement, filled with the facility to practice
"dharmāḥ", then, then, actually, it becomes easy to practice "dharmāḥ".
Otherwise, it becomes difficult. And then, when there are temptations always
there. Temptations can drag people down. So, Krishna is, Arjuna is foreseeing
future consequences. He is saying that, in this way, when women become polluted,
there will be "varṇa-saṅkaraḥ". There will be degraded population that will come
up. Let us see what he says next:

        saṅkaro narakāyaiva
        kula-ghnānāṁ kulasya ca
        patanti pitaro hy eṣāṁ
        lupta-piṇḍodaka-kriyāḥ

So, "saṅkaro narakāyaiva". So, "saṅ...", "saṅ..", those who are born in the
"saṅkaraḥ", when they grow up, they actually are uncultured. And they create a
life that is hellish. "narakā". "narakāyaiva". "kula-ghnānāṁ kulasya ca". So,
for whom, do they do this? They do this for the people who have destroyed the
family. And for that particular, for dynasty also. Because what happens is, they
are going to populate the world. And when they populate the world, they are
going to disrupt everyone, not just their family, not just their opponent's
family. Because they are uncultured. They are uncontrolled. They are going to
disrupt everyone. And then, what will, happens. He, Arjuna is s..., seeing much
further also. So, we see, Arjuna is a very thoughtful person. And he is thinking
in terms of long-term consequences here. "patanti pitaro hy eṣāṁ". What will
happen because of this is? The ancestors will fall. "patanti pitaro". The
"pitaraḥ"s are the ancestors. "patanti pitaro hy eṣāṁ". The ancestors will fall.
"lupta-piṇḍodaka-kriyāḥ". So, "lupta". "lupta", means stopped for them.
"piṇḍodaka-kriyāḥ". The offer..., "piṇḍa" is offering of food. "udaka" is
offering of water. "kriyāḥ", those rituals. So, actually, the Vedic culture is
described that people who do extraordinary punya, they go to svarga. People who
do have rich punya, they go to pitraloka. And it is expected, it is not that all
of one's ancestors always have to go to pitraloka. But it is generally accepted
that one's had..., ancestors, if they were living a reasonable life of
"dharmāḥ", they will go to pitraloka. And generally, it is expected there is an
intergenerational pious connection that is established through the rituals of
pindodakakriyah. This intergenerational connection is that the ancestors have
given birth to us. The ancestors have given us everything that we have. Now, we
have to do something for them. What is that? When we do punya over here, then
that punya contributes to their continued existence over there. Generally, only
the earth is the area where we can do punya and "pāp". Other areas at other
places, where are simply simply exhausting the punya if we are in svarga. And we
are exhausting the "pāp" if we are in lower regions, like Naraka. So, now,
pi..., so, if the descendants on earth keep doing the punya of pindodakakriyah.
And the pitras can stay in their higher region..., abodes. But if they do not
do, then, look, they "patanti pitaro hy eṣāṁ". And the ancestors fall down. So,
Arjuna is thinking not just of here. He is talking about ancestors also. What
will happen to them? They will all fall away. And in this way, he is envisioning
devastation everywhere. So, Prabhupada writes theat these kind of rituals have to
be performed for those who are non-devotees. But those who are devotees:

"Such help rendered to forefathers is a family tradition, and those who are not
in devotional life are required to perform such rituals."

So, that means, we have multiple debts. Ultimately, whatever, whoever is doing
for us. It is Krishna doing for us through that person. Whoever is doing
anything for us. It is, when a mother gives, feeds child breast milk. At that
time, who is feeding the breast milk? Actually, mother is feeding. No doubt. But
the mother does not produce the breast milk. How does the breast milk come at
that time in the breast? Actually, it is the Supreme Lord who has sent us soul
in the mother's womb, and has arranged for the soul to come out of the mother's
womb is now sending breast milk in the mother's breast also. So, similarly,
whoever is doing whatever for us. It is ultimately Krishna doing for us. This
does not mean that we neglect those people. We, we appreciate them. We value
them. Because they are the instruments through which Krishna's grace, Krishna's
kindness, Krishna's love is coming to us. So, normally, if a person, a person
has to reciprocate. So, whatever we get from someone, we have to give to that
person. So, we have all these "ṛṇī"s. So, it is described over here. Prabhupada
quotes the Bhagavatam verse, 11.5.41:

        devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

So, we have, we, we have debts to all these people. We have debts to the
devatas. D..., devatas, they give us the necessities of life. We will discuss
in the third chapter of Bhagavad Gita.

        annād bhavanti bhūtāni

They give us "annāt". Then, "ṛṣi"s. They give us spiritual knowledge. They give
us a Vedic scriptures by which we understand how to live and why to live. Then,
"bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ". So, "bhūtā" is generally living entities. "āpta" is
the relatives. "nṛṇāṁ" are the human beings, other li..., human beings.
And "pitṝṇāṁ", the ancestors. So, we take things from all of them. And we are
expected to give some things in return. So, the deva..., the, the, these three
yajña"s. So, devatas, how do we? There are these three primary debts. And the
others fall in that, through, what are? The devya yajña, pitra yajña and rishi
yajña. So, the, we have to do three duties. For the devatas. They are the
karma-kanda like agnihotra, and another sacrifice has to be performed for
devotees. Then, for the rishis, there is svadhyaya yajna. That is performed. So,
the svadhyaya, self-study the scripture. They have given the scriptures. So, we
study and submissively under them, and learn. That is the way we repay the debt
to them. And then, for the pitras, devata pindodakakriyah. There is the sabda
that is performed. And in this way, we do duties to all of them. Of course,
sab..., sabda is not enough. You also have to continue the dynasty by
maintaining its prestige and maintaining it through progeny also. So, all these
are duties. And apart from that, there is bhuta atranam. We have to,
Prabhupada's father, when he had a cloth shop, he would make sure that, in the
cloth shop, he would keep some food, right in the middle of the shop. So that,
if some rats come, instead of biting the cloth, they will take the food. It was
not just to avoid the cl..., them from biting the cloth. But he felt, just, they
are living, they should get some food. So, we have duties towards other human
beings also. So, we give charity to, sometimes, to them, apta. And especially
relatives, there is, there is relationships. So, we are expected to help
relatives. So, all these are duties.

        na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

But if somebody starts serving the Supreme Lord, "nā...", "nāyam ṛṇī". One is
not a "ṛṇī". One is not indebted to all these people if:

        sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

If that Lord who is ultimate shelter of everyone. If one takes shelter of that
Lord. "gato". Who is that?

        gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

So, if one surrenders to that Lord wholeheartedly. Then, one does, one is not
obligated to anyone else. One simply serves Krishna. And all other debts are
taken care of. So, how does this work? We have a vertical relationship with
Krishna. You know, we are here. Krishna is here. And we have vertical
relationship with Krishna. And then, we have horizontal relationship with
various other living beings. Within that, the devatas may be higher. Devatas are
higher. So, there is, it is a, it is a vertical within the horizontal. And then,
we have our young ones. These are horizo..., it is a downwards, vertical within
the horizontal. But overall, all of them are at the same level. They are all
living entities. So, now, you know, all of them had done something for us. So,
we expect to do something for them. But if, when we are, we understand that,
actually, all of them are giving Krishna's love to me. They are showing
Krishna's care to me. Even if they are not aware of it, it is Krishna who is
caring for me through them. Then, when I understand that I decide to devote
myself to Krishna alone, directly, then I am no longer obligated to all of them.
So, those who become devotes Krishna and serve Krishna vertically, directly,
wholeheartedly, undistractedly, then, they are not obligated to do their other
duties. That is the idea over here. So, now, Prabhupada is saying, Arjuna is not
thinking from a devotee point of view. Arjuna is thinking from the ksatriya
point of view, ksatriya and the kula point of view. See, I have my duty to my
kula, how can I let all of them be destroyed? So, then, he says:

        doṣair etaiḥ kula-ghnānāṁ
        varṇa-saṅkara-kārakaiḥ
        utsādyante jāti-dharmāḥ
        kula-dharmāś ca śāśvatāḥ

"doṣair etaiḥ kula-ghnānāṁ". So, because of the fault of these all destroyers of
"kula-ghnānāṁ". So, what happens is, they, if they give, they give birth to
"varṇa-saṅkara". When they give birth to "varṇa-saṅkara", "utsādyante
jāti-dharmāḥ". That the "jāti", you know, there is "varṇa". And there is "jāti".
"varṇa" is caste. And "jāti" is like a subcaste. So, those are every, within the
caste also, there are different kinds of, different levels of people. And they
also have their specific duties. "utsādyante", they are disrupted, devastated,
Prabhupada says. "jāti". "kula-dharmāś ca śāśvatāḥ". So, again, he is saying,
oh, this "śāś..", this "śāśvatāḥ". The "kula-dharmāś ca śāśvatāḥ". Actually, the
"kula-dharmāḥ" is not "śāśvatāḥ". But it is no lasting. And it is maintained, it
is meant to be maintained. So that generation after generation, people's
material wellbeing can also be taken care of. So, Arjuna is saying the Lord, you
see. All this will be destroyed. And when all this is destroyed, then there will
be people who will be upset, a, people who, so many generations will get disrupted
by that. So, do I want to do this? What will be the consequence of this? So, he
is thinking that it is not only just the killing of aggressors that I will be
responsible for. See, we are, if our actions lead to a chain of chain reactions.
Then, we are responsible for that also. You know, so, for example, if somebody
sets fire to a house. And if his intention was only, one, one room in the house
should burn. And that person should die. But that fire spreads. And h...,
hundred people in that particular building are killed. Then, that person will be
held guilty for arson. And that arson will not just be for that one person. Yes,
he wanted to kill one. But he has ended up killing so many. So, so, he is
thinking that if w..., if I fight this war. And I kill all these people. Then, I
will kill not only this person, will not only kill the, my opponents over here.
But I will kill everyone. E..., e..., everyone in the sense that generation
after generation, I will be, you know, having, a, to, I will be, be the cause of
pa..., a part of the cause of desctruction and devastation. And I will be
responsible. That is what he speaks in the next verse:

        utsanna-kula-dharmāṇāṁ
        manuṣyāṇāṁ janārdana
        narake niyataṁ vāso
        bhavatīty anuśuśruma

So, oh,  Janā..., oh, so, now, Krishna is being referred to by the name of
Janārdana repeatedly in this section. Why? Because He is saying that He was the
protector of people. Oh, "janārdana", "ārdana". Why are you letting such
distraction happen, oh, Krishna? So, "utsanna-kula-dharmāṇāṁ". When
"kula-dharmā" is destroyed. "manuṣyāṇāṁ janārdana", when, now, for people, then,
what happens to such a person? "narake niyataṁ vāso". Forever, such a person
will have to stay in hell. And what? "bhavatīty anuśuśruma". I heard this from
authorities. "anuśuśruma". So, Arjuna is not quoting his own reasoning over
here. He is actually saying that, I am quoting authority. I have heard from
authority that those who cause devastation. They will have to suffer hellish
consequences. So, Arjuna is also using his reasoning. But his reasoning is based
on a scripture. Later on, of course, we will see that scripture has multiple
levels of teaching. And Arjuna's reasoning is not at the highest level of
scripture. This is, it is an intermediate level. So, but he is also relying on
authority. "bhavatīty anuśuśruma". And then, one important point is, you know,
Arjuna is talking about "narake niyataṁ vāso". He says, we, the way that person
has to go to hell. Now, actually, the reference to hell and going to hell raises
the question that, actually, that means, Arjuna knows that I am not the body. I
am the soul. Because who is going to go to hell? The body is going to be
destroyed. So, who will go to hell? There has to be some part of us which will
go to hell. And that part is the soul. So, that means Arjuna is not entirely
unaware of spiritual knowledge. He is not entirely unaware of afterlife. But the
problem is that their afterlife is still based on a material conception. Now,
somebody can have the idea that I can go to, I will have a next life. But just
knowing that there is a next life does not necessarily purify us. You know, it
does not necessarily make us detached, does not make us attached to Krishna.
Because we will become, when we become spiritually attached. Because one has to,
one may still have material conception of life. So, for example, there are, you
know, there are jihadis, you know, within Islam. There is a particular
misinterpretation of Quran that is circulating. And there, the jihadis, its
ch..., the children, who grow up, the young boys, are told that if you, if you
lay down your life in a, become a jihadi, fight for Allah. And if you die
fighting for Allah, he says, you will go to Jannat. And Jannat, you will enjoy
73 virgins for all of eternity. So, now, this is actual distortion of what the
Quran is teaching. But the point is that, you know, what is the attraction? You
know, in Jannat, there with the attraction is not that you will go to Allah. And
you will love Allah. And you will serve Allah. Actually, even if they are doing
something like this, their goal is what? They are, they are doing this not for
love of Allah. They are doing it for love of virgins. So, this is a complete
distortion of the teaching of Quran. But the point is that this is a material
conception of religion. So, the idea is, their p..., there can be this worldy
materialism. And there can be other worldly materialism. So, just being other
worldy does not necessarily make one spiritual. One may think, oh, next world.
It is spiritual. No, not necessarily. It may not be spiritual. It can be
material also.

There is a famous Christian author who wrote a series of novels about a CS
level, very famous theologian, and very brilliant in many ways. But still, he
was limited by his reasoning and his abilities, were limited by the narrow and
shallow conceptions that we are prevalent as per the biblical understanding at
his times. So, he had wrote a serious of novels, and called the books Travel,
Narnia-Travels. And then, he describes that, everybody went back to heaven. And
when they reached heaven, they all saw heaven was just like London. Heaven was
just like London. So, what is the idea there? The idea is that the heaven is
just like a continuation of on this worldly life. But without the problems of
this worldly life. This is a very peripherable..., I mean, it is superficial
understanding of what next life, next world life is. So, just believing in next
life does not necessarily make one spiritual. What makes one spiritual is
understanding the difference between the body and the soul. And raising to a
spiritual level of consciousness. So, Arjuna has awareness of a next life. And
in that sense, he has, understand that there is some component of mutual
continuum, which will go to hell. But the focus is to learn the material
conception of life. And:

        narake niyataṁ vāso

Now, actually, "niyataṁ" here is not eternal in the sense of literal eternal.
They are saying that for a f..., you know, actually, nobody stays in hell
forever.  The, actually, the concept of eternal lamentation, that is not there
in the Vedic scriptures. It is there in some religions, like Christianity,
Islam. That is, they say that those who do not follow Jesus or Muhammad in this
life, they will go to hell. And they go to hell, and burn in the fires of hell
forever. So, this is a, their idea. Now, here, "na...", "niyataṁ" is used in a
non-literal sense. That will be forever, very long time. Very very long time,
that person will have to suffer in hell. And he is thinking, I will have to
suffer like this. Why? Because I am going to cause such suffering to people.
Therefore, I must not do this. And Arjuna is saying that. Now, after concluding
his argument, he will move forward. And he is saying that. He is lamenting at
what are you doing.

        aho bata mahat pāpaṁ
        kartuṁ vyavasitā vayam
        yad rājya-sukha-lobhena
        hantuṁ sva-janam udyatāḥ

"aho bata mahat pāpaṁ". Oh, "mahat pāpaṁ", what a great sin we are doing. "aho"
is lamentation, alas. "aho bata", alas, how strange, how sad it is. "kartuṁ
vyavasitā vayam", we have resolved to do "vayam". Now, "vyavasitā" is we have
decided. How come we decided to do such a? And why are we doing this? "yad
rājya-sukha-lobhena". Out of the low birth and greed for "rājya-sukha", of being
the owners of the kingdom. So, he is saying that just as Duryodhana was
blinded, similarly, we have also become blinded.

        yad rājya-sukha-lobhena
        hantuṁ sva-janam udyatāḥ

So, "sva-janam udyatāḥ". We have decided to kill our own relatives. So, see, how
many times Arjuna is using the word "sva-janam". You know, earlier was
"dhārtarāṣṭrān sa-bāndhavān". But now, it has become "sva-janam". So, the whole
conception, the frame of, the frame of thinking has changed. And what has caused
the change? It is the attachment. It is the bodily conception. It is the
material illusion. Oh, alas, how have I decided to kill everyone? He is
lamenting. And now, he will express his, it is illusion. Now, Prabhupada
explains Arjuna is conscious of his s..., moral principles. He does not want to
avoid sinful, he does not want to do any sinful activities knowingly. And now,
he starts thinking, what is the alternative for me? If I am not going to fight,
then what will happen? Actually, they are not going to stop fighting. So, he
says, ok, I will die. I will die without fighting. But I will not fight. That is
what he says in this verse.

        yadi mām apratīkāram
        aśastraṁ śastra-pāṇayaḥ
        dhārtarāṣṭrā raṇe hanyus
        tan me kṣema-taraṁ bhavet

"yadi mām apratīkāram". That if I do not do any "pratīkār". "pratīkār" means
reaction. I do not, if they attack, and I do not respond to their attacks. Not
only will I not respond to their attack, but I will put down my weapon also.
"aśastraṁ śastra-pāṇayaḥ", it is normally, two warriors should not fight to
each other, each other unless they are both equipped. That is the normal
ksatriya code. You know, that is religious warfare. So, actually, when, when the
Quran talks about Jihad. Essentially, there is a holy war and unholy war. So,
war that is meant for protecting one's religious principle, that is considered
a holy. And war that is for just personal aggrandizement, war that is
non-essential, that is considered unholy. So, that is, their difference is
there. But anyway, even with the conception of religious war, the idea is that
the battle has to be fought among equals. So, terrorism, which is what the
jihadis do, that is completely antithetical to the Q..., idea of a holy war.
Normally, when ksatriyas fight, the, the ksat..., ksatriyas have to be, they
have to be equal. They have to be equipped. And they have to be alert. So, if
one sas..., ksatriya has got a weapon. Other does not have. You cannot just go
and kill him. Actually, it is, it is, so, it is a s..., like I described, it is
like a sport. You know, both are exhibiting their skills, exhibiting their
prowess. And who let the stronger person prevail. It is like that. That is the
mood. So, they fight. Both have to be s..., both have to be equal. So, equal
means that a chariot warrior should not fight with a foot soldier. Chariot
warrior should fight a sol..., foot s..., a chariot warrior. Both of them should
equal. Both of them should be equipped. And both of them should be alert. It is
not that, that person is looking somewhere else. And you shoot from behind. Now,
if we see, terrorism is the exact opposite of that. The victims of terrorists,
they are not equal. They are not equipped. And they are not alert. So, it is
completely unholy. It is castly. You know, as the, horrible. It is a, a terrible
ugra-karma, this kind of terrorism. But he is saying that even if they act like
terrorists. That I am "aśastraṁ". I give up my weapons. But they are
"śastra-pāṇayaḥ". "dhārtarāṣṭrā raṇe hanyus". Ok, I will be exec...,
slaughtered. But he says, that, at, at least, before just one lifetime. You
know, I will suffer a little bit when I die. But at least I will avoid sin. And
if I avoided sin, that I am not going to suffer for a long long time because of
sinful reactions. So, "tan me kṣema-taraṁ bhavet". I think this is better for
me. I think this is better. And he puts it aside. And he says, I will not fight.
That is what his resolution is. And with this resolution, the conclusion of the
last verse come, you know, of this chapter comes. Now, here, the scene is
shifted back. And Arjuna has stopped speaking. So, then, a, Sanjaya starts
speaking reporting what is happening. Because when there is speech, Sanjaya is
speaking. But when there was action, Arjuna is not speaking the action. Arjuna is
doing something. So, at, his speech has stopped. So, then, Krishna..., Sanjaya
speaks over there.

        sañjaya uvāca

        evam uktvārjunaḥ saṅkhye
        rathopastha upāviśat
        visṛjya sa-śaraṁ cāpaṁ
        śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ

"evam uktvā". Having spoke like this. "ārjunaḥ saṅkhye". So, "saṅkhye" means in
the battlefield. After speaking this, "rathopastha upāviśat". Arjuna sat down.
When he sat down, "rathopastha upāviśat". And that means he is, a warrior
sitting down itself is indicating that he is not fight. And as if that will not
clear. "visṛjya sa-śaraṁ cāpaṁ". He put aside his bow. "śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ".
His mind was, became filled with gloom. "śoka". How can I fight? What can I do?
So, actually, the Bhagavad Gita is definitely a historical event. The ba..., the
war did take place. But at the same time, there is also a deeper sigficance
which applies universally. So, Prabhupada also says that, that, you know, when
the first initiation ceremony that took place, Prabhupada said that, for now,
the first ceremony, he says that, now, you should not lament. Because you have
given the reins of your chariot to Krishna. So, Prabhupada is saying the body is
like a chariot. And Krishna has become like a charioteer. So, the symbolic
meaning is not wrong if it is not sup..., supplanting, replacing the literal
meaning. But it can supplement the literal meaning. That means if it gives a
further illumination, that is perfectly ok. So, Arjuna's Gāṇḍīva bow, upraise
Gāṇḍīva bow represents the living entity's determination to serve Krishna. So,
Arjuna had come with the Gāṇḍīva bow, upraise. He was determined to serve
Krishna. But by pratyaksha and anumana, by observing and then interfering based
on that observation, he lost his determination. And he put aside the bow. So,
same happens with us. You know, when we look at the world. And we try to do our
own reasoning. We start getting doubt. Does God exist? Does God care? And why
should I serve God? I have to do practical things in this world. And pratyaksha
anumana eat away our determination. So, Arjuna put aside his bown. Whereas
sabda revives our determination. Sabda nourishes our determination. So, that is
will, what will happen to Arjuna. He will, he will, He will turn to Krishna.
Krishna will speak. And the last verse of the Bhagavad Gita is, 18.78 is,

        yatra pārtho dhanur-dharaḥ

So, by the end of the Bhagavad Gita, that bow which Arjuna has put down, Arjuna
has picked it up. So, like that, by B..., hearing the message of the Bhagavad
Gita, by meditating on it, by understanding, internalising it, then we will get
strength. And our determination to serve Krishna will become restored. We will
understand that Krishna is my greatest well-wisher. And by serving Krishna, my
best interest would be served even if I do not understand it right now. That is
how Bhagavad Gita will restore our faith in sabdha, and restore our
determination, restore our enthusiasm, and bring us back to life. It will live
in such a way that we can live forever with Krishna in the future.

Thank you very much. Srimad Bhagavad Gita ki jaya. Hare Krishna.
