Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZEHQAfVs-0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_042_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Introduction_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=izxlAjxZnFeKnHr-q9Xy_7rPtZt8MTU0ODQ4NjkxNkAxNTQ4NDAwNTE2&event=video_description&v=iZEHQAfVs-0

Hare Krishna.

So, today, we start with the Bhagavad Gita as a part of a Bhakti Shastri course.
So, we will start with a prayer which refers to Lord Krishna as the s...,
speaker of the Bhagavad Gita. And every class will start with this prayer.

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

"sarathyam arjunasyadau", the, the Lord became the "sarathyam" of Arjuna. And
after that, in the beginning, he did that. "kurvan gitamrtam dadau". He gave the
nectar of the Gita. For what purpose? "loka-trayopakaraya", for the sake of the
benefit of all the three worlds. "tasmai krsnatmane namah", unto that Krishna,
who is a soul of all existence. Krishna says "mamatma bhuta bhavana". He says
actually He is a soul of all existence. "krsnatmane namah", unto that Lord
Krishna, I offer obeisances.

So, today, I discuss briefly with the introduction and the preface, we will not
be able to go fully into details of that. But we will just look at a topic wise
overview, to be able to understand in what mood Srila Prabhupada is presenting
the Bhagavad Gita. And in that, I will also talk about the setting of the
Bhagavad Gita, the background, its importance in terms of the overall Vedic
context. And then, we will start with the Bhagavad Gita after that. So, in the
book, there is, in Prabhupada's Bhagavad Gita as it is, there is a preface. And
there is an introduction. So, generally, when books start off, there can be
various things that come before the book, which are also written. But there can
be a prologue. Prologue generally comes in a novel or a story where some part of
the event is told beforehand. Some part of the story line is told beforehand. Or
something which sets up the sc..., scene, is told beforehand. So, here, we have
setting the scene. That gives an introduction which is not written by the
author. But which is written by the publishers. And then the, along with that,
there can sometimes be a foreword, So, if a foreword is there, the foreword is
normally written by somebody other than the author. So, setting the scene can be
written by the author sometimes. But generally, foreword means, that, some other
person is writing the word in the beginning. Fore is beginning. So, the idea of
a foreword is, that somebody whom the author, so, whom the author is connected
with well, or somebody who respects the author, and somebody whom the audience
respects. So, the foreword is a bridge between the author and the audience. So,
these, sort of the, in the foreword, the author is introducing the author to the
audience and telling about the book to the audience. So, apart from that, there
is an introduction. So, normally, if we have a class, then we often have the
introduction of the preacher. So, that introduction of the speaker is like the
foreword of a book. So, that introduction, normally, normally speaking, people
do not introduce themselves. Somebody else introduces that person. So, like
that, in the foreword, is basically introduction of the author and introduction
of the book also. So, in Srila Prabhupada's Bhagavad Gita, at, as it is, we have
a setting the scene, which describes, which is written by the publishers, which
describes how Srila Prabhupada's Bhagavad Gita is important, and basically
describes the background. You know, this was written especially for a western
audience. Because in the west, Bhagavad Gita at that time was not so familiar.
And suddenly what happened in the battlefield, that is what the book starts
with, it seems a little odd. So, the setting the scene basically gives the
historical context of the Bhagavad Gita how there is a war between the two
dynasties or the two branches of the Kuru dynasty. And how that came to a head
at Kuruksetra and just before the war is about to start, the battle took place.
So, the hystorical background is given setting the scene.

Now, introduction, is something which Srila Prabhupada wrote with the book. And
preface is something which Srila Prabhupada wrote just before he published the
book. So, in a sense, both are introductions. But the introduction is much more
directly focused on the content of the book. And the preface is focused much
more on the historical context or the audience for which the book is written.
So, the preface is something which Srila Prabhupada's, has written and it is
shorter, much shorter than the book at, than the introduction. So, I will talk
just two-three points from the preface, and then I will go the introduction
which is quite long. And we will try to have an overview of the introduction.
So, through both the preface and the introduction, Srila Prabhupada is
preparing the audience, of, by getting them into the right mood to understand
the Bhagavad Gita to understand the Bhagavad Gita as it is. But Srila Prabhupada
called as Bhagavad Gita as it is, not just Bhagavad Gita, but Bhagavad Gita as
it is. Because several people had commented in, in Prabhupada, in incorrect
ways. And Srila Prabhupada wanted Krishna's message as it is originally intended
to be presented to the people. And that is what he tries to do in his
presentation of the Bhagavad Gita. So, let us look at the preface first. So, in
the preface, we have, so there is setting the scene, there is dedicated, there
is preface. So, in the preface, we will see that Srila Prabhupada is describing
the background in which the book was written. And that background is also quite
adventurous. You know, so Prabhupada is writing, originally the book was written
in the pres..., form that I was presented. So, this Srila Prabhu..., this
preface was not there in the first publication of the book. So, it is, the
book's story of how Bhagavad Gita was written is also very interesting. Srila
Prabhupada was in India, and 1965, he left India. Before that, in the previous
three years, he published one-one volume of the Bhagavatam. Actually, it was the
first Canto produced in three volumes. You know, when he had the first Canto
translations ready, translation, commentary is ready, then he felt himself
equipped, just for going to be transcendental ammunition to low power the
delusion in the minds of people, the affects of mode passion, ignorance. Now,
when Srila Prabhupada went to America, he got followers after a lot of struggle,
but from 1966 onward, he started getting followers. But he was in a peculiar
pro..., situation there in the sense that in India, he was a published author
and he had respected author his book with Bhagavatam volumes had been sent to
government libraries. He had given a copy to the prime minister of India, to the
president of India, and to many respectable people. And they had even written
positive sta..., positive statements about the book. But in America, he was
relatively unknown. And his disciples were all relatively uninfluential and
unconnected. They were mostly hippies who had a lot of sincerity. But they did
not have any material contacts and not so much material competence also. So,
Srila Prabhupada sta..., started asking them to do, you know, the back to
Godhead, which he had started earlier and he stopped to start focusing on his
books. But then he wanted his books published. Even when he was in America, he
would, very diligently, make time, especially in the early morning hours to
write his commentaries. So, when he was writing in this way, just there was no
way the book was working out. Who, these devotees had, disciples had no idea how
they will publish the book. They went to some publishers, but, now, the American
publishers had no reach in India. And because Srila Prabhupada was not a very
famous swami at that time, the American publishers were thinking that, who will,
who will take such a book and how will we distribute it? So, the prospects were
not very bright. So, Brahmananda Prabhu, Hayagriva Prabhu, all of them were
trying to find out some way, and one day, you know, the devotees got a letter
from Macmillan. Macmillan was one of the biggest publishers at that time. Even
now, it is quite respected. So, when they said that, we, please come to our
office, we are interested in the books. So, it was Macmillan that devotees went
there. That devotees went very enthusiastically there, and there, disappointment
awaited them. They found that there was only one clerk in Macmillan's office who
wanted a Bhagavad Gita for himself. And they were so disappointed. They already
told Prabhupada how excited they were, so what will they tell Prabhupada. But as
the clerk was talking with the devotee who had come to give him copy of the book
also, suddenly, the clerk became tense, and he became very respectful. And then,
this other person walking behind, and he says that is the chief officer, as
like, that is our boss, you know, the biggest person in Macmillan. So, that
person just walked away into his office. And Brahmananda Prabhu was thinking,
can I somehow get to meet him? So, as he was thinking about it, can I meet him?
No, he is very busy. It takes a long time to get an appointment. At that time,
suddenly, their office, that person, he came out. He says, are, are you
connected with some swami? He said yes. He said, I am a disciple of
Bhaktivedanta Swami. And he said in a lower voice, a real swami? He says yes,
yes. You know, we are making a collection of books on rela..., on the scriptures
of the world. So, we have a, we have a boon on the Bi..., we have published a
Bible. We have published a Quran. We have published for various religions, but
we do not have anything on the hinduism. So, we want the Bhagavad Gita. Has your
swami written anything on the Bhagavad Gita? He says yes. I got the book. Oh,
full commentary on the Bhagavad Gita? He says yes. So, he says, so excited, so,
ok, come and show it to me. And they showed it. So, normally, if a publisher has
to publish, they go through a long editorial process, the publisher may say do
this, do that. But they said that, ok, if you got it, then, they, actually, it
went through it quite fast. But they saw one thing. He says we got a standard
length for all our books. That is something like four hundred, five hundred
pages. And they said that your swami's commentaries are too big. So, tell him
to cut the commentaries and make the book to our prespecified length. So, then,
then, Hayagriva Prabhu writes in his Hare Krishna Explosion that he had the
doleful task of deciding which of Srila Prabhupada's purports were unnecessary.
So, somehow, he did that. And then Macmillan published the book. So, after
Macmillan published the book, Prabhu..., the, the devotees were very happy.
So, Prabhupada also got a lot of respectability by that. And at that time, the
foreword was written by Allen Ginsberg, and G..., Al..., who was a famous hippie
musician. You could say famous or infamous, but he appreciated Srila Prabhupada.
And there were two other people also who wrote book, relatively well-known, who
also wrote forewords. And then the book was published.

Now, when the book was published, it, it got positive reuse from many people,
many scholars also, and when the book's demand has big, book was wanted more and
more. And then Prabhupada felt that now that he had got the first breakthrough,
he decided that rather than getting the book published through Macmillan, he
decided that as it is they had cut down on the purports and much of what he had
given was not there, so Prabhupada decided to start his own publishing house,
you know, which at that time was called ISKCON Press. Later on, that was renamed
as Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. So, through ISKCON Press, then he published the
full Bhagavad Gita as it is. And that full Bhagavad Gita as it is had all the
purports. So, that is why Srila Prabhupada is writing that:

"When this book was first published, the original manuscript was, unfortunately,
cut short to less than 400 pages, without illustrations and without explanations
for most of the original verses..."

So, that had happened because, that had happened because, you know, Macmillan
hinted a particular length that they wanted the books to be. So, Srila
Prabhupada has, so this preface is not there in the Macmillan published Bhagavad
Gita. It was there in the ISKCON Press published, subsequently were published by
Prabhupada, by Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. And that is how it has been published.
So, Prabhupada writes that many scholars wanted the full manuscript and
some book presented it right now. And then he further writes that how Krishna
Consciousness movement is being accepted by people all over the world. And many
intelligent people, when even what had happened at that time, many hippies were
there, and the hippies were peculiar phenomena, alarming phenomena for many in
American history. You know, they had rebelled against what America had stood
for. You know, and the values of material progress, and material happiness. They
wanted something more. And in then, in the hope of something more, they had
been allured by drugs. And drugs were taking them down, not up. So, when they
were becoming degraded, so Prabhupada writes that, many of my students' parents
have come and appreciated me for how their lives have been transformed. And then
he says, there, there is no credit for me, actually, there is a credit is that I
had repeated the message of my spiritual master. And then, Prabhupada makes a
very, you know, basic point that people are misinterpreting the Bhagavad Gita.
And that is the point which he will repeat again and again in his purports. And
finally, he says our only purpose...

"Our only purpose is to present the Bhagavad-gita As It Is in order to guide the
conditioned student to the same purpose for which Krishna descends to this
planet once in a day of Brahma, or every 8,600,000,000 years."

So, actually, Prabhupada has suddenly taken from a historical context which
people can relate. He then says, oh, now, the western people not understand, oh,
what do you mean by 8,600,000,000. Who is Brahma? What is this? But Prabhupada
is not just connected with the reality of the world around. He is also connected
with the reality of the tradition that he represents. And it is such a
seamlessly from here to there. And he says about, this is a historical book. It
is, it is spoken by the Supreme Lord, He descends once. And we are trying to
fulfill that same purpose. And he says if you understand, you know, if we
understand, such understanding of Bhagavad Gita, that means, what is such
understanding? Understanding, the understanding, what purpose Krishna spoke it:

"Such understanding of Bhagavad-gita is really profitable and authorized for the
welfare of human society in fulfilling the mission of life."

So, what that mission of life will be? We will talk about it later. And then he
talks about how we are all servants of Krishna and we are meant to serve Him.
And if we do that, then we will be able to be happy. Otherwise we will not be
happy. And then, he talks about, you know, if you go down below, the Lord wa...:

"The Lord wants this, and He demands it. One has to understand this central
point of Bhagavad-gita."

What is central point of the Bhagavad-gita? That actually we are parts of
Krishna. And we are meant to serve Krishna. And if we do not serve Krishna, we
become miserable. When we start serving Krishna, then we will become happy. So,
Prabhupada said Lord wants it, and the Lord demands it.

        sarva-dharmān parityajya

When He is saying that at the end of Bhagavad-gita. That is what He is calling.
Just come to me. Be happy with me. And he says that, actually speaking, even if
one purpose is, even one person becomes a devotee, that is a last sentence that
Prabhupada writes:

"If even one man becomes a pure devotee of the Lord, we shall consider our
attempt a success."

So, this is Srila Prabhupada's goal. It is not to become a famous scholar, a
popular author. Prabhupada's goal in presenting Bhagavad Gita is to fulfill the
purpose of Krishna. And what is the f..., purpose of Krishna? That we all return
back to Him. And returning back to Him means becoming the pure devotees of
Krishna. That is what Srila Prabhupada is presenting through his books.

So, let us look at the introduction now. Now, in the introduction, Srila
Prabhupada starts with these prayers. And here there is a prayer to Radharani.
And actually speaking, in the full of Bhagavad Gita As It Is, this is the only
reference to Radharani. Afterwards, Srila Prabhupada does not refer to Radharani
even once. Becau..., now, of course, indirectly, she, he will refer. And we will
discuss in the Bhagavad Gita also how some level, there is a reference to raja
bhakti. But the point is, Prabhupada does not refer to all this so much. And
then after that, all the prayers, now, Srila Prabhupada explains the point that
the Bhagavad Gita is like a manual or a prescription. So, now, when a
prescription is given, the potency of the prescription will be w..., valid when
it is followed. You know, and what is, what does it mean follow? Ok, whatever
has doctor said over there, we have to find out what it, what the doctor meant
over there. Ok, take this, three times a day, morning, afternoon, evening. Now,
if I start thinking, you know, morning, what does morning mean? Actually, in
India, morning time is different. Africa, morning point is different. And
America, morning time is different. So, actually, morning means evening. And
this medicine is not to be taken in the morning. It is to be taken in the
evening. And if I start thinking, the doctor says, do not take sugar. Oh,
actually, sugar, you know, what is sugar? Sugar is simply white substance. So,
the idea is that, you know, substances which are of a particular color should
not be taken. So, if you take sugar, but you put some quoting on it so that that
is no longer white in color, then you can take it. Now, if I start interpreting
and misinterpreting the doctor's prescription like this, I will not get the
benefit. Similarly, Prabhupada explains that the prescription has to be followed
if we want to benefit. And for that purpose, he is presenting the Bhagavad Gita
according to the prescription which has been given in the Gita itself. And what
is the prescription? Prabhupada quotes from the fourth chapter where he says
that, actually:

        bhakto ’si me sakhā ceti

This has to be understood in a mood of devotion. Without that mood of devotion,
the import of the Bhagavad Gita will remain lost. And then what is this mood of
devotion? Prabhupada talks about the five rasas. And it, right now, in the
Bhagavad Gita itself, introduction, he introdues the point that we are eternal.
God is eternal. Then, we have eternal relationship with God. And it is that
eternal relationship which has to be developed. So, he talks about the five
rasas. And then he moves forward. And he talks about how Arjuna has also
accepted Krishna as the Supreme Lord and then talks about Krishna's supreme
position. Now, the whole point of this discussion till here:

"Unless one reads the Bhagavad-gita in a submissive spirit, it is very difficult
to understand Bhagavad-gita, because it is a great mystery."

So, submissive spirit is the same in this context, the spirit of devotion. Then,
Prabhupada talks about, after setting this mood, first he has himself offered
devotional prayers, and after offering those devotional prayers, then he has
said that this is the devotional mood in which one should understand. And then
after that, he starts. Then, what is the Bhagavad Gita?

"The purpose of Bhagavad-gita is to deliver mankind from the nescience of
material existence."

This is the fundamental purpose of the Gita, to deliver people from the miseries
of material existence. And then, in, Prabhupada talks about how we are all in
misery, but very few people think about spiritual inquiry. And those who, we are
all, Prabhupada writes, we are all about we devour by the tigers of ignorance.
But we should enquire about spirituality. So, he writes over here, actually:

"Actually we are swallowed by the tigers of nescience, but the Lord is very
merciful upon living entities, especially human beings."

So, what does the tigers of ignorance mean? It is of course a metaphorical uses,
usage. You know, the tigers of ignorance, nescience refers basically to the fact
that we have forgotten our spiritual identity. And the Bhagavad Gita is meant to
rescue us from that. And then Prabhupada goes to Baladeva Vidyabhushana's
introduction. You know, Prabhupada has dedicated his Bhagavad Gita to Baladeva
Vidyabhushana gave the Govinda-bhashya commentary, and, on the Vedanta Sutra.
And it, in Baladeva Vidyabhushana's Gita Bhusana, which is his commentary, he
describes that the Bhagavad Gita deals with five basic truths. So, now,
analytical frameworks are always helpful for us to understand spiritual truth.
What do we mean by analytical frameworks? Whenever a subject to be discussed, so
for example, when a speaker is giving a class. So, in, in any mood of
functioning, or communicating, or even thinking, you know, basically there are
two things in operation. There is analysis. And there is synthesis. So, analysis
means taking things apart. And synthesis means bringing them together. So, for
example, we may say that, ok, today, some speaker may say, today I will speak
about five points. That will be one, two, three, four, five. So, analysis means,
ok, these are the points which I may have spoken. But synthesis means, ok, how
are these points connected together? If somebody says today I will speak about
five points. You know, I will speak about, you know, what is the, what is the
prospect of the India's cricket team winning the 2015 world cup. Then, I will
talk about what is happening in Uttarakhand, even the, after the floods were
there.  Then, I will talk about the political situation in Zimbabwe. Then, I
will talk about the state of maffia controlling Italy. And then, I will talk
about terrorism in Pakistan. You say, what is the connection? You know, we see,
that this is, basically becomes like a news report then. So, now, news report,
you know, there is, it, it is not that when the person is reading out of news
report, there is a flow from this point to this point. No. Just one news is
over, next new starts. Even in the newspapers, sometimes, we will see that,
there are, there are sometimes that looks so terrible, a news flashes there, the
cricket score given, and below that, there is a given, so 139:43 India. 139
people killed in earthquake. So, from the news' perspective, there is two news.
There are human lives which have been killed. But sometimes, the cricket score
will be higher than the news, than the news of people being killed. Because,
for th..., it is just figures.

So, now, analysis just does not mean separating. It is also separating in the
conceptual thinking. But the point, synthesis means, how does it come together.
So, generally, the scriptures present knowledge in a synthetic way. Synthetic
way means that things are presented as a living culture. So, for example, when a
child learns language. You know, child, when the mo..., baby is learning to
speak, the mother does not tell, you know, ok, mo..., ok, better, my child, I
will tell you this is a noun. This is a word. This is adjective. This is a
pronoun. This is adverb. No. The baby just, baby starts mamma, pappa, dadda,
daddy. You know. Then they start pa..., child starts speaking. And after the
child grows, then when the child has already learned language, then analysis
comes afterwards. He says, ok, you will, you will learn the sentence, ok, now,
this is for part of, it is subject. This part is a predicate. And in subject,
generally, there is a preposition. There may be a noun. Then the linking the two
occur. And again, there may be a noun. Or there may be a phrase. There may be a
close. So, all these concepts come afterwards.

So, analysis is generally what we do to get a clear understanding. But when it
comes to functioning, we need some synthesis. So, the Bhagavad Gita is presented
as synthetic body of knowledge. And the acharyas do analysis to help us
understand, to help us get a conceptual foothold. And then after we get the
foothold, then we have to integrate it all. And then we will get a better
understanding. So, Prabhupada quotes from Baladeva Vidyabhushana and says that
there are these five subjects that have been talked about. So, what are those
five subjects? He says, now, Prabhupada does not quote Baladeva Vidyabhushana
over here. But he says:

"... entails the comprehension of five basic truths."

So, what are these basic truths? They are actually ishvara, jiva ishvara,
prakriti, kala and karma. So, jiva is the soul. Ishvara is the living entity.
Now, among these five, you see, jiva and ishvara are conscious. Prakriti, kala
and karma, now, Prabhupada says prakriti and kala are also, also eternal like
jiva and ishvara. Karma is not eternal. Karma is temporary. And exactly what are
these, and how they are related, that is going to be discussed in the Bhagavad
Gita. And Prabhupada makes some important points about it, you know, in this
purport. So, as far as ishvara is concerned, Prabhupada quotes the Bhagavad
Gita to show how Krishna is the ishvara. And then what is jiva? Jiva is a part
of the ishvara just as Prabhupada gives two examples:

"... a particle of gold is also gold, a drop of water from the ocean is also
salty,"

Similar, we are parts and parcels. Prakriti is material nature. So, prakriti
also belongs to Krishna. And Prabhupada introduces the modes right now in the
purport itself. And then he says, what is karma? When we act under prakriti for
some desire, that is called karma. Now, after describing this, he talks about
the relationship between jiva and ishvara. So, he is, finally says, the:

"Conscious he may be, but he is not perfectly or supremely conscious."

Already in the beginning only of the Bhagavad Gita, Prabhupada is pointing out,
there is a difference between the jiva and the ishvara. They are not the some.
So, he is refuting mayavada over here. And again, he makes the same point, we
should not forget this. And, then he talks about how a devotee is transcendental
to the material modes. So, when we are materially contaminated, we are called
conditioned. So, it is interesting, we use the word conditioned soul very often.
So, what does the word conditioned soul mean? Generally, when we talk about our
conditions, you know, in, in some advertisement, it may be that conditions may
apply. Or sometimes, we have, the word condition is used for some treat..., some
treatises are made. Ok, this agreement, contract will be made, provided these,
these, these conditions are there. So, in what contexts is, what senses
Prabhupada uses the word condition over here? So, it is in the context that, in
what sense or context it is, and the soul's happiness depends on so many
conditions that are not in the control of the soul. When I am a conditioned
soul, first of all, if I want to enjoy, my body has to be healthy. Not only
that, apart from that, I also have to have the sense objects which I want to
enjoy. Sense objects have to be of good enough quality. And the circumstances
have to be suitable for enjoyment. And after that, I get enjoyment. And even
then also, because the body's capacity to enjoy is limited, my enjoyment also
remains limited. So, in that sense, I do not get really as much as of the
enjoyment as I would like to get. This is the meaning of condition. Now, we are
all con..., all conditioned souls. And to become liberated does not, does not
even mean having to become formless. It, Prabhupada says, Prabhupada quotes from
the Bhagavatam:

        muktir hitvānyathā rūpaṁ
         sva-rūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ

That when we rec..., we are rec..., reins..., reinstantiated in our svarupa as
the servants of the Lord, and, then that is actually real liberation. And what
is contaminated consciousness? Prabhupada explains:

"In contaminated consciousness, "I am" means "I am the lord of all I survey. I
am the enjoyer."

So, I am the controller. I am the enjoyer. And then Prabhupada basically in this
pur..., introduction, Prabhupada is giving the whole introductory philosophy of
Krishna Consciousness in a nutshell. So, he also gives the example of the
stomach and the hands. All of us know that example. Hand needs, needs the
stomach, not just nourish itself separately. So, it is remarkable how much Srila
Prabhupada condenses in the introduction. So, he gives practically the whole
philosophy of Krishna Consciousness in nutshell over here. He talks about the
Lord's form is sat-cit-ananda-vigraha. You know, Lord is not impersonal. Now,
here is the nice adigut, sudra like statement. Then, he talks about prakriti,
talks about prakriti is complete:

"There is complete facility for the small complete units, namely the living
entities, to realize the complete, and all sorts of incompleteness are
experienced due to incomplete knowledge of the complete."

So, this is something similar what Srila Prabhupada had said in the Isopanisad
introduction:

        oṁ pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ

So, there is complete facility for the complete, small complete units, namely
the living entities, to realize the complete. So, we as souls can realize with
Supreme Lord. What do you mean we have complete facility? We have the capacity for
brahma jijnasa. So, we have advanced spiritual consciousness by which each of
them can realise the Absolute Truth. And, and by that, we can experience
happiness. So, only when we realize the Supreme Lord, do we attain completeness.
And all sorts of incompleteness that we experience right now. So, I am, feel, oh, I
do not have this. I do not have that. I do not have that. I do not have that.
They are incomple..., they are experienced due to incomplete knowledge of the
complete, to incomplete knowledge. That means people do not have proper
understanding of what is the, what are the values and goals of life. And that is
why they are suffering right now. Incomplete knowledge of the complete.

And then Prabhupada talks about the infallibility of the Vedic knowledge that we
discussed in the Isopanisad introduction. And then, this is, this is actually
very similar to the introduction of the Isopanisad, where Prabhupada talks about
how we should raise above animal platform and come to human platform. So, what
is Prabhupada doing over here? He is actually essentially explaining how, what
kind of karma we should do in the world. And then he talks about sanatan dharma.
This is a very important point that, what do we mean by sanatan dharma?
Prabhupada writes:

"... sanatan dharma does not refer to any sectarian process of religion. It is
the eternal function of the eternal living entities in relationship with the
eternal Supreme Leader."

So, here, it is important to understand that the Bhagavad Gita is not teaching
any sectarian religion. You know, we know very well that the Bhagavad Gita does
not talk about hinduism. The Bhagavad Gita was spoken thousands of years ago.
And the word "hindu" has come into the vocabulary less than thousand of yea...,
thousand years ago. That is called relatively very recent entry into the
vocabulary of the new Indian languages. So, the Bhagavad Gita is talking about
universal truths. And Prabhupada hence differentiates between religion and
dharma. So, dharma itself req..., req..., requires something that is
intrinsic. That which is unchangeable. That which is eternal. And sanatan dharma
emphasizes that all the more. So, we will discuss about the concept of sanatan
dharma later when we talk about dharma in the Bhagavad Gita. But suffices it to
say over here that this word ka..., san..., san..., intrins..., dharma refers to
intrinsic nature. And sanatan dharma refers to the intrinsic, the set of
activities that are intrinsic nature for all of eternity. That are which is
intrinsic, will not be go, will not be changed. Then Prabhupada is, quotes
Sanatan Goswami saying that rel..., sanatan dharma is unchangeable, is, is, has
no limitations. So, Prabhupada says limitation means no change also. So, other
dharmas can change. And what is sanatan dharma? Prabhupada quotes Caitanya
Caritamrta that actually we are all the servants of the Lord. Then, he had
written some technicalities on the Bhagavad Gita saying that how there is
a spiritual world. And demigod worship is not desirable. Demigod worship does
not lead to sanatan results. Only the worship of Krishna will lead to sanatan
results. And then after that, he says that we, it is, for, the goal of life is
to go back to the spiritual world. This material world is a reflection of the
spiritual world. And we need to surrender to Krishna. Then, we will attain the
spiritual world. And how do we remember Krish..., surrender to Krishna? By
remembering Him in context constantly. So, then, he talks about various
spiritualists. And then he says, we basically, we have to contemplate, remember
Krishna. So:

        tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu
        mām anusmara yudhya ca

This is the practicality of the main, message of the Gita that we have to
remember Krishna. Along with that, we have to serve Him. And then, here itself,
Prabhupada gives a very esoteric example. So, this is actually quoted by Rupa
Gos..., quoted by Caitanya Mahaprabhu to Rupa and Sanatan Goswami when they
asked Him. How can we stay dutiful to you while being engaged in the material
world? And He was, He told him that actually you can do that by practicing the
devotional service, the way a woman allows her paramour. A married woman loves
her paramour. So, this is at the very least inflammatory example. You know, why
do they use, why would Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu practice the highest levels of
morality that he was restrict sannyasi, that one time in a trans when He heard
the Gita Govinda being sung, He ran towards, you know, the sound of the Gita
Govinda. And then, His servant stopped Him and he said it is a woman. And
Caitanya Mahaprabhu froze at that time. He said that if I had, if I had done
anything inappropriate, I would have died. You have saved my life. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was so strict about the rules of morality. Why is He giving an
inappropriate example, an example that seems to be inappropriate to us? That
just as a paramour, a woman who has a lover other than a husband. And she is
thinking of her husband. But she does not want her..., she is thinking of her
lover. But she does not want her husband to be suspicious. So, she does all her
duties at home, not only now with normal attention, with better attention. So
that her husband does not suspect anything. And then she is thinking of her
paramour. And she, whenever she gets, she meets her paramour. So, now, why would
somebody give an example of something immoral to teach something which is
spiritual? The point is that the acharyas will use, actually Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is himself, God himself. They will use examples which convey the
point. So, now, that there is promiscuity in the world, that there are affairs.
And there are illicit, there are extramarital relationships. This is simply a
fact of life. It is definitely not a pleasant. It is definitely not a moral or
recommended thing to do. But it is simply a fact of life. So, what is a fact of
life? And what c..., can be used to convey a point in an unforgettable way? You
know, if somebody hears the example like that which is, first of all, few things
that attract people's attention as much as male-female interactions. That is a,
you know it is a para..., if we could have, go into look at people's minds and
look at what is that favorite taste. So, male-female interaction will be a
perpetual top ranker. So, any example that will involve male-female
interaction, that will immediately catch people's attention. And basically the
point is to convey a message. So, it is not in any way to condone. Condone means
to allow or worse still, to glo..., to ac..., pray to, recommend that sort of
action. The point is to convey a message. And the message that is conveyed is
very clear. The message is that, just as a woman, now these are, this sort of
things happen in life. So, you see, when a woman is actually attracted to some
man, other than her husband, what does she do? She does her duty to her husband
well. Because she does not want to hurt into suspicious. But at the same time,
that attraction, because of that attraction sittings in her lover also.

So, similarly, a devotee has two duties. The material duties and the spiritual
duties. So, the material duties are important at our level. And we have to do
them well. At the same time, the material is foreign to our nature. Because the
material is foreign to our nature, it is alien. And the spiritual, the
devotional is actually our true nature. But right now, we are caught in
shackles. We are caught in the shackles of matter. And we cannot wish them out.
So, a devotee is internally thinking of Krishna while externally engaging in the
material world. So, the essence of the example is not the morality of the
immorality. The essence of the example is the intensity of the remembrance. And
how that intense remambrance can be invoved by strong affection, by strong
attraction, by intense desire. So, Prabhupada writes immediately after the
example that actually the art of Krishna Consciousness is in..., Arjuna says
that I cannot remember Krishna. Then, he says, the, this is the art:

"If the mind is engaged in Krsna service, then the senses are automatically
engaged in His service. This is the art, and this is also the secret of
Bhagavad-gita: total absorption in the thought of Sri Krsna."

So, the point of the example is not to condone morality. It is to give you an
example of abso..., of absorption in something different from what one is doing.
At the same time, we may be able to do what one is doing well. So, that is how a
devotee does not give up material duties. A devotee is absorbed in Krishna. At
the same time, the devotee is able to, does also the material duties well. That
is the art. And the art has to be done. Now, somebody may think, what do I do?
How do I do like this? Do I always think of the supreme personality? And I am
doing my work on my computer in my office. At the same time, I am thinking of
Krishna. How do I think, how do I sort of create two lanes in my consciousness?
One doing my material duties and the other doing my spiritual duties? No, we do
not have to bisect our consciousness like that. Bhakti actually integrates the
whole thing. Now, we see our office, and our profession, and our worldly
responsibilities also as a part of our long-term welfare. You know, also a part
of, how it is a part of long-term welfare? Although soul and the body are
different, bhakti is so wonderful that the body and everything in relation with
the body can also be used for Krishna's service. 40:25
