Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Js3Y1tGHlgY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=C58BIRmaWbX7u-tg1i7_T3wFU4p8MTU0ODQ4NzE0NkAxNTQ4NDAwNzQ2&event=video_description&v=Js3Y1tGHlgY&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_048_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_01_to_05_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome to the Bhagavad Gita, Chapter Two. So, at the end of the
Chapter One, Arjuna has put aside his bow.

        visṛjya sa-śaraṁ cāpaṁ
        śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ

He is holding his head in his hands. His head is lowered. And his
"śoka-saṁvigna". His mind is filled with misery. "mānasaḥ". "śoka-saṁvigna",
with moroseness, with lamentation. And he has told through his actions to
Krishna that I will not fight. So, that is the end of the Arjuna Vishada Yoga.
Now, the second chapter starts. The second chapter has been named differently by
different acharyas. Sankhya Yoga is one of the standard names. Because sankhya
is what is talked about, at least in the initial parts of the chapter. And
sankhya essentially un..., involves analysis, analysis of existence into various
elements. So, the analysis of the existence into, basically, matter and spirit,
into our life, into body and soul, our being into material and spiritual sides.
So, Bhaktivinoda Thakur has said that the second Chapter has the whole Gita in
nutshell. And that is why he uses the name "Contents of the Gītā Summarized".
So, Prabhupada uses that name for the second chapter.

Let us look at the overview of second chapter. And then, we will move forward.
So, the sections can be divided into five. The first section is "Arjuna's
further doubts and surrender". So, Arjuna, you know, expresses one more reason.
That is indecision. And if we l..., because, you know, I am undecided. So, let
me just not take the more aggressive course of action. Let me not fight. Then,
Ar..., when Krishna, Krishna, He is basically using various reasonings to Arjuna
for fighting. So, first is, in 11 to 30, he says jnana. What is "jnana"?
It is Knowledge. Fight. So, using jnana, fight. As the soul is eternal,
compassion for the temporary body is ignorant and useless. So, here, He cou...,
counters Arjuna's compassion argument. First argument was, oh, how can I kill my
relatives? He felt compassionate for them. Second argument was, based on
enjoyment. So, in 31 to 38, is karma-kanda. So, that is the first application of
atma-jnana. Atma-jnana is I am not the body. I am the soul. So, when we
understand that you are not the body. You are the soul. That means you will
continue to live after you die, also. And if you act according to dharma, then
you will get elevated destination, go to svarga. By doing your prescribed
duties, you will enjoy. So, dharma has to be done to get kama and artha. So,
therefore, he says that, you sh..., if you want to enjoy also, only by doing
dharma, you will enjoy. And in this way, He counters Arjuna's enjoyment
argument. And then, further, there is a third argument, is about Nishkama Karma
yoga. Thi..., in the Nishkama Karma yoga argument, Krishna basically focuses on
Arjuna's concern that there will be suffering because Arjuna will be subjected
to sinful reactions. So, Krishna tells him that if you act in Nishkama Karma
yoga, then you will be doing activity which will bring no reaction. And when
there is no reaction, then there is no sinful reaction also. So, that is the
la..., next part. So, in Nishkama Karma yoga, that is second application of
atma-jnana. It is one level higher. If you really understand you are the soul,
then the goal is not to go to svarga. The goal is to go beyond material
existence to eternal spiritual existence. And for that, you will be, be not
attached to anything material. So, fight with detachment, then there will be no
sinful reactions. So, this counters Arjuna's sinful reactions argument. And
then, when he is talking about a person who is detached from everything
material, for that, Arjuna asked, who is that kind of person? I want to know
more about that person. Then, Krishna gives the characteristics of that person.
And there, that is the last sections. Characteristics of a sthita-prajna. So,
basically, in this section, Arjuna's three arguments, compassion, enjoyment and
sinful reactions is in one way countered. Now, the arguments will, the argument
about "kula-kṣaye praṇaśyanti", that destruction of family tradition will, will
be countered in the Third Chapter. And Arjuna's next last, fifth argument is
indecision. Which he will make in this Chapter. That will be countered by the
end of the Bhagavad Gita when K..., Arjuna expresses his decision. He gives up
indecision, expresses decision. I will fight. So, let us look at the chapter
now. It starts with:

        sañjaya uvāca

        taṁ tathā kṛpayāviṣṭam
        aśru-pūrṇākulekṣaṇam
        viṣīdantam idaṁ vākyam
        uvāca madhusūdanaḥ

So, "taṁ tathā kṛpayāviṣṭam". "taṁ", unto that person. Who is that person? The
previous chapter ended with the description of Arjuna. Arjuna had set down. So,
th..., unto that "tathā kṛpayāviṣṭam". So, that Arjuna, who had thus set down
overcome by "kṛpayā", by weakness, weakness caused by compassion. So,
"aśru-pūrṇākulekṣaṇam". So, "īkṣaṇam" is eyes. "pūrṇā", "ākula", "aśru-pūrṇa",
full of tears. That means that was not just a few tears. But the tears were
filling the eyes, practically speaking. If you consider the eyes to be
container. This is, then, the container was overflowing. And the t..., t...,
tears were coming out. "visidantam idam vakyam". "visidantam" means, he was
lamenting at that time, these words. "uvaca madhusudanah". So, that Lord,
Madhusudanah, he spoke these words. So, now, Srila Prabhupada, because this is
sank..., sankhyeva chapter, where is a difference between the body and the soul.
So, Srila Prabhupada's, takes the focus in this chapter on the point that,
actually, bodily emotions are illusory. So, in the previous chapter, the focus
was on talking about Arjuna's qualities. And that is why Prabhupada said that,
he is, Arjuna has, he is, he is thoughtful. He is saintly. He does not want to
hurt others. In all these ways, he is talking about the good qualities of
Arjuna. But now, he is going to talk about the bodily conception. And Prabhupada
starts itself is with a very sutra-like statement.

"Material compassion, lamentation and tears are all signs of ignorance of the
real self. Compassion for the eternal soul is self-realization."

That is through distinctive points Prabhupada makes, wh..., which are related.
But they are substantially different also. First is, ignorance of the real self.
So, when we are ignorant, when there is material compassion. There is
lamentation and tears. So, which is wha..., is what, Arjuna has e..., ex...,
exhibited. The, where are these three words coming from? These are coming from
what is talked about in the verse. It is "kṛpayā", "kṛpayā", "parayāviṣṭam". That is
material compassion. Then, there is "viṣīdantam". That is lamentation. And
"aśru-pūrṇākulekṣaṇam". That is tears. So, these three are coming up. And
Prabhupada is saying, the, all this indicates the ignorance of the true self.
And if the true self is known. And if one wants to become compassionate. Now,
how is one going to become compassionate to the true self? By cultivating
self-realisation. By cultivating self-realisation. So, compassion for the
eternal soul is self-realisation. That means, actually, the, a person does not
have to be hard-hearted if the person wants to be spiritually knowledgeable. We
just have, we have to direct the soft-heartedness in the right avenue. So, when
we are ignorant. If somebody is coughing. And we think, oh, that person is
coughing. What should I do? The cough causes so much pain. So, if somebody says,
oh, that person is coughing. Just stuff the person's mouth with a hanky. Then,
he will not cough. Hell, that is, you may want the person not cough. But that is
ignorant. That is not going to solve the problem of coughing. Actually, we have
to take the person to a doctor, and then give the proper medicine, and the
coughing will stop. So, when we see somebody coughing, naturally we feel, we
s..., if somebody com..., coughing very badly, we feel compassion for that
person. But compassion is, we are directed in a intelligent, enl...,
knowledgeable way, not an ignorant way. So, same way, with respect to the
suffering of material existence. When we see death. When we see old age. When we
see destruction. We naturally feel bad about it. But we have to have it in a
direct, those resulting feelings of compassion properly. So, that is, actually,
the person is suffering. But that person is suffering because of bodily
misidentification. There may be some specific causes of suffering right now,
which do need to be dealt with. But beyond that, person is fundamentally
suffering because of ignorance of the soul. So, that ignorance has to be
countered. And the way, that ignorance is countered is by becoming
self-realised. So, that is why compassion for the self is self-realisation. For
the eternal soul is self-realisation. So, actually, when we are chanting Hare
Krishna, we are being compassionate. Compassionate to ourselves. Compassionate
to others. That is self-realisation. Now, Prabhupada, of course, uses the word
Madhusudan. And he says, Madhu..., here, Krishna, he says, Krishna is the killer
of demons. So, then, Arjun..., Sanjaya is indicating from these over more so,
then, that, this Lord, who killed the demon, will now kill the demon of doubt,
the ki..., demon of indecision, the demon of delusion that has overcome Arjuna.
So, that is indica..., s..., indication of this particular word. Now, after
describing this, now, Krishna, this is the, this is the first verse, full verse
that Krishna is speaking. He has spoken just "paśya". "pa...", paśya". "pārtha
paśyaitān". Just see. That was the only word that Ar..., Krishna spoke in the
earlier chapter. Now, he starts speaking.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        kutas tvā kaśmalam idaṁ
        viṣame samupasthitam
        anārya-juṣṭam asvargyam
        akīrti-karam arjuna

So, Krishna is surprised over here. He says "kutas tvā". Where from? "tvā
kaśmalam idaṁ". That such contamination has come upon you. "kaśmalam" is
contamination. "viṣame samupasthitam". "viṣame", "viṣame" means at a critical
moment, critical moment, how have you become weak-minded? So, now,
"anārya-juṣṭam asvargyam". This does not befit you. "anārya-juṣṭam". You are a
glorious person. So, sometimes, you know, if there is a big sporting event. Say,
there is a world cup final. And the last ball is coming. And then, baller is
about to ball. And the baller starts trembling. How can I ball? What will happen
in this ball? The captain says, come on, you are made of better stuff. You
cannot lose your nerve like this. So, people who lose their nerve, they are
sometimes, they are called as chokers. You choke when the pressure comes up. The
pressure comes up, person should be able to take the pressure. That is maturity.
That is the person, who can choke, check, take the pressure is said to be cool.
But somebody who cannot take the preassure is said chokes. So, he gives ch...,
ch..., that person gets choked up. So, Krishna is telling Arjuna, do not, now,
do not be a choker like that. So, nobody likes the label of a choker. You know,
a, people feel that, when the pressure comes, I will be able to take that
pressure. So, Krishna is telling "anārya-juṣṭam asvargyam". "anārya", this,
"viṣame samupasthitam". This is the, so crisis moment. This is pressure moment.
And at that time, the real stuff should come out. You know, the real strong you
should come out. But what is this I am seeing? "anārya-juṣṭam", does not become
you. So, "kutas tvā". Where, from where has such a feeling come about? This is
unexpected for you. Now, the words have special significance over here.

        anārya-juṣṭam asvargyam
        akīrti-karam arjuna

So, He is saying that, this, this action is unbit..., unbefitting for you in
three ways. What are three ways? It is unbecoming for you as an "ārya". It is
unbecoming for you because asvargyam. It will not take you to auspicious
destination. And also, "akīrti-karam". Even in this world, it will make, not
bring you fame, but infamy. So, it does not befit who you are. It does not befit
what you will get in the future, next life. It does not befit what will get, you
will get in this life also. So, in every way, this action is unworthy of you.

Now, what is the word "ārya"? Now, we have a very positive connotation of the
word "ārya". Say, the word "ārya", there is a particular society, which is
called as Arya Samaj. And they have the idea that "āryan" is that particular
kind of people. Historically, it is said that "āryan" was a very advance race.
Srila Prabhupada acknowledges all this. But he says these are all external
meanings. The essential meaning of the word "ārya", when Krishna is using it, he
is not referring to it, oh, you do not, you do not belong to a particular race.
He says, Prabhupada says, "ārya" refers to those who know the purpose of life,
who know spiritual purpose of life, who have spiritual values. They are "ārya"s.
So, today, the word "ārya" has a very negative connotation in western thought as
well as the thought that has come to India, also. Basically, now, words acquire
certain meanings based on how they are used. And the word "ārya" has become
almost like a, in today's intellectual dialogue, discourse, it has become like
an untouchable word. Nobody wants to use that word to identify themselves. Just
like nobody wants to be called a fanatic, a religious fanatic. You know, that is
probably the worst label that a person can get today. You are white doing
extremist. So, like that, the word "ārya" has got a lot of negative connotation.
In fact, you know, the association with Vedic culture, there was this also, they
are the "swastika". So, there was an attempt in Germany to get the "swastika"
banned. Because "swastika" itself has associations which are very very
unpleasant memories for certain people. So, the word "ārya" has not been banned.
But it has also become like that. So, why is that? Prabhupada explains, beyond
any racial, cultural connotation, he says, the "ārya" has spiritual connotation,
spiritual meaning. That is, that it refers to the person who has spiritual
values. That person is "ārya". Now, words have two feature. There is
denotation. And there is connotation. Denotation means what the word directly
means. Connotation means what it implies. So, when we use words, we have to be
aware of both. For example, we had discussed earlier the word "gay". The word
"gay", denotation, in fifteen years ago, it was just simply the cheerful. But
now the word "gay" has a completely different meaning. So, like that, now, of
course, that words have certain meanings. And they have certain subtle
associations when the words are used. So, the word, what is the problem with the
word "ārya"? So, actually, when the Europeans came to India. They discovered
after Columbu..., a, after Vasco da Gama came to India. You know, basically,
the, Europe was divided into catholics and protestants. So, there were two main
divisions from the 15th, 16th century onwards between the church. And Spain,
Portugal, and Italy, these were the countries which were under the catholic
church. And France, Germany, you know, Britain, they were all under protestants.
So, they had their own churches, anglican church and other churches. But there
was a split. And both of them felt that we should evangelise the world.
Evangelise means we should spread the gospell of Christianity everywhere. So,
the protestants went to America. Amerigo Vespucci and Columbus went there. Then,
Vasco da Gama came to India. Now, when, of course, primary, Italy and Spain,
they were under catholics. So, then, after that, so, they, they went to South
America. And then, there was, the, the catholics and protestants, war was going on
in Europe. And similarly, in ..., wars were going on. But eventually, Britain,
which was a proper western country, it got paramount seed. It got power over
India. And then, when they came to India, initially, they found it, oh, this
culture is so majestic. Such a cul..., you know, there is, so ad..., first
thought, e..., everybody apart from Christians must be very bad barrack people.

And Rudyard Kipling even wrote a poem. His poem was that, it is the white men's
burden to civilise the rest of socie..., rest of the world. So, he says, just
like, it is a father, fa..., it is a father's responsibility to grow the child,
to educate the child. So, he said that, the whole rest of the world is
uncivilised. It is primitive. It is uncultured. And it is the white men's burden
to civilise the rest of society, rest of the world. So, they had their own
superiority complexes, complex. That we are best in the world. And, of course,
they had science and technology which added to that infatuation. So, when they
came to India, they were shocked to see that India had its own magnificent
literature and a lofty vision of history which spanned far, far greater than
their history. For, you know, all the doors of history ultimately go to
Greece. You know, there is Aristo..., there is Pl..., Socrates, Plato,
Aristotle. And something beyond that, but primarily, Greek civilisation was
considered to be very advanced. And after that, Jesus came. And Jesus redeemed
everything. So, that was the idea. But the Vedic civilisation went thousands and
thousands of years beyond. And initially, they thought, this was a very primitive
civilisation. But the, as some of them started, to, looking at the sanskrit
literature. They saw the scope of it. They were stunned. And somehow, their
superiority complex could not digest the idea that the, there can be any
civilisation which is more advanced than our civilisation. So, then, they tried
to come up with various ideas, how, how how can we do, accept this. You know.
Then, basically, they found that there was a lot of similarity also. For
example, the Monier-Williams, and Max Muller, and all these other prominent
indologists. That means western European scholars, who studied India. The branch
of knowledge which studied India is called as indology. So, of course, it
involves philosophy. It can involve language. It can involve religious studies.
It can involve anthropology. Various fields can be there in that. But the broad
branch is called as indology. So, now, these, all these people when they
studied, they found that sanskrit was remarkably similar to Latin and Greece.
But not only was it similar, it was actually better. Sanskrit was more refined.
The vocabulary was better. And the structure, with the grammar structure, and
the aesthetic was also better. So, the grammar is for techniques. And we have
figures of speech. We have metaphor, literal devices. That is for aesthetic. So,
the techniques and aesthetics, b..., of sanskrit, both were superior to Latin
and Greek. And, now this was even more difficult for them to digest. So, then, a
logical inference, if, it, both are su..., if sanskrit is superior to both, and
one inference could be that, why is there similarity there? Because they are all
related. And sanskrit is superior. Because sanskrit is more advanced. And then,
probably, there was some old civilisation from which they were offshoots. And
that, s..., so, some offshots went to Europe. And that is how European
civilisation came about. But this was unacceptable to their superiority complex.
You know, that means these barbarians. So, they had the idea we are civilised
people. Rest of the world is barbarians. So, these barbarians, they are our
source. And they have a civilisation better than us. That they just could not
accept. So, they came up with their own theory. That, ok, the European
civilisation and the Indian civilisation. Both have involved from some other
civilisation.

And that civilisation, they called as aryan civilisation. And they had the idea
aryans came from somewhere. They came in civilise Europe. And they came in
civilise India, also. Now, this was not just to explain a way, the magnificence
of Indian culture. That was one aspect. But there was a political impo...,
po..., it was not just for justify their superiority. There was a political
agenda behind this also. See, when the muslims came and ruled India. The muslims
came and started staying in India. So, numerous muslims came and stayed in India.
And lot of muslims, Indians also got converted, also. But anyway, the muslims,
when they came, you know, for example, Akbar Babar, their, their intention
was to rule. They stayed in India. Akbar Babar, from Babar onwards, they were,
they, India became their home. But for the Britishers, you know, the, India was
like a degraded land. And for most Britishers, they felt that, going to India is
like a punishment. You know, for some officer is posted in India. It is, India
is such a primitive, dirty, uncultured place to be posted. There is like a
punishment. So, they did not want to stay there. But at the same time, they
wanted to mo..., maintain their rule here. So, they decided, the only way we can
rule India, if Indians consider, if India is, do not cooperate with our rule, we
will not be able to rule them. So, the only way we can rule India is, if Indians
voluntarily accept that we are superior to them. That we are superior to them.
And that, we will teach them, and we are there for their help, not to rule them,
but to help them. Then, they will accept our rule. So, then, how do you make
Indians accept their rule? So, from the Indian point of view, you know, from
the, if Indians are going to study the, look at them from the Vedic sper...,
scriptural point of view. And people who eat meat, people who drink alcohol,
people who are not following on the basic regulative principles of life,
regulative principles. No, they are considered low-class. So, how can they be
respected? So, of course, they had the power of science and technology which
brought some respect. And they were political rulers, which also brought some
respect. But that respect was a grudging respect. That was not a willing
respect. So, then, they felt that the only way we can make them respect us is if
they see that our culture is superior to theirs. And if that is to be done, then
their framework for evaluating cultural superiority has to be changed. And for
that purpose, they decided, it was a, it was a huge program, which has gone on,
over multiple generations. They decided that, you know, people's faith, Indians'
faith in the Vedic literature has to be destroyed. When that faith has
destroyed, then they will not see us through the framework of those eyes,
through that scrip..., those cultural standards. And they will see our
superiority. So, when the muslims came to India, they destroyed temples. Many
temples, they have destroyed. Thousands in fact. But when the Britishers came to
India, they did not destroy so many temples. Their strategy was much deeper.
They destroyed the faith that made people go to the temples. By misinterpreting
the Vedic literature in a systematic way, they destroyed the faith. So, one of
the ideas was, that rather than acknowledging that, In..., Indian culture is,
Indian civi..., literature, Indian culture is superior to European culture, they
said that both of us, we have come from some other culture. And that they called
as aryan civilisation. So, in that sense, we are both long-lost brothers. You
know, our ancestors, the same. They are the ancient aryas. And we have both come
from same ancestors. And now, we, long-lost brothers have met. And now that we
have met, we will, we have learnt some things more. So, we will teach them to
you. So, and that, original aryan culture, that was lost. So, practically,
everything that was good about Indian culture, they said that, oh, that has not
come from India. That has come from that aryan civilisation. And the original
Indians, they were the dravidians. Dravidian, they were low-caste, low-cla...,
low-quality people. And, of course, this is a very complex social-political
issue. So, I will not go into the intricacies. Our focus here is on the current,
current untouchable status that was associated with the word "aryan". Why is
that?

So, what happened was that this, so, idea. So, his, his, Srila Prabhu..., one
of Srila Prabhupada's scholar disciple, Devamrita Maharaja has written a book
"Searching for Vedic India" where he talks extensively about this. And this is a
huge field of academic research, also. So, basically, when the idea came up that
there was an ancient civilisation which is the mother, which is the parent of
both the European civilisation, the Greco-Roman civilisation, and the Indian
civilisation. Then, the quest for that ancient motherland became frenetic. You
know, where was it? There, the problem is that if there was the ancient
civilisation. And that was so advanced that it led to the, all the good parts of
the Indian civilisation and all the good parts of European civilisation, also.
Then, it itself must have been very advanced. Where is that civilisation? And,
actually, archeology, and history, all around in the Eurasia, or for that
matter, in that whole area, we could not give any s..., tangible evidence for
an ancient, advanced civilisation anywhere else. So, now, the correct
understanding is that, actually, that ancient civilisation was in India itself.
And after the Kurukṣetra war, then people started, a, a, when the strong rule of
the, of it, Hastinapur over India, and the world started weaking, then there was
emigration. And then there was disconnection. And that is how the expatriates so
went from here everywhere else. So, but the point was that, actually, the ar...,
heart line of the aryan civilisation was India only. And aryans and dravidians,
they were living compatibly together for, and th..., this whole division is,
actually, quite artificial. There was so many races over there in India, at that
time, also. Different people were living reasonably harmoniously. But this idea
came up that aryans were staying somewhere else. And that way, you know, Indians
could be deprived of the credit for their advanced religion. Because, this,
your, this is not yours. This is the aryan civilisation, all the good parts.
Sanskrit has come from the aryans. Now, if these aryans were invading tribes,
who came. There are several problems with this. First is, there is no s...,
psychological evidence for any advanced civilisation in, anywhere in Eurasia.
Beyond that, if she did, the aryans were just nomadic tribes, that was the idea.
You know, they were tribes who were, nomadic means traveling here and there.
Now, these nomadic tribes sang the Rigveda. That is the idea. So, now, Rigveda
and Sanskrit itself, Rigveda itself is a complex poetry. And Sanskrit is such a
profound language that even the understanding the grammar of sanskrit takes
twelwe years. So, then, the question comes up, if there was a race which is
primarily nomadic, you know, people who were just traveling, how much time do
they have to study? If they do not even have one place to stay. Then, they are
always on the move. When can they study? And how much can they study? If we
look at the anthropology of the world. Anthropology is study of the cultures,
cultures of the world. Then, we see that, generally, nomadic people do not
develop much literature. Their language is not very sophisticated. Even their
thoughts, they may have wisdom because of traveling. But in terms of
literary sophistication and linguistic depth, that is not possible for nomadic
tribes. You know, you know, we have some idea of this. When a, when, say, some
preachers and some devotees are traveling a lot. Then, you may, can read a few
books while traveling. Because now traveling is easy. We can travel by cars. We
can travel by trains. We can travel by planes. But earlier, when people, who
traveled, you had to travel on horse pack. Or you had to walk. Or you had to
travel by some other animal drau..., drau..., using some other draught animals.
So, then, that sort of traveling is not very conducive for reading. So, then,
w..., and what about systematic serious study? So, there is a complete mismatch
between the idea that there i..., there is a, there is nomadic tribes who is
going from place to place, to place. And their writing, and speaking, and
singing in a language whose grammar takes twelwe years to master.

So, basically, the point is the aryan invasion theory or the aryan migration
theory, that is a complete speculation. You know, it is, it is a total mess. And
there is practically no evidence for it. But anyway, the idea was once this
ar..., once this claim of an ancient civilisation which populated the Euro...,
Europe, as well as populated and civilised both Europe and India came up, then
every c..., you know, almost every European country started claiming, oh, we are
that ancient European civilisation. We are that ancient civilisation. And one
person who claimed that we are that ancient civilisation is Adolf Hitler. So,
Hitler got the idea that Germans are the original aryans. And Germans are the
people who, who have actually civilised the whole world. And now, that ancient
glory of Germany will now come back again. So, under me. So, his idea was that
because Germans were the original glorious race of the world, they deserved to
rule the world. And that is, be..., it was this, this aryan idea was one of the
prominent ideas of the nazi ideology. And through that, equipoisoned the whole
world, whole, whole of German country. And then that poison spread practically
the whole world, ov... whole world. And eventually started attacking country
after country, and this second world war started. Because the nazis were
convinced of their superiority over others based on the conception of they being
the original aryans. And then he also adopted the swastika. So, the swastika
symbol, it is there. So, he said that, we are the a..., I am the a..., we are
the aryans. We, germans are descendant on the aryans. And the "swastika", that
is the symbol of auspiciousness. He twisted it a lot. And he said this is our
symbol. So, of course, he wanted not auspiciousness for everyone. He wanted
inauspiciousness for everyone, practically. Inauspiciousness for everyone,
except the Germans. So, either they have to be slaves of Germans, subordinate to
Germans, or they have to be exterminated. So, eventually, of course, the world
war two took place. And finally, he was checked. And he committed suicide. And
then everything stopped. The war stopped after 1944, 1945. But the point of all
this discussion is that the word arya became associated with the whole
socio-cultural, socio-cultural, sociopolitical mess that erupted as the second
world war. And that is why, now, the word, nobody wants to say that we are the
arya. Because Hitler was to claim that. Then, I was the arya. And the word has
got a very negative connotation today. So, the point is, a..., all these are
completely non, they are accretions. Accretions means that which is externally
added. They are irrelevant to the context of the Bhagavad Gita. When
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur had sent his disciples to preach. So, they went
to, there were two countries which were very influential. England was
influential. And Germany was influential. In Europe at that time. So, America
was also powerful. But America became especially powerful after the second world
war. So, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur, at that time, Europe was still
powerful. In fact, he, so, he had sent his disciples to both Britain and
Germany. And while he was, the, the, his disciples were preaching in Germany.
So, one of his disciples gave a talk about aryans. And then, he mentioned the
point that, actually, this aryan is a spiritual designation. And this is not a
racial designation. It is not a, it does not refer so much to a particular race.
It refers to the person having spiritual values. And then, one of the nazis, he
read this. And he found this unacceptable. And he said, this is completely
antithetical to the understanding of aryans that we have. And at that time, they
were in power. And they said that, this, this sort, this sort of, they said that
the Gau..., Gaudiya Math, what they are preaching is completely poisonous. It is
completely antithetical to the understanding. This sort of understanding should
not be given. And they almost imposed a ban on the devotees preaching over
there. And the devotees were, were preaching over there, they had to, is, these
devotees were, at that time, ISKCON was not there. These were Gaudiya Math
devotees, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura disciples. They had to flee for
their life. And somehow, the whole German mission got scuttled.  So, the point
is, this is not just a casual thing, what the word arya means and what it does
not mean. It has very serious implications. So, w..., here, what Krishna is,
Ar..., referring to. "anārya" is a person who does, does not act according to
spiritual values. That is "anārya".

        anārya-juṣṭam asvargyam
        akīrti-karam arjuna

So, "akīrti-karam" will be elaborated by Krishna later on, in the section 31 to
38. He says, how, you will be infamous. They are famous as a heroic warrior. But
if you leave the battlefield, you know, people will think that you are cowardly.
You got, suddenly got, now, then you left. So, you know, suppose, there is a
final lower to be balled. And there is a famous baller. You know, he is known to
ball well. But there is only, say, 7-8 runs to be scored in that last ball. And
the baller says, you know, in fact, ball and the race must cause 7-8 runs. Then,
my name will get tainted. Oh, that, he balls the last ball, gonna be, lost the
match. And he says, I will not ball the ball only. Then, what are you saying?
You are a chicken. You know, you should be worthy. You should be ready to ball
the ball. You know. It is tough. But you have to do it. So, like that, if
somebody runs away when there is a big crisis. Then, what happens is, when that
person runs away like, that, when there is a challenge, or a crisis, then that
person is disregarded. So, this is worse than that. Even there is a war is
there. And somebody just leaves the war. He says, you will be treated as
cowardly, "akīrti-karam arjuna". So, Krishna continues this logic. Now, Srila
Prabhupada, his whole purport is primarily focused on only one point. His point
is "śrī-bhagavān uvāca". So, he says, who is this "bhagavān"? Prabhupada talks
about A..., the Absolute Truth as three manifestations. Brahman, Paramatma and
Bhagavan. And Bhagavan is the highest manifestation. And Krishna is that
"bhagavān". And Prabhupada quotes from the Bhagavatam twice to esta...,
substantiate the point how Krishna is the original manifestation of Bhagavan. He
is the fullest manifestation.

        ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ
        kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

And that, after that, Prabhupada just quotes one paragraph about kutaḥ. And how,
it, this is unworthy action. Then, let us look at 2.3.

        klaibyaṁ mā sma gamaḥ pārtha
        naitat tvayy upapadyate
        kṣudraṁ hṛdaya-daurbalyaṁ
        tyaktvottiṣṭha paran-tapa

"klaibyaṁ mā sma gamaḥ pārtha". Oh, Arjuna, this is "klaibyaṁ". "klaibyaṁ" is
actually very strong word. "klaibyaṁ" is impotence. So, it is, this is like a
verbal slap for Arjuna. There is a physical slap. And there is a verbal slap.
So, "klaibyaṁ mā sma gamaḥ pārtha". Oh, Arjuna do not become impotent like this.
"naitat tvayy upapadyate", this does not befit you. "tvayy upapadyate".
"upapadyate" means to befit you, behool you. "kṣudraṁ hṛdaya-daurbalyaṁ", this
is weakness of the heart. And this befits a "kṣudraṁ". "tyaktvottiṣṭha
paran-tapa".  Oh, you are a chastiser of the enemies. The word "paran-tapa" will
come again and again in the Bhagavad Gita when, when a person has to be gloried
and prayed.  So, you are "paran-tapa". Actually, you are meant to chastise the
enemies. But if you flee away from the battlefield, this, unworthy of you. So,
actually, there are two strong verbal words. The word "kṣudraṁ" and "klaibyaṁ".
So, a man, a k..., a k..., a ksatriya, ksatriya is a, the, very, in many ways,
the ksatriya is the personification of masculinity. You know, is, the ksatriya
is considered to be very, very strong, and powerful, virile. And along with
that, the ksatriya is set to have, not only a, courage, but also po..., potency.
You know, cour..., c..., ksa..., maybe, ksatriya has some, as many wives and
then, they beget many children to those wives. So, that is considered potency.
So, of course, ksatriya has many wives because in the Vedic culture, women, the
f..., male population would often be less than the females. Because many men
would take sannyasi. And that is why all the women had to be married. So,
ksatriyas would have many wives sometimes. But the important is, for a ksatriya
to be considered impotent is a big, big insult. And for a ksatriya to be called
a shudra, that is also big insult. So, this is not just against a casteist
insult. It is basically quality based insult. You know, somebody, who is a very
talented student. You know, he is a, he is a, so, that person is very
intelligent, a topper. And then, somebody says, you are a buff. You know, you
are a fool. We do not understand anything. That is insult. It is not a casteist
insult. It is a quality based. You know, somebody has qualities. But when
somebody says, you do not have those qualities. So, Kr..., Krishna is trying to
prod Arjuna g..., into action by giving a peptalk over here. And peptalk
involves, you know, come on, do it, man. You are not a coward. You are a strong
person. Why are you acting cowardly? So, here, Krishna is just trying to,
through a peptalk, g..., inspire Arjuna to start acting again. So, now, actually
speaking, the word "klaibyaṁ" brings back memories. Memories that are quite
mortifying. Why? Arjuna, as I said, ksatriya is a very personification of
masculinity and virility. So, for Arjuna, to beco..., for Arjuna, during the
agyatvas, he had become Brihannala. Brihannala was a dance teacher. So, actually,
Arjuna had, there was prac..., very difficult for Arjuna to conceal himself.
Because he was so famous. But they all had to see nagyatvas. And when Duryodhana
have set up that condition, Duryodhana was convinced that, you know, actually,
the, it will be impossible for the Pandavas to hide themselves. My spies will
find. And then, the condition was if you are found, you have to go again for
twelwe years, you know, to the forest. So, that way, he thought that he had, he
would send, send him to the forest forever. But Arjuna had taken on the, for the
dress of a dancer. So, he has, had a formidable body, which he could not hide.
But then, now, how could he be hiding dance teacher? So, he said, he could not
be, real, become a female. So, he had the idea that he was a neuter, a eunuch.
So, you know, actually, how could a person like Arjuna be a eunuch? He was, as I
said, such a strong virile masculine ksatriya. So, there is the whole story that
Arjuna had gone to the heaavens. When he was in the heavens, heaven, that time,
he was with Indra. Indra was very happy to see, in a sense, Indra was Arjuna's
father. Because Indra, he had begotten, through Indra and Kuntī. So, Indra
welcomed his son. And, so, Arjuna did heroic feats in Indra's service. There
were demons, like Nivatakavachas, who had been troubling Indra for a long time.
And Arjuna went and single handedly fought them. And Indra was so confident that
Arjuna will be able to kill them. That Indra gave his own chariot, Matali. It
was a great honor to get the chariot of Indra. So, that ch..., honor was also
accorded to Lord Rama during the final war with Ravana. So, Indra got Matali,
his charioteer and the chariot. And then, they went and fought. And Arjuna was
s..., overcame, the full, he was, gigantic army of the Nivatakavachas. So, that,
Arjuna's exploits when he had gone to heaven, are extraordinary.

But anyway, when he was in heaven, at that time, Indra was giving him a lot of
honor. And Indra had these damsels, apsaras, who would dance in his court for
his pleasure. And Indra, and Arjuna saw over there Urvashi. And he was glancing
at her again and again. So, actually, you know, Indra merely noticed it. So,
Indra thought maybe Arjuna is attracted to Urvashi. So, he told Urvashi, you go
and serve In..., A..., Arjuna. So, Urvashi dressed up, so, very nicely. And
Arju...,  Urvashi, she was also attracted Indra. Arjuna was very handsome, very
powerful. So, she, then, she went at night to him. And she was dressed in a, a
way that was meant to provoke a man's desires. And when Indra s..., when Arjuna
saw her. Arjuna immediately, he looked at the, the, she was number, pretty, but
he looked at away from her. And he says this, how can I serve you? She says,
Indra has sent me to you. And you know, she is, she basically offered, him,
herself to him. And he says, no, no, no, no. Actually, I was looking at you. But
because I have heard about how my ancestor, Purūravas was attracted to you. That
is thoroughly described in Ninth Canto of Bhagavatam and Eleventh Canto of the
Bhagavatam. That Purūravas was completely infatuated while only he was
practically give up everything for her sake. So, he says, I was remembering
about how Purūravas was attracted to you. And therefore, I, I was looking at
you. He says not that I am personally attracted. He says, no, no, but he says, I
am, I am attracted. Urvashi says, practically speaking, you know, I want to be
with you. He says, no, you have been, you have been the wife of my ancestors.
Therefore, you are like my mother. He said, I cannot unite with you. She said,
you know, oh, these rules of morality do not apply to us in heaven. He says, no,
which, us, they may not apply to you in heaven. But I am not from heaven. I am
from the earth. I have to follow the rules of morality. She said, no, your
father has sent me to you. Indra has sent me to you. You must have this for me.
He said, no, no, I cannot do that. So, you know, for a woman to offer herself,
that is often sometimes difficult to do. For, and then, for a woman to be
rejected after she has offered, so, that is extremely mortifying. So, Urvashi
was furious. And she said, you are acting like an im..., impotent person. I
curse you that you will become impotent. Now, for Arjuna, this was, a,
devastating. You know, first of all, to exhibit self-control in such a situation
where a, where a, not just an ordinary woman, but apsara is offering herself,
with no strings attached, that itself is difficult. And after one does that,
instead of, after one exhibits such an exemplary self-control, then instead of
being praised, one gets cursed for that. That is even more shocking. So, he even
immediately went to Indra's palace. And he told all this. And then, In..., Indra
said, Indra, he tought, he, as he was going through the story, then, surely,
Indra must have thought that this will happen. Now, why did he send? Then, Indra
told him, do not worry, this will come you, good use for you in future. So, that
curse, which Urvashi had given to him when Arjuna had been heaven law, in
heaven, in the forest time. So, that curse Arjuna used now. So, he got the
bin..., he got the benefit here. Because here, he wanted to act like a dance
teacher for Uttara, the daughter of Uttara, K..., daughter of Virata, Virata's
king. So, then, he, and, he was able to take up that curse. And he acted as
eunuch over here. And in that way, he could also stay in agyatvas. So, actually,
sometimes when we try, stay strong in our principles, you know, we make it, we,
it may appear as if we are getting now more trouble. You know, by resisting
temptation, Arjuna got, seems to get into more trouble. But what happened was,
eventually, in an inconceivable way, he could not have possibly thought later
that I will have to act like an eunuch. And at that time, the curse will come
and helpful. But in the own way, if somebody lose for dharma, even if there is
trouble, the trouble will eventually lead to something good, in a way, that we
cannot conceive at that time. So, that is how Arjuna had acted as a eunuch. And
not just acted as a eunuch, he had become a eunuch for that month. He had become
physically impotent. So, when he came along on the King of Utt..., Virata, he
actually saw him. And when the, he told them I am a dance teacher, then, he, he
was going to interest his daughter. So, he had to be careful. So, he had
been examined. And they found that he sees actually a eunuch. And then, they had
an interested with the responsibility of teaching his daughter.

So, the point of all this discussion is even for f..., although Arjuna was
eunuch at that time. But for all the Pandavas, it was an extremely mortifying
period. You know, at least, when they were in the forest, they were on their
own. And they were surrounded by sages. And they were discussing Krish.., they
were discussing about the various Vedic histories and the Lord's pastimes. But
here, when they were in agyatvas, they had to act as servants for some other
king. Whose power was actually far lower than their power. You know, so, Bhīma
had to become a cook. Arjuna, Krish..., Yudhiṣṭhira became a minister. Yu...,
Draupadī had to become a maidservant for the queen. But among all of them, you
know, probably, the most mortifying, most humiliating, in a sense, degrading
duty was for Arjuna that he had to become a, he had to become a eunuch and a
dance teacher for a woman. So, of course, that, that was, that woman was the
princess. That was different. But the point is for him to become a dance
teacher, a eunuch, was itself quite mortifying. So, actually, the word
"klaibyaṁ" actually invokes those thoughts. So, for Arjuna, you acted like a
"klaibyaṁ". You acted like a "eunuch". You acted like an impotent. But have you
actually become impotent? Have, have you actually become impotent? So, this is
like a severe verbal slap. And Arjuna, Krishna wants to goad Arjuna out and make
him fight. But Arjuna's despression is too deep. You know, just some surface
talks are not going to work. So, Arjuna counters all this. And then, Krishna,
next time, when He speaks, even He starts giving enlightenment. So, let us see
what Krishna speaks. Sorry, Krishna had spoken. Let us see what Arjuna speaks.

        arjuna uvāca

        kathaṁ bhīṣmam ahaṁ saṅkhye
        droṇaṁ ca madhusūdana
        iṣubhiḥ pratiyotsyāmi
        pūjārhāv ari-sūdana

So, he says, "kathaṁ bhīṣmam ahaṁ saṅkhye", in the battle, "saṅkhye", "kathaṁ
bhīṣmam ahaṁ". How can I fight with Bhīṣma? "droṇaṁ ca madhusūdana". How can I
fight with my Droṇa? You know, Bhīṣma is my grandfather. Droṇa is my teacher.

        iṣubhiḥ pratiyotsyāmi
        pūjārhāv ari-sūdana

How can I shoot arrows at them? "iṣubhiḥ". So, what should I be doing? Actually,
instead of offering arrows, "pūjārhāv". I should be offering them flowers. I
should be respecting them. And he is drawing out, highlighting the contrast by
using the word "ari-sūdana". "ari-sūdana" means, first, he has used the word
"madhusūdana" for him. You know, that is fine. You are the killer of the
Mari..., Madhu demon. But you see, "ari-sūdana". You are the killer of demons.
Now, would you ever shoot arrows at Maharaja Ugrasena who is your grandfather?
Or would you shoot arrows at Sandīpanī Muni who is your teacher? If you would
never shoot arrows at them, you are o..., you are killer only of demons. You are
killer of enemies, "ari-sūdana". And then, example of that is you kill Madhu.
But how can you ask me to kill, to shoot arrows for killing my elders? In fact,
according to, Prabhupada writes about Vedic etiquette, one should not even
verbally count one's elders, what to speak of physically attack them? So, he
says, how can I do that? "kathaṁ bhīṣmam". So, here, they are both discussing in
rhetorical language. So, Krishna is "kutas tvā kaśmalam idaṁ". From, where from?
From, where from have such impurities come? Now, where from such impurities have
come does not mean, have they come from north, west, east, south? That is not
the point. Even they are not expected to be there. It is a rhetorical question.
Rhetorical question means, in that, rhetorical question, the answer is implied.
The question itself contains the answer. One is not expecting an answer. But it
is implied. What is the use of crying when things have already gone wrong? So,
then, when, what is the use of crying means there is no use of crying. So,
"kutas tvā kaśmalam idaṁ" means, from where have they come? They should not have
come. "kathaṁ bhīṣmam ahaṁ saṅkhye". How can I fight with my elders? That means
I cannot fight. So, the rhetorical questions, which are used to emphatically
drive home a point. So, then, he substantiates this point with further
reasoning.

        gurūn ahatvā hi mahānubhāvān
        śreyo bhoktuṁ bhaikṣyam apīha loke
        hatvārtha-kāmāṁs tu gurūn ihaiva
        bhuñjīya bhogān rudhira-pradigdhān

So, "gurūn ahatvā". So, "gurūn", "hatvā" is to kill. "ahatvā" is to not kill.
So, "gurūn ahatvā", without killing my elder relative. "hi mahānubhāvān". And
they are "mahānubhāvān". Now, somebody may say that, actually, yes, he might
have been a guru. But, you know, he has not acted properly. And therefore, he is
no longer the guru. So, the Mahabharat also contains a verse, actually. That, in
the, that if a guru acts in unworthy way, then the guru can be rejected. So,
Ri..., Jiva Goswami also talks about this in his writings. And we have the
example of that in, Bali Maharaja, acting against the will of Shukracharya. He
was a, he was a priest. But the priest was also acting like a spiritual master
for the, for Bali Maharaja and the demons. So, when he told him, do not
surrender to Vishnu. So, that, Bali Maharaja said, no, the purpose of the guru
is to help a disciple surrender to Vishnu, you know, to go closer to Vishnu. So,
if that the guru is coming in-between that, then the guru should be rejected.
So, s..., similarly, in this context here, Droṇācārya and Bhīṣma, both actually
had remained silent. They had not stopped when Draupadī was being disrobed. So,
by thus allowing adharma to happen, they had also practiced adharma. And because
they had practiced adharma, they had also become contaminated by sin. And
therefore, they were not worthy of being gurus. They were not worthy of being
gurus. So, that is why, you know, k..., somebody may say that, oh, the, how can
they be killed? So, Krishna, Arjuna's point is, no, they are still mahānubhāvān.
You know, they are still great souls. So, you know, there is Draupadī's
svayaṃvara, Draupadī's vastraharan is a very dramatic pastime. Of course, it is
dramatic ultimately. Because Krishna comes and offers unlimited clothes to her.
But before that, it was very dramatic. It was dramatic for everyone over
there, especially those were on the side of virtue. So, for the Pandavas, it was
dramatic, to, first of all, lose the whole kingdom, to lose their honor, to
become enslaved, and then to see Draupadī also humiliated like that. But it, it
was, was similarly for Bhīṣma also, for Droṇa also, for all the, Vidura also.
So, and, of course, for Draupadī, it was so mortifying. So, why did Bhīṣma
remain silent at that time? So, you know, at a deeper, at the deepest level, we
understand that, this whole pastime is meant to demonstrate a particular truth.
And that truth is that no matter how many worthy protectors we have in this
world. Still, this world can put us in situations where none of our protectors
will be able to protect us. And ultimately, we have only one protector. And that
protector is the Supreme Lord. So, Draupadī had, normally, a woman is protected
by the husband. Draupadī had five ksatriya husbands. And still, she could, she
could not be protected. Such circumstances came up that they were all reduced to
helplessness. And similarly, their elders, elders, who could not, like Bhīṣma
was so powerful that nobody could counter him in war. Droṇa was a teacher of
great, great ksatriyas. And even they could not be able to help. So, ultimately,
we understand that this whole pastime is orchestrated in such a way that this
lesson is taught that we have no protector ultimately, except Krishna. So, that
is the lesson which we learn from this pastime at an ultimate level.

At the same time, if we look at the contextual level. The Mahabharata,
especially, can be understood at various levels. At the karma-kanda level and
the pure devotional level. So, at the karma-kanda level, it is, why did Bhīṣma
fight on the side of the Kauravas? Because he was duty bound. He had taken a
vow. Because he had taken the salt of the Kauravas. So, he had to, he had to
fight on their side. He had taken a vow to protect the ruling dyna..., ruler of
the Has..., of Hastinapur. And that is why he had to fight. But that is the
external reason. That is the karma-kanda level. A deeper level, he fought on the
side of the Kauravas because he wanted to demonstrate the principle that the
Lo..., Lord wanted, through him, to demonstrate the principle that anybody who
goes against the will of the Lord, that person will be, will perish. So,
similarly, at the karma-kanda level, at the pure devotional level, we understand
that Bhīṣma Pitamah was orchestrated by the Lord. But at the low, at another
level, at the karma-kanda level, we can also look at the reasoning. So, when
Draupadī was gambled. And she was lost. So, you know, at that time, Duryodhana,
Karṇa, Duḥśāsana, Shakuni, they all started laughing, rubbing salt on the wombs
of Kauravas, of the Pandavas. And then, they suggested, you know, now, Draupadī
has been won over. Now, let us, let us bring her over here. You know, and bring
her here. And then, le..., she is our maidservant. We can do whatever we want
with. Actually, even with maidservants, ksatriyas are not allowed to do anything
that they want. It means they have to, maidservants also have to be taken care
of. Ksatriya is ksata trayate. That means to protect others. His maidservants
are meant to serve them and the family, serve the house, and serve the kings.
But they also should be given proper dignity. This is their idea. She is our
maidservant. You can do whatever you want. This is a perversion of the ksatriya
idea. And worse, all the more so, for a woman, who is not a maidservant. So,
then, he sent one of the court attendances, called Pratikamin. You know, so,
Pratikamin, he sent him. Go and get s..., Draupadī. So, now, he was trembling.
You know, he, he knew this looks a very adharmic act that was happening. When,
he told Draupadī, Draupadī, Draupadī was very kind. And she said, what is the
matter? He said, you have been summoned to the assembly. And he told everything
that had happened. So, Draupadī was aghast to hear this. But then, she said,
that you go and ask the assembly that who was gambled first? If Yudhiṣṭhira had
gambled himself way first, then did he have any right to gamble me? You know, if
Yudhiṣṭhira was not even his own master. He was already a slave. He was already
l..., lost himself. He had become a slave. Then, how could he have gambled me?
And if he was not my master and he has gambled me at that time, then if none,
then my gambling is not proper. Then, I am not anybody's slave. So, she went and
to..., he went and told this. So, the Pratikamin said this question. And then,
the Duryodhana just, he was so haughty. He said, you know, tell her, she can
come, and come to the assembly, and ask this question to the assembly herself.
So, Pratikamin went again. And then she said, so, Draupadī heard this and she
said, actually, I am in my period. I am wearing a single cloth. I cannot come
now. So, so, he went and told. You know, so, Dusha..., Duryodhana got very
angry. Why are you coming alone? So, he said her answer. She cannot come. So,
then, Duryodhana said, she is our maidservant. Whether she is in a period or
what, she is wearing a single cloth or no cloth, she has to obey our commands.
He says, he is, Duryodhana turned to Duḥśāsana. He said, you know, this
Pratikamin is a coward. He is afraid of Bhīma. Du..., Duḥśāsana, you are not
afraid of Bhīma. You go and get her. So, then, Duḥśāsana went and brutally
dragged her. So, when Duḥśāsana saw, when Draupadī saw Duḥśāsana coming, she is,
became scared. Then, she ran. She, now, she, now, only place she could run
towards, everybody was in the assembly. So, she ran towards Gandhari chambers.
So, at least, Gandhari would stop. But before she could reach Gandhari chambers.
Duḥśāsana dragged her, caught her by her hair, and dragged her, and he took
brutally to the assembly, and crying bitterly, like an os..., helpless osprey.
Draupadī came and fell. She was thrown, hall of the floor, of the pala..., of
the court. And everybody was aghast. Of course, everybody, apart from the
Kauravas. They were aghast to see what was happening. Fie, fie, you know, they
said. This is bru..., terrible, they said. What is this happening? But then,
Draupadī got away. She says, she says, she was such a cultured lady. She says,
please forgive me I am coming in this condition. But I have been brought here
against my will. And she put, she submitted the same appeal again. And she
looked at everyone else, at everyone. And nobody answered her. So, then, at that
time, when nobody answered, she, she, she begged. She, she just said, you know,
please tell me. Now, actually, the Kau..., Kau..., Pandavas were so moritified
by all this. They could not even meet the eyes of Draupadī. And Draupadī said
that please tell, wha..., actually, if Yudhiṣṭhira has already gambled himself,
then how could he have gambled me? So, then, at that time, Bhīṣma Pitamah, he
spoke. And he said that. Bhīṣma said that, actually, the question that you have
asked is very difficult. You know, my mind is bewildered. He said that, you
know, actually, if a person has gambled himself away, then he, he has no right
to gamble anyone else. But at the same time, it is said that in the scriptures
that, the wife is al..., always belongs to the husband. So, these are
contradictory considerations. And I do not know wh..., I am confused about what
is the solution.

So, here, actually, from the karma-kanda point of view, here, Bhīṣma Pitamah is
acting as if he is caught in a niyamāgraha. We discussed in Updesamrta,
niyamāgraha means to get caught in the technicalities of a rule without
understanding its essential principle. So, the essential principle is that, all
the rules are ultimately there to prevent injustice from happening. And now, at
a blatant level, injustice is happening. How? You know, a virtuous lady is being
so publicly and flagrantly dishonored. That is injustice. So, technicalities do
not matter, you know. The, the whole thing should have been stopped that away,
there itself. But here, what happens is Bhīṣma Pitamah gets caught in the
niyamāgraha. And then, Vikarna speaks. And Vikarna says, oh, assembly, you
should answer. So, if you are not going to answer, then nobody answers the
question. She has raised a question. And we will, we will all become
contaminated by sin if you do not answer. Then, Vikarna says, if you do not
answer, I will answer. And then, Vikarna says that, you know, when ksat..., men,
when ksatriyas come under the influence of animal hunting, womanising, gambling,
or drinking, then they lose their intelligence and they act irrationally. And
what is, what action are done in that situation should not be taken very
seriously. So, I, he says that I feel that whole gambling match would be
cancelled and analed. And the Kau..., Pandavas should be restored to their
kingdom. And Kaurava..., Kau..., Draupadī should be restored to a proper honor.
So, on hearing this, all the assembly s..., except for the Duryo..., Pa...,Kauravas,
start cheering. And they all started cheering. Yes. Yes. Very rightly said. Very
rightly said. Wherein, Karṇa blazes up. And he, we, is using, moving his giant
arms. He silences everyone. Shut up. Silence. Shut up, he says. And then, he
says that there are many improper things that I have seen in this assembly. But
the most improper thing is what Vikarna has spoke. See, he is perverted lawyer.
Vikarna is trying to project..., protect dharma. But he is saying, this is the
most improper thing I have said. He said, Yudhiṣṭhira gambled voluntarily. He
says, nobody forced him to gamble. You know. He was invited. He came. He was
invited to gamble. He agreed to gamble. Nobody forced him to gamble his kingdom.
Nobody forced him to gamble himself. Nobody forced him, him to, forced him to
gamble his wife. He has gambled voluntarily. So, now, he has to bear the
consequence. And as far as chastity is concerned, you know, actually, what kind
of chaste woman will marry five wife..., five husbands? You know, she is not at
all a chaste woman. And whatever we do to her, he says, that has nothing wrong
with it. Because the woman who has five husbands, she is already unchaste. So,
when Karṇa spoke, just the Pandavas looking so angry. You know, so angry. That,
that was a time after, soon after he said, Bhīma took those fierce vow. He took
the vow that, you know, Duḥśāsana had brought her, w..., brought Draupadī with
her hand, dragging with her hands. He says, I will cut off that hand. And I will
drink the blood. And Duryodhana had said, oh, Draupadī, you are my maidservant.
Come and sit on my lap now. So, he had tapped his lap. And, you know, so, at
that time, Bhīma, I will break your tie. Bhīma took that vow. So, Arjuna said
that, you know, I will kill Karṇa. So, so, very terrible occasion. So, of
course, the point of our discussion here is that, you know:

        maunam sammatir lakshanam

Bhīṣma and Droṇa, they were in that assembly, and while being in that assembly,
they, they silently, almost unprotestingly, allowed Draupadī to be disgraced.
So, that is why they are not worthy to be gurus. That is the point. But Arjuna
feels, no, no, no, no. They have given me so much. They are worthy of being
gurus.

        gurūn ahatvā hi mahānubhāvān

So, he says, they are still mahānubhāvān.

        śreyo bhoktuṁ bhaikṣyam apīha loke

So, he says that rather trying to enjoy this world, "bhaikṣyam", literally
better, "śreyo", for me, if I become a beggar. And I live by begging rather
than:

        hatvārtha-kāmāṁs tu gurūn ihaiva

For my "kāmā", for my lust, "hatvārtha", if I kill my, you know, worshipable
superiors.

        bhuñjīya bhogān rudhira-pradigdhān

Then the s..., then the spoils that we get, the kingdom that we will get, will
be tainted by blood. And what is the use of such kingdom that is tainted by
blood? He says we will be contaminated by sin. We will be tainted by blood. So,
far better than that is "śreyo bhoktuṁ bhaikṣyam". It is be..., far better to
live by begging. So, Arjuna, he is maintaining his respect towards his
superiors even though they have acted g..., in grievously wrong ways. And he is
saying I cannot kill them. I cannot kill them. Better that I live by begging.
Why live by begging? Because for a ksatriya, there is no other way to live.
ksatriya is meant to rule, and rule, and that way, ksatriya gains taxes. And
that is how the ksatriya rules. The Pandavas living in, you know, of exile in
the forest, that is inappro..., that was exceptional situation. Because they
were under sentence. And when they were living as guests after that in Virata's
kingdom, that was also as temporarily. But normally, ksatriyas need to have a
place to administer. And that is how they live. Otherwise, they basically are
renunciates. And as renunciates, they live by begging. So, this is, it is
better for us to live by begging. It is better for us to live that way rather
than to eat the spoils of those who have, you know, killed. So, this was
Arjuna's feeling. And we will, you know, discuss this more in our next class.

Thank you very much. Srimad Bhagavad Gita ki jaya. Hare Krishna.
