Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vR22CbxAbh8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=NYH58zXbB0JqTO2MLQR9ezligLJ8MTU0ODQ4NzI4MEAxNTQ4NDAwODgw&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_052_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_22_to_28_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=vR22CbxAbh8

Hare Krishna.

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita class. We are discussing on
the second chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. Where Krishna is responding to the
Arjuna's various arguments. So, the first argument was about compassion. How can
I kill my relatives? So, Krishna is responding from 2.11 to 2.30 by saying
that, actually, your relatives are souls, who are indestructible. And their
bodies are unavoidably destructible. Therefore, do not give up your duty. That
is the crux of the argument. And Krishna is essentially using the strategy of
naiti, naiti. Not this. Not this, to explain the soul by negation of the
material. So that some indication of the spiritual will be given, will be
conveyed. So, now, let us look at the process by which the soul moves from one
body to another body.

        vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya
        navāni gṛhṇāti naro ’parāṇi
        tathā śarīrāṇi vihāya jīrṇāny
        anyāni saṁyāti navāni dehī

So, "vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni". "vāsāṁsi" is dress. "jīrṇāni" is when they become old.
"yathā vihāya". "vihāya" is to give up. So, just as that person gives up all
garments. "navāni gṛhṇāti naro ’parāṇi". "naro ’parāṇi". Another, a human being
takes another garment which are new. "tathā śarīrāṇi". Similarly, you know, the,
the, "śar...". Similarly, there is a body. "vihāya jīrṇāny". When old is given
up. And "anyāni saṁyāti", is accepted new. "navāni dehī". The occupier of the
body, the soul. So, here, essentially, the process of transmigration is being
described. So, now, generally, we talk about, we use the words reincarnation and
transmigration, re..., interchangeably. So, are the two exactly the same? Not
necessarily. You know, re..., in the emphasis is different. Re..., in
transmigration, the focus is on the, the journey. So, as we, here, the word
migration. So, birds migrate the seasons change. Or when there are, say, some
natural calamities. People migrate from one place to another. So, migrate is
basically travel. So, transmigration talks about the travel of the soul. But you
know, from trans, means, trans means across. So, from one body to another body.
So, in the transmigration, the focus is on the journey aspect. So, the
transmigration of the soul through eight point four million species. There, the
word we will use, the transmigration. Whereas in reincarnation, the focus is on
coming into flesh. So, as we discussed earlier, incarnation means to come in
flesh. So, reincarnation means to come in flesh again. So, re..., in
reincarnation, the focus is on coming into a body. Whereas in transmigration,
the focus is on the going from one body to another body. Now, this ver...,
there, in the, philosophical terms, there is also a word "metempsychosis". Which
also refers to the journey of the soul. So, there are different words. But the
essential point is that life does not begin with birth. And life does not end
with death. So, that happens thereafter, that is conveyed through an example in
this verse. So, so, this example is used to convey the point of how the body is
peripheral and superficial to the soul. Now, when we are wearing a dress, our
dress is important to us. But at the same time, you know, we do not have a
permanent relationship with the dress. I will wear a dress today. And after it
gets old, I will change to another address. So, the p..., essential person is
different from the dress. Similarly, if we consider the body to be a dress.
Then, the essential person is different from the body. You know, a.., and then,
the different bodies are like different dresses, which serve different purposes.
So, we wear different dresses, dresses based on what we are going to do. If
somebody is going to the polar areas, then people may wear warm clothes, you
know, wool and other things. If people are going to work, they may wear a
particular kind of clothes. If they are going to a formal occasion, a party,
they may wear a tie, and a coat, or some other formal attire. So, a, depending
on the purpose that is to be served, then, and accordingly, the inclinations
that we have, we choose a dress. So, when a, but the essential point is that we
and the dress are different. We remain the same whether the dress keeps
changing. So, similarly, the soul remains the same whether dress changes. Now,
when the dress changes, the person, what does that person wear? The person
discards the old dress and takes new dress. Similarly, if we look at the process
of reincarnation, there are three, three stages in it. The first stage is the
soul leaves the body. The second stage is the soul goes to the stage where the
next body is. And the third stage is, the soul enters into a, enters into a
situation where it will get a next body. Or the soul acquires the next body. So,
for example, if a person has done karma by which the person is going to, say,
again be reborn as a human being. The first stage would be giving up the old
dress. So, that person gives up the body. And then, after that, you know, under
the guidance of the Supersoul, the person travels to the next body. And this is
also arranged by various, you know, factors. And finally, the soul acquires a
new body. So, if it is human body, in the Third Canto, in the teachings of
Kapila, it is described that:

        karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa
         jantur dehopapattaye
        striyāḥ praviṣṭa udaraṁ
         puṁso retaḥ-kaṇāśrayaḥ

So, "karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa". Under the supervision of "daiva-netreṇa", the
divine I is referring to the arrangement of a, destiny.

        karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa
         jantur dehopapattaye

The living entity gets a "deha". "upapattaye". The living entity gets a body.
And what kind of body i..., will be? How does it get the body? So, "praviṣṭa
udaraṁ". So, the ch..., soul enters into the womb of a woman. How? " puṁso
retaḥ-kaṇāśrayaḥ". By taking shelter of a particle of semen in a hum..., in a
male. "puṁso retaḥ-kaṇāśrayaḥ". So, now, the essential point is that when the
procreational act happens, at that time, the soul is in the semen. And from
that, it is in the sperm. And then, through the sperm, the soul enters into the
egg. The desire goes to a form. The embryo is formed. And then, a child is born.
So, now, in these three stages, the first stage is the soul leaves the body.
Now, how does the soul leave the body? Generally, it leaves through one of the
nine holes. So, of course, the soul can, soul has the power to break through
and also go. But generally, the soul leaves through one of the nine holes. So,
generally, the Upanishad, it said that, the soul, if will, it leaves through
one of the lower holes, then that is a, considered an auspicious departure. And
the soul is going towards one of lower destinations, lower species, lower
planet. If the soul leaves through one of the upper holes, then it is considered
auspicious. So, the eyes, the ears, even those nose, the mouth. The realised
yogis, the, who attain samādhi, they aim that, actually, when the soul leaves
they will burst the skull and go out. And if they go out that way, then they
will attain liberation. That is the understanding. So, of course, now, for most
of, most people, most of us, you know, we do not have such an awareness of the
soul. And we do not have, we do not seem to have any control over a, how the
soul will leave the body. So, f..., it is not so important for us. The most
important thing is that we remember Krishna. In the Eighth Chapter, Krishna will
talk about this. And He says:

        naite sṛtī pārtha jānan
        yogī muhyati kaścana
        tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu
        yoga-yukto bhavārjuna

So, He says, there are various ways by which, different, Krishna has, in the
previous verse, talked about the two ways, "devyan" and "pitrayan". We will
discuss about them in the eigth chapter. But then, essentially, Krishna says, do
not worry about all this. Just practice yoga. And it is already earlier
mentioned that the best yoga is bhakti yoga. He mentioned this in 6.47 as well
as 8.14. So, as devotees, we do not have to bother from which hole the soul is
leaving the body. We have to bother whether we are remembering Krishna or not.
So, now, the soul leaves the body. And generally, the soul goes to next body
depending on the karm..., the, two factors. There is the kama. And there is the
karma. Kama is the desire. And karma is the destiny. What kind of karmic destiny
one has got. So, you know, just as, when we want to purchase a new dress. You
know, we look at what is my desire. And then, what is my budget. So, similarly,
all of us have a karmic budget. And accordingly, the soul gets a new body. So,
we are, actually, dressed for and dressed by our desires. That means, we are
dressed for our desires means, that, actually, say, if a male is attracted to
female. A female is attracted to a male. Then, if a male dies thinking of the
female, then the male will get a new body in the next life, which will be
fem..., female body. Or a female dies thinking of the male, then female will get
a male body. You know, if a human being dies thinking of a pet dog. And the dog,
pet dog dies thinking of its master. Then, both of them may well interchange their
positions on the rope, on the leash. The ma..., dog may become the master. And
the master may become the dog. So, the important point is that, actually, it is
determined by what we remember at the time of death. But what we remember at the
time of death is depe..., also determined by what we have remembered throughout
our life, what I, have been our desires throughout our life. So, anyway, the
important point in this discussion is that the essent..., the relationship
between the body and the soul should not be given too much emphasis. It is
actually peripheral. It is tempo..., it is not eternal relationship. It is a
temporary relationship. So, this is something, which, you know, many traditions
do not understand. Like, we were earlier discussing about the Abrahamic
religions. So, the c..., clear understanding of the soul as a, as an ontological
concrete higher-dimensional entity, you know, the clear understanding of that
soul is not there that way. And because of that, there is some sign of
conflation, a mixing up of the soul and the body. And in some of these
traditions, the idea is that they bury the body. Because, somehow, the idea is
that, at the time of judgement, eventually, when people will be taken back to
heaven, they will all be taken back at the time when, in the body that they have
right now. So, the idea is, the body that we have right now is the body that we
will have in heaven for all t..., time to come. So, now, a, because there is no
clear understanding of the difference between the body and the soul. And that is
why some people have the idea that the body has to be preserved in a coffin when
it is buried. Now, of course, even if it is preserved in a coffin, body does not
stay. And, actually, not only that body does not stay, all the particles that
remain in the body, they get destroyed. And they may all be in different bodies
now.

So, it is a little simplistic idea that the body and the soul are somehow
eternal. And in the king..., in this, in the kingdom of God, we will have the
same body that we have right now. And of course, this body pos..., possess,
possess various serious problems that if a person is born with a, say, a
crippled, or a blind, or a deformed body. And that is the body that the person
has. Will that person have the same body throughout all of eternity? That would
be hell. Or if a child, people say, people say, no, no, the person will have a
young, heal..., youthful, healthy body. But then, we may get the question, but
then, what if somebody dies before that person becomes youthful and healthy?
What kind of body will the person have at that time? Will it be, you know, the
body that the person may have got when the person grew up? How do we know that,
what kind of body that person will have? So, actually speaking, you know, the
whole understanding here is based on a, two clear, two strong misidentification
or a conflation between the body and the soul. And when people have a bodily
conception of life. Then, you know, even if there is religion. And there is
religious belief. Still, that religious belief can also be misunderstood. You
know, there are some atheists who say that, religion is extremely dangerous.
Because there are these, there are these terrorists, jihadis. And they become
suicide bombers. And they are ready to destroy themselves. And why are they
ready to destroy themselves? They, because they have been brainwashed into
believing that, oh, we will enjoy with 73 virgins in heaven, for, in Jannah, for
all time to come. And that is why, you know, we can k..., what is the wrong in
dying once? If you are going to eternal life and eternal enjoyment. So, the
atheists say, atheists argue that, see how dangerous religious belief is.
Nothing else will make a person become a suicide bomber like this and not in
such large number. So, religion contaminates the human mind with such dangerous
imaginations that people are ready to, you know, kill others, you know, in the
hope of some imaginary pleasure in the future life. So, is this the effect of
belief in after-life? Actually, any belief can have any effect depending on how
it is interpreted. So, actually, the problem here is not after-life. The problem
is material conception of life. It is a fundamental diffence between the two.
See, after-life means that there is some life after this. So, the problem here,
i..., it is not that all people who believe in after-life will become jihadis.
You know, there are so many people who have believed throughout history in
reincarnation, in future lives, and after-life in general. But the, how many of
them have become, you know, militants? So, actually, the what cau..., causes
that person to develop this kind of, you know, ideas is a material conception of
life. Because of the material conception of life, people think that, ok,
enjoyment means sensual enjoyment. And I am not getting sensual enjoyment. In
the future, I will get sensual enjoyment. And therefore, let me do this. Let me
become a suicide bomber. And in future, I will be able to enjoy.

So, the point is, you know, the clear understanding of the difference between
the body and the soul ensures that the person does not continue in a material
conception of life. And when the person does not continue in the material
conception of life, the person acquires a spiritual conception of life. That
actually, real enjoyment is not just in sensuality. It is in loving service. It
is in love and service, and love and service centered on God, and centered...,
and connected with all living beings. So, you know, if the belief in after-life
is based on a simplistic, whitewashing of the future as en..., materially
enjoyable, based on some belief system. Then, that can be perverted. But when
the entry in the future life is dependent on a thorough reeducation of our head,
and redirection of our heart. Then, that means from matter to God. Then, this
sort of misunderstandings will never happen. So, these are disastrous
misunderstandings. And that way, if you see, any belief system can be, you know,
distorted. With the world's greatest ki..., killers in recent times, were, if
you see, there were Mao Zedong in China, Stalin in Russia. And such people, if
you see, they were the biggest killers. And they were atheists. They were
atheists. So, it is, actually, atheism itself has that, his, Hitler was an
atheist. You know, and he killed so many millions of people. So, actually
speaking, you know, if we look at it, the religion, if it is properly
understood, in, it tells us that our life is sacred. And because life is sacred,
it must be valued. Whereas, spirituali..., whereas, atheism is telling us life
is a chance product. And then, if enjoyment in this life is the goal, then what
is the point in doing anything which will, so obstruct that enjoyment? What is
the poi..., what is the point in preserving anything? So, morality obstructs
enjoyment. Put it aside. And just enjoy. So, actually, it is not reincarnation
or after-life. It is a material conception of life that causes problems. And
here, we see, that material conception of life is removed. It is shattered by
the Bhagavad Gita right in the beginning. When it describes that we are
different from the body. We are actually souls. And Prabhupada again quotes the
verse about the two birds in the purport to illustrate how the soul's journey
takes place from one body to another, by the guidance of the Supersoul. Now, let
us look at the next verse:

        nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi
        nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ
        na cainaṁ kledayanty āpo
        na śoṣayati mārutaḥ

So, "nainaṁ". Not this. "chindanti". This penetrated by "śastrāṇi". The soul is
not penetrated by, soul is not destroyed by weapons. The soul is not "dahati
pāvakaḥ", burnt by fire. The soul is not "kledayanty āpo", is not watered away.
It is not a, destroyed by, dissolved by water. "na śoṣayati mārutaḥ". It is not
withered away by the wind. So, essentially, what is the emphasis of these four
statements? It is that the things which destroy the body, things which harm the
body will not harm the soul. That is the important point. So, again and again,
Krishna is driving home the point that the soul is indestructible. So, in
continuing in this with the previous verse, the point is that, that, the, just
as we discard the dress and new, take a new dress, the person remains unharmed
in the process. So, similarly, when the person m..., may, person discards the
body and goes to new body. The person will remain unharmed. So, when Arjuna is
going to shoot the arrows, at that time, the soul is going to be unharmed. And
the soul is going to the next body. So, the soul is not going to be destroyed by
any weapons. So, Prabhupada explains in the purport about how there are
different kinds of weapons which the Vedic literature talks about. So, today, we
have lots of weapons of mass destruction. And these are extremely dangerous in
many ways. You know, but, in the, and these are considered to be, you know,
enormously powerful, extremely destructive. You know, after a, after the World
War II, in which the, in which the atom bombs were dropped on Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. After that, there were further, many weapons, destroyed, developed. In
fact, America developed a weapon. And they tested it on an, you know, island.
You know, and then, this weapon was several, several, many many times more
powerful than the bomb that fell on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. And the result of
that exploison was that, it exploided on an island. And the whole island
disappeared from the world map. It was just shattered. And what the sha...,
debris just sunk into the ocean. So, if the, the destruction of the weapon
obliterated the whole island from the world map. So, we have weapons of
tremendous destructive power. Now, these weapons are there in today's time.
Whereas, in the past, there were other weapons. So, we had the Brahmāstra. We
had the Suryastra. There are various weapons like that. So, that is also
technology. This is also technology. Is there any difference between the two?
There is a major difference. The difference is that, the technology today is in
untrained hands. Often, it is in hands that are irresponsible. You know, this,
the more dangerous the weapons, let us say, terrorists have, the greater terror
they will cause. So, in the Vedic culture, it was ensured that the weapons would
not be in the hands of people who could caught..., such, cause such terrible
destruction. So, when the ksatriyas would have skills in fighting. And they
would fight. But they were trained so that they will act in a responsible way.
And they, "ksat trayate", Prabhupada will say in the purport. "ksay trayate",
those who protect from hurt, they are called as ksatriyas. That is what they are
meant to do. So, unless there is proper training, you know, the use of that,
this invention, or the development of weapons can lead to enormous damage in
society. Now, Prabhupada explains in the purport how there are different kinds
of weapons.

See, the current idea of weapons is, you know, the way, in today's weaponry,
atomic weapons are developed is that the whole process involves understanding
there is a lot of energy witin an atom. So, by a process, we tap that energy.
And when we tap that energy, then that can be used for peaceful purposes. Or it
can be used for destructive purposes. There are a lot of energy within the
nuclears, also, that can be used. So, either way, the important point is that
these weapons are used for, you know, by manipulating things at atomic level.
So, when, the primary kind of energy that we know about is based on radiations.
And in the elementary theory of matter, earth, water, fire, air, ether.
Radiation, electromagnetic waves, they fall in fire. So, Prabhupada says, most
of the weapons that we are, know about today are fire weapons. But there are
different kinds of weapons. So, for example, if somebody wanted to destroy a,
you know, village. So, we could drop a bomb on it. Or that person, imagine, if a
tornado comes over there. A tornado can also destroy that village. Now, of
course, if we may say that, w..., oh, the tornado is a force of nature. We
cannot cause a tornado. Yes, that is true. We cannot cause a tornado. But, you
know, if this, say, when a tornado comes, it is not just a chance force of
nature. There are factors involved, which, wha..., involve karmic, karmic, you
know, causality. Those people have done some karma. And they are getting the
reactions. But anyway, even the moment of the wind is controlled by the devatas.
So, just as, those who control the devatas can cause a tornado. Similarly, they
have the p..., they can give the power to cause something like a tornado for
those who do the appropriate kinds of tapasya and worship. So, that means, here,
we understand that there is jiva. There is "prakṛti". There is "prakṛti". There
is jiva. So, "prakṛti" is material nature. Jiva is we, living entities. So, now,
we, living entities can manipulate "prakṛti". We can manipulate "prakṛti" for
various purposes. You can ma..., you can use it for good purposes. Or we can use
it for bad purposes. You know, so, we manipulate it using technology. Now, when
we use it, with our technology, say, we make some atom weapon, atomic weapons,
or something like that. We are trying to, you know, understand the principles
from a reductionistic point of view. Reductionistic means we reduce the whole
universe down to particles and forces operating according to laws. So, we, and
we try to get power over that. And we try to a, control nature. So, that is one
way of looking at it. But other way is that, we understand that there is a
hierarchy in the universe. And a, the matter is controlled by devatas. And those
devatas also have, devatas also have powers. Powers, which are far greater than
what we have. And when devatas use that power, they can use it for, you know,
doing their universal functions. But if we satisfy them, so, in this hierarchy
of "prakṛti" and jiva. In the jiva, there is hierachy of jivas. We have certain
level of control over "prakṛti". And we can use our intelligence to increase
that power if we want. That is what we try to do with technology. But there are
other jivas who have greater control over "prakṛti". And when those jivas u...,
they gain control. And then, a, they already have control by the power of
nature. And when they, we satisfy them. By satisfying them. By doing certain
rituals. By doing certain tapasya. By a, by religious practices. Then, they give
us that power. When they give us that power, then, similarly, we are able to
control material nature. So, when we say that, there is, say, a Vayu Astra, you
know, a weapon which causes, you know, a tornado, like a storm to come. Then, we
may say this is all methology. How can I, now, you can take out an arrow and
that causes storm? No. It is not methology. There are subtle principles
involved. And the principle is that, actually, there is a devata in charge of
Vayu. And if we invoke that devata. If we please that devata. And got that
astra. Then, that astra can enable us to do that. So, like that, the living
entity can try to control matter in different ways.  One is independently of any
higher controller, higher knowledge or higher purpose. And, or it can be in
cooperation with the higher purposes, higher pow..., higher beings. So, either
way, the important point is that none of these weapons can ever destroy the
soul. There have been many different weapons throughout history. In the future,
also, there will be different weapons. But the important point is none of those
weapons can destroy materi..., destroy the soul. Now, why they cannot destroy
the soul? That is described in the next verse.

        acchedyo ’yam adāhyo ’yam
        akledyo ’śoṣya eva ca
        nityaḥ sarva-gataḥ sthāṇur
        acalo ’yaṁ sanātanaḥ

So, "acchedyo ’yam". So, here, in the twenty-four A and B, four characteristics
are described. Which explain the four statements of twenty-three. So, for
example, you know, water cannot dissolve. If I say that, you know, if I got some
pill. And it is, say, put in a capsule. If I got some medicine in capsule. Then,
I put in water. He says, that water will not dissolve this. So, why? So, it will
not dissolve in water. Why? Because it is insoluble. So, like that, in the
previous verse, an assertion is made. And the next one, and in this verse, a
characteristic of the soul is described, which brings about that ele..., which
explains that assertion. So, "nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi". The soul cannot be
penetrated. Why? Because "acchedyo ’yam". It is impenetrable. "nainaṁ dahati
pāvakaḥ". The soul cannot be burnt. Because it is "adāhyo ’yam". It is not
inflammable. It i..., it is, it has characteristic, it cannot be burnt. Then,
"nainaṁ śoṣaṁ...', "nainaṁ śoṣayaṁ...', "nainaṁ":

        na cainaṁ kledayanty āpo
        na śoṣayati mārutaḥ

"na cainaṁ kledayanty āpo" is "akledyo ’yam". So, the soul cannot be, it d...,
it cannot be, it dried away. You know, it cannot be dissolved. It cannot be
dried a..., it cannot be withered away. So, these are the characteristics which
explain what has been in the previous verse. And after that, Krishna wants to
describe "nityaḥ". "nityaḥ". Now, He was talking about it earlier.
"sarva-gataḥ". "sarva-gataḥ" is, the soul is present everywhere. So, now, again,
what does this mean? Does it mean that the, you know, soul is all-pervading?
Now, it is very clear that Krishna has stated, He is talking about the body. And
if he has, in the previous verse, talked about ho..., how the soul goes from one
body to another body. How the soul actually is in a, a, just as the soul ha...,
just we have one dress. And we give up one dress and take on another dress.
Similarly, the soul goes from, soul gives up one body and acquires another body.
Now, if the soul were "sarva-gataḥ" in the sense of being everywhere. Then, what
is the point of the saying that the soul will be, give up one body and take
another body? You know, the whole point of saying that it will give one body and
another body. That, that implies the soul is, soul is going from here to there.
Or soul is acquiring another body. There is no point in, if the soul is already
all-pervading, then what is the point of saying, the soul will give up one body
and take another body? It is like saying that, that the person is already
wearing all dresses, person is already there everywhere. So, what is the point
of giving one dress and taking another dress? So, "sarva-gataḥ", if we see,
that is what Srila Prabhupada explains. He follows the acharya, Baladeva
Vidyabhushana, Chakravartipada over here. And he explains that, "sarva-gataḥ"
does not, it is not to be taken literally as meaning that the soul is
all-pervading. But the soul is capable of going everywhere. And "sarva-gataḥ"
means, soul, soul is capable of living everywhere. So, you know, Prabhupada uses
this to say that how there is life on other planets, also. The soul is there in
every specie..., in various species, in bodies that are suitable to the
climates, atmospheric situations in different places. So, how is this possible?
You know, all that an honest scientist can say is that life, as we know it, is
not possible on other planets. That means that, how can scientists infer that
there is no life on other planets? They may say, oh, there is no oxygen over
there. There is no ea..., water over there. You know, the temperature is too
high over there. So, based on this, they can, they may say that, ok, life is not
possible over there. So, now, all that this means is we are assuming that life
requires oxygen. Or life requires a particular temperature range. Life requires
a particular, you know, req..., say, par..., particular, you know, material
items, like, say, water. Only then, life can survive. But this is not necessary.
In the previous verses, Krishna has told that the soul is a source of
consciousness. And the soul is not destructible, destroyable by anything
material. So, therefore, the soul can, if it gets the appropriate bodies for
being in a particular locale, in a particular environment. The soul can stay in
that locale. So, if the soul is, you know, say, in the, a, sanity of the sun
planet, then, there, the sun will, ng..., there, it will get a body that is
primarily made of fire. And it will survive in that bo..., place, also. Even in
the modern scientific point of view, all that can be said, is that, you know,
life as we know, it would, does not exist.

So, there are some scientists who had proposed that, you know, scientists
claimed to have gone to the moon. And they say that, we f..., we found animal
life over there? But then, the question arises, sometimes, it is said that we
have not really searched beyond the c..., surface of the moon. You know, what
about under the surface of the moon? There will be life over there, deep buried.
We have found lots of forms of life there called as extremophiles. Extremophiles
means they live in extreme conditions. Phile means to love. Extreme is, you
know, ex..., severe condi..., extreme conditions. So, for example, there are
life forms which survive in extremely hot s..., situations. So, they are
called as, say, fire bacteria, for example. So, these survive in such hot
conditions, in which humans cannot su..., consume, conceive of surviving. What
to speak of a, human beings? Most living beings cannot survive. The
extremophiles, in fact, when, when the temperature decreases, they, it becomes
too cold for them to live. So, the temperatures that which we cannot, we will
find them intolerably thought, they find, hot, they find those temperatures
to be intolerably cold. So, similarly, the deep within the ocean's ca...,
ocean's surface, ocean's body, actually, there are, you know, organisms, not
just microscopic organisms, but visible organisms who live, you know, breathing
in nitrogen dioxide. And they basically get the nourishment from the oxetane in
the ocean bed. So, this was inconceivable. But extremophiles, more and more
extremophiles are being discovered by researchers. And this indicates that,
actually, things are not as simple as we have been led to believe when we talk
about life on other planets. So, if we assume that life has to be like this,
like this, like this, like this. Then, when we find that, you know, then, we may
say that, ok, these conditions are not there. So, life is not there. But we find
out that, actually, there are no conditions required for life. In the sense
that, you know, in many environment, the soul can acquire appropriate body
suitable for that environment, get nourishment from that environment, and
continue to live. Then, "sarva-gataḥ" is entirely possible. So, Prabhupada would
use a simpler logic, also. He said that, if we look on the earth, we see that,
life is crowding everywhere. We can look at a small crack on the earth. And the
crack is filled with some ants, and insects, and things like that. So, when so
much life is there everywhere on, in every small crack of space on the earth,
small crack in the earth. You know, there are thousands of planets. Why would
God create, do such a waste of space? You know, there are so many planets. Why
would just God create them and leave them as it is? So, God is an efficient
designer. And He would do things in such a way that they are productive. So,
"sarva-gataḥ". Soul is capable of living everywhere. "sthāṇur". Unchangeable.
So, unchangeable can have various meanings. In the context, what it means over
here is that, it, Prabhupada, this can be used, as well as in future verses, can
also be used to explain that the soul does not undergo the changes. You know, we
say, "akshara" will be talked about in next, in the future, also. So, the soul
does not undergo the changes. The body undergoes. Now, "acalaḥ". What does
"acalaḥ" mean? Now, "acalaḥ" means immovable. We know the mind is said to be
"cañcalaṁ", restless.

        cañcalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa

Krishna tells to Arjuna in, you know, 6.35 that, 6.34 that, is, mind, I cannot
control this. It is impossible. So, "cañcalaṁ", the mind is restless. But
Krishna is stating the soul is "acalaḥ". It is immovable. It is not restless.
So, now, if, does this immovability mean complete, permanent, absolute
immovability? Again, if we are remaining that, then the whole point of the soul
giving up one body and going to another body, that would have no meaning. And
Krishna tells also later in the Bhagavad Gita, in the fourteenth chapter. He
talks about:

        ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā
        madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ
        jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā
        adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ

So, Krishna says that those who live in mood, goodness, they go upwards. Those
who live in passion, stay over here and li..., and those who live in ignorance,
they go downwards. Now, such statements would have no meaning if Krishna, if the
soul were immovable. If the, if, if the soul were absolutely immovable. Then,
what is the point in saying that the soul will go up. Or the soul will go down.
Or soul will go in this area now itself. So, what it means is, "acalaḥ" means,
the soul cannot be moved by anything material. So, the soul can be moved by its
own will. When the atma is a, to be taken from one body to another. For example,
when Yamadutas come. And Yamadutas are to catch the person. And drag the person
away. So, what do they do? The yamapāśa is material. The yamapāśa cannot catch
the soul. The yamapāśa catches the subtle body. And Yamadutas are, drag the
subtle body out. And the soul is attached to the subtle body. And because the
soul is attached to the subtle body, the soul goes with the subtle body, to
wherever, the soul does, go..., to wherever the subtle body is taken. So, for
example, to understand this, you can say that, if a person is watching, say, a
match on TV. A cricket match is going on. Person is completely attached to
watching the TV match. And then, suppose, some thieves come along. And the
thieves come along. The thieves just pick up the TV and go away. And this person
keeps watching the TV and goes along with the thieves. So, like that, basically,
the Yamadutas come and take the subtle body. And because soul is hooked to
subtle body, soul also goes along with it. So, "acalo ’yaṁ". So, "sanātanaḥ".
So, soul is immovable and is eternal. Now, Prabhupada uses here the masculine
gender for the soul, several places. He uses the word "he" in several places.
Now, this is a just conventional use. It is not referring to the soul's gender
per say. You know, sometimes, some other places, soul may use the word lit, it,
also. It, living entity is and it goes. So, now, soul uses, now, the soul, you
know, the, the reference to the masculine, for the soul, is just conventional.
In the, you know, for most of history, actually, "he" was used as a reference
for everyone. The male was an inclusive reference for all of humanity. But due
to the trends of modernity and postmodernity, you know, often, now, the "he" is
considered as a reference to males. And therefore, many times, when we talk, you
know, we use "he" or "she". Or sometimes, "she" or "he". So, this is just a
reference based on, you know, the total, con..., current conventions. But "he"
itself was not meant to, here, earlier, it was inc..., all-inclusive. So, man
is, so, for example, ma..., if we say that, man is the maker of his own destiny.
So, if, is, if that is the case, then, does not that, that man includes women in
it. So, the, earlier, the "he", masculine gender, the male was in..., considered
inclusive. And, it is a, Pr..., Prabhupada wrote the books when the masculine
gender was inclusive. So, this is not referring to the, wherever in this
section, Prabhupada refers to the soul in masculine. That is just a reference to
the, you know, all, all living beings, in a generic, inclusive sense of the use
of the word "he". The soul is actually having no gender. It is neither
masculine, nor feminine. The soul is transcendental. Of course, in the spiritual
world, a soul has a svarupa. And in that svarupa, the soul thus does have some,
you know, some gen..., some form. So, that may also be of particular gender. The
gopis are female gender. The gopas are male gender. But that is completely
spiritual and transcendental. So, here, the "he" is used in an inclusive sense,
not in a specific sense of be..., belonging to a particular gender. The soul is
transcendental. Now, Krishna gives some further description of the soul.

        avyakto ’yam acintyo ’yam
        avikāryo ’yam ucyate
        tasmād evaṁ viditvainaṁ
        nānuśocitum arhasi

So, "avyakto ’yam". "avyaktaḥ" means, the soul is in..., as Prabhupada
translates, invisible or unmanifest. So, we cannot perceive the soul with our
senses. We cannot perceive the soul with our gross sensory faculties. Then,
"acintyo ’yam". The soul is also inconceivable. If the soul is inconceivable,
"acintyo ’yam". Then, how can we conceive it? You know, in fact, we could say
that, what is the need to conceive it, also? You know, let me just live happily
in the bodily conception of life. Let me not bother about the soul business. But
the point is that, the, wh..., unless we think about the soul, we cannot
understand what life is ultimately meant for. Because life at the level of the
body will soon be destroyed. It will be terminated. So, "acintyo ’yam". "acintyo
’yam", Prabhupada explains, it means, inconceive means that we cannot really
conceive the soul by our own independent endeavors. We need scriptural guidance.
With our logical inference, we can, you know, think of something about the soul.
We can get some understanding of the soul. But if we want deeper understanding,
we need to look at the, you know, tradition, you know, at the scriptural
tradition. And therein, we get that understanding. So, "acintyaḥ" does not mean,
it is entirely inconceivable. It simply means that it is not conceivable by our
independent speculation. We get some indication. But for a deeper understanding,
we need scripture. "avikāryo ’yam ucyate". "avikāryaḥ". "vikāryaḥ" is change.
So, "sthāṇuḥ" was also unchangeable. So, here, explain, Prabhupada explains that
"vikāryaḥ" refers to the six changes that the body undergoes. That is, there is
creation. Then, there is growth. Then, there is reproduction. Then, there is
maintenance, preservation. Then, there is deterioration. And then, there is
destruction. So, these six changes, the body undergoes. But the soul does not
undergo in the changes. "avikāryo ’yam ucyate". And "tasmād evaṁ viditvainaṁ".
So, knowing soul to be, thus "nānuśocitum arhasi". Do not lament. Do not lament.
Now, Krishna will talk about this, you know, we will see this "nānuśocitum arhasi
". "nānuśocitum". This will come again and again in this section. You know, in
fact, this has already come once in, you know, you know:

        avināśi tu tad viddhi
        yena sarvam idaṁ tatam
        vināśam avyayasyāsya
        na kaścit kartum arhati

So, when Krishna had talked about that the soul cannot be destroyed, at that
time, also, He had told Arjuna, therefore, Arjuna, do not lament. That, you
know, He has talked about this "do not lament" earlier in 2.13. When He said
"dhīras tatra na muhyati". So, what He has talked about, now, if, He will make it
more emphatic. So, this first time, "nānuśocitum arhasi". It will come several
times in this section. So, what is the connection of the first part and the
second part? For, first part, actually, the soul is "avikāryaḥ". It is not going
to grow old. It is not going to grow die, die. It is not be able to be young, it
is always the same. So, Prabhupada explains, Bhīṣma and Droṇa, for whom Arjuna
is concerned, they are going to get new bodies. You know, they will either get
spiritual bodies if they are liberated. Which, soul, is going to happen to them
when they are d..., dying in Krishna's presence. Or they will get elevate
bodies based on their overall karma. You know, so, if their old bodies go, when
new bodies come on, that is, then is, what is the cau..., cause for lamentation
in that? Then, after this, now, after talking about how the soul gets a new
body, Krishna briefly talks about the philosophy which rejects the soul.

        atha cainaṁ nitya-jātaṁ
        nityaṁ vā manyase mṛtam
        tathāpi tvaṁ mahā-bāho
        nainaṁ śocitum arhasi

So, "atha cainaṁ". If, however, "nitya-jātaṁ". The soul is always born. "nityaṁ
vā manyase mṛtam". Then, it is always destroyed. "tathāpi tvaṁ mahā-bāho".
Therefore, even then, Oh, Arjuna. "nainaṁ śocitum arhasi". So, I said, the same
point is being repeated. And the conclusion is do not lament. Do not do
"śocitum". So, what does it mean? Here, Krishna is talking about the atheistic,
figure..., reductionistic philosophies that were present at that time. And there
are philosophies present like that even today. Which claim that, you know,
actually, you know, life begins with chemical combination at the time of birth.
And when the, there is chemical deterioration, life des..., life is destroyed.
So, the, this whole, this school of taught reduces life to just a set of
biochemicals. Which live for some time and which die thereafter. So, this kind
of understanding of life, as, just a set of biochemicals that has come alive.
This is today promoted in the name of science. However, science has never been
able to bring a, produce life from biochemicals. There have been experiments
which claim to have produced artificial life. But, you know, if we look at the
dee..., at, seriously, at what has been done. It is not artificial life. It is
simply manipulation of real life, you know, to bring about something else which
is just slightly modified. So, you know, nowadays, many research institutes, in
att..., order to attract funds, and in order to gain prestige, use spin doctors.
Spin doctors means that these are media experts who know how to s..., phrase
things in such a way that will catch attention. So, you know, because of that,
when they use such words, oh, artificial life created. And it catches attention.
But actually, if we see what has been done, it is not artificial life creation.
It is simply, basically, for example, they may take the, I have written article
about this on my website, you know, the whole point is they may just take some
DNA from existing setup. And then, they replicate the DNA. And they put the DNA.
You know, they make some modification in that, maybe slightly change it. And
then, let the thing grow. And then, basic..., then, there, life emerges. So, now,
they say that we have created artificial life. But basically, the structure,
through which life has come, that only, they have modified. But how life comes
about, that is not really known. So, it is like music. You know, if I have a
soundtrack on which music is there. And then, I replay the soundtrack, the sound
comes. Now, if I take the soundtrack. And I just change it a little bit. And
place it on some another medium. Then, on that medium, the sound plays slightly
differently. So, now, the soundtrack is definitely connected with the sound. But
the soundtrack has not originated, so, the sound has not just originated from
the soundtrack. The sound was spoken by somebody. And the sound is heard by
somebody. So, the soundtrack is the medium through which the sound comes. And
the soundtrack can be manipulated and changed slightly so that the sound can
become changed. By soundtrack, I am referring, here, to the physical medium,
whatever medium it is, on which the sound is st..., is stored. So, that can be,
now, this is an example that is given by a prominent biologists in his book
called "The music of life".

So, you know, similarly, body is the medium through which consciousness is
expressed. So, for example, instead of microscopic organisms, you know, they
grow in a particular way. So, now, if you change the genetics a little bit.
Then, they may grow in a different way. But either way, the consciousness is not
just present in the biochemical arrangement. Just as the music is not originated
in the soundtrack. The music is originated from person who spoke the music. And
the music is understood by some other person. The soundtrack is simply the
medium through which the music is transmitted. And when the medium is changed,
the soundtrack can be at change. So, what researchers do is simply the
biochemical structure, like DNA, or whatever, which they use for their
experiments. So, those are originally produced by nature. And then, when they
are slightly modified, at that time, life may come out in slightly different
ways. So, this is a very simple example I am giving. You know, we do not want to
go into science class over here. So, a..., but those who are interested, they
can read the relevant articles on my site. You know. But the important point is,
actually, this whole idea that life comes from chemicals, does not have, even
scientific basis, what to speak of philosophical basis. So, so, these are g...,
grand claims. These are claims done by spin doctors. Spin doctors means media
experts, media managers, who want to get big publicity. So, but, Krishna is
saying, even if somebody thinks the life is just a bunch of chemicals. Then,
this, even then, you should not lament. So, why should one not lament? Now,
Prabhupada explains that, here, Krishna is also using the word "mahā-bāho".
Because He wants to mention, indicate to Arjuna, that, Arjuna, I have known that
you are a great s..., you are a person who is born in a great culture. You are a
great warrior. You will not be overcome by such, a, pity misconceptions. You
know:

        jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyur
        dhruvaṁ janma mṛtasya ca
        tasmād aparihārye ’rthe
        na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi

So, "jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyur". So, now, if one thinks that, either whether
there is no body. There is, there is, there is no only body, nor soul. But
still, we know that it is a universal fact that whoever is born, has to be, has
to die. "jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyur". "dhruvaḥ". It is a certain fact. Similarly,
"dhruvaṁ janma mṛtasya ca". Similarly, actually, once we accept the
reincarnation of the soul, then we understand that one who is, you know, you
know, you know, "dhruvam", after that, one is going to get the body.

        tasmād aparihārye ’rthe
        na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi

So, the connection between this and the previous verse is that if we just
consider life to be a bunch of chemicals, then why lament? That, actually,
chemicals are existing everywhere. And by the principle of conservation of
energy, none of the chemicals are permanently destroyed. All that happens is
that, their, their form is just temporarily changed. So, they were in the form
of a person right now. That is conscious. Now, they have just become a lump of
ashes. So, why lament? But Krishna does, Arjuna is, you are not that kind, you
do not have that kind of belief. So, "jātasya". Everyone who is born who has to
die. So, even if you do not fight this battle, your relatives are going to die.
And they are going to get a next birth, also. So, rather than giving up your
duty to avoid that which is unavoidable. Do your duty, and thereby, you will
attain an auspicious destination. So, you can, by giving up your duty, you
cannot avoid the unavoidable. Death is going to come to everyone. Therefore, do
your duty. So, "na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi". And Krishna says, all things are:

        avyaktādīni bhūtāni
        vyakta-madhyāni bhārata
        avyakta-nidhanāny eva
        tatra kā paridevanā

So, "avyakta-ādīni", "bhūtāni". Every..., initially, everything is mani...,
unmanifest. "vyakta-madhyāni bhārata". Then, they become, everything is
unmanifest. And it becomes manifest. And then again, it becomes manife...,
unmanifest. So, therefore, what is the cause for lamentation? That means as far
as chemicals are concerned, if the body is just a lump of chemicals, then they
are initially not alive. And now, they become alive temporarily. And then, after
that, they die. So, chemical transformation is th..., constantly happening. And
if th..., life is just reduced to chemicals, then all emotions ultimately become
meaningless. So, now, ultimately, everything becomes meaningless. That, oh, who
am, oh, you know, when a mother loves the child. Why does the mother love the
child? Oh, actually, just some chemicals are secreted in the brain. And because,
the m..., so, those chemicals are secreted in the, in the, in the brain of the
mother, that is why the mother loves the child. So, we reduce love down to just
chemical secretion. So, is that really love? Is that all that love is? Just some
chemical secretion? Not at all. Love is something far deeper and richer. So, if
it was just chemicals. And why need to, why should we lament? Ultimately,
everything is destructible. It is temporarily there with us. It is an
unavoidable change. So, essential message of Krishna to Arjuna is "tatra kā
paridevanā". Why do you lament, oh, Arjuna? So, now, Krishna is, a, going to
talk in, a, conclude this section in the next verses. Which we will discuss in
our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
