Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NrE0hyBKFpA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=mx0pfaHNWxZGoFT24Aa9tom-XtR8MTU0ODQ4ODE4NEAxNTQ4NDAxNzg0&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_080_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_06_Text_01_to_08_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=NrE0hyBKFpA&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
go onto the Sixth Chapter. The Fifth Chapter ended with, you know, description
of ashtanga-yoga in verses 27-28. And 29th was bhakti-yoga. So, ashtanga-yoga
will be described in Chapter Six. Let us have an overview of Chapter Six. It is
ca..., this chapter is called as "Dhyāna-yoga". So, yes. So, Chapter Six has 47
verses. And verses 1 to 9 talk about advancement in the stage of yoga, in the
process of yoga. From Aruruksha, that is the beginnng stage. To Arudha, that is
the advanced stage. So, Aruruksha is, if we envision a ladder, then Aruruksha is
one who starts climbing up the ladder. Arudha is one who is situated on the
ladder. Like we have a m..., radha rudha. One, the per..., the charioteer, who
is already situated on the chariot. The warrior who is situated on the chariot.
It is said that Lord Vishnu, when he travels, He is Garuda Arudha. He is
situated on Garuda. Arudha means to be seated properly. Aruruksha means one who
has started climbing. So, if y..., yoga is a ladder, one who has started
climbing the ladder. And who is moving towards in the uppering of ladder. So,
the first verse to ninth verse talks about, you know, the process that one needs
to go through by which one can renounce the world. In dhyana-yoga, one renounces
the world and focuses exclusively on meditation. But there is some preliminary
purification that is required for that. That is described in one to nine. Then,
ten to thirty describes progressively, how one will attain perfection when one
is, you know, practicing yoga. So, from practice to perfection in yoga. So, ten
to fifteen describes realisation of Brahman. Sixteen to Twenty-three describes
realisation of Paramatma. And twenty-four to thirty-two beci..., describes
realisation of Bhagavan. Now, hmm, after that, thirty-three to thirty-seven,
Arjuna raises a question that, you know, what if so, the, the mind is very
difficult to control. So, Krishna answers that. So, two verses are questions,
33-34. And 35-36 a..., are the, you know, answer, are the answer. And then,
after that, the last section is, you know, if the mind deviates the yogi, then
what is the destination of the yogi. Where does the yogi, deviated yogi, foreign
yogi go. So, that Krishna answers in a, you know, very thought provocing
section. And then, lastly, Krishna says that the topmost yogi is one who fixes
his mind on Krishna. That means, you know, after giving, going through this
elaborated analysis of the process of bhakti-yoga. Krishna eventually comes to
talking, o..., of, after going through the elaborated analysis of ashtanga-yoga.
Krishna eventually comes to the conclusion that bhakti-yoga is the best,
bhakti-yoga is the highest. So, that will set the scene for Krishna to start
speaking in the Seventh Chapter. When he will speak about bhakti-yoga. So, it
will, take, you know, this, this chapter takes us slowly up the yoga ladder
to the perfection of fixing the mind on Krishna. And the next chapter describes
in alternative way of attaining that same perfection. So, let us look at the
Sixth Chapter now. Beginning with verse one. So, the first section is, moving
from the Aruruksha stage to the Arudha stage. So:

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ
        kāryaṁ karma karoti yaḥ
        sa sannyāsī ca yogī ca
        na niragnir na cākriyaḥ

So, "anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ". So, one does the work without taking ashraya of
the "phalaṁ". In this world, when people want to work, you know, and they need
motiva..., motivation for the work. So, what is the motivation? The motivation
is the fruit. And they take ashraya of the fruit. That means, suppo..., suppose,
there is a sports champion. You know, There is a world cup cricket team, winning
cricket, world cup winning cricket team. And the captain is asked, you know,
what is, how did you win this world cup? What motivated you? He says, you know,
for, since my childhood, I was w..., w..., imagining myself. Holding up the
world cup in my hand. And at, that dream motivated me. So, what is happening
over here? "a...", this is "āśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ". One is taking shelter of the
fruit of work. Now, the Bhagavad Gita is not that against doing, you know, you
know, you know, things in this world. Now, it is not against achievements. But
if those outer achievements are, lawn our, our motivation, then we do not make
any inner development. You know, any spiritual development through that outer
achievement. We do not necessarily go closer to Krishna. So, therefore, a, a
person, when he wor..., a, when a d..., when a, especially, here, Krishna is
talking about a karma-yogi. Now, a p..., a pure devotee may visualise things to
be offered for Krishna's service. That is different. But the karma-yogi is
primarily focusing on detaching oneself from worldly things. So, therefore,
m..., the karma-yogi's motivation, as we discussed in 5.11 is ke...:

        kāyena manasā buddhyā
        kevalair indriyair api
        yoginaḥ karma kurvanti
        saṅgaṁ tyaktvātma-śuddhaye

So, "ātma-śuddhaye". The yogi works primarily for purification. Not for
"phalaṁ". So, Krishna is telling here, what a yogi has to do, in the beginning,
"anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ". And then, what does v..., "kāryaṁ karma karoti yaḥ"?
"kāryaṁ" means prescribed duty. Understanding this is my obligatory duty. "karma
karoti". "kāryaṁ". What, what is, I am obliged to do? I will do that. "sa
sannyāsī". Such a person is a sannyasi. S..., "sa", "yo...", "ca yogī ca". That
a person is the renunciate. And that person is also a yogi. So, it is
interesting, Krishna has suddenly m..., used the two words, sannyasa and yoga
together. Such a person is a sannyasi and yogi, also. If we remember in Thir...,
in the Fifth Chapter, Krishna has referred to sannyasi and yogi, as two
opposite. You know, two different paths, not necessarily opposite, but different
paths. And in Third Chapter, he has referred to them alm..., almost as opposite.
You know, so, in the Fifth Chapter, Krishna has talked about how:

        sannyāsas tu mahā-bāho
        duḥkham āptum ayogataḥ
        yoga-yukto munir brahma
        na cireṇādhigacchati

So, in 5.6, He has talked about sannyasa and yoga, as two opposite process...,
in as two distinct process. Not necessarily opposite, but distinct processes.
So, He has told our how both ultimately leads..., to s..., same destination. But
he says, one who tries to practice sannyasa alone. sanny..., with, without yoga,
such a person, what happens to such a person? "duḥkham āptum ayogataḥ". On the
other hand, one who practices yoga, "yoga-yukto munir brahma". "na
cireṇādhigacchati". Not after a long time. Soon, such a person will attain
perfection. So, in that sense, Krishna, many, what he has talked about is two
different persons. And now, He is saying, essentially, they are the same. So,
"sa sannyāsī ca yogī ca". So, who is the yogi? Who is such a person? What, what
a sannyasi? And a yogi? So, normally, Krishna has used the word yogi till now to
u..., refer to karma-yoga. Hmm. Although, we may use the word yogi, generally, we
think of a person who does a, yoga asanas. And generally, when the word yoga is
used alone, most people think of the yoga-marga. The ashtan..., the process of
ashtanga yoga. But Krishna, till now, has not talked about ashtanga-yoga much.
And whenever he has used the word yoga, he has used it in terms of connection
with one's prescribed duty. And, and of course, through the connection, with
one's prescribed duty, one, you know, connects with the Absolute Truth. But
Krishna is here saying that, both are similar. That sannyasa means
disconnection, you know, from the material world. And yoga is connection with
the Absolute Truth. That can be o..., by various ways. One way is by doing one's
work. So, then, such a person is a sannyasi and a yogi. Krishna will ex...,
clarify it, how the person is the same. How sannyasi and yogi can be the same
person. Krishna will clarify in the next verse. But here, he is saying, "na
niragnir na cākriyaḥ". So, such a, who, who is sannyasi? That person who works.
Not the person who does not work. And not working, Krishna talks in two terms
here. "na". "na cākriyaḥ". The person who does not do "kriyaḥ". Such a person is
not, therein, a, a n..., not the actual yogi, or the sannyasi. And among the
various "kriyaḥ"s, among the various prescribed duties that are done, a
prominent prescribed duty for a person who is a grihasta, who is living in the
world is agni. That actually, they are meant to light the sacrificial fire. So,
of course, in Kali Yuga, we do not like the sacrificial fire. We chant the Hare
Krishna maha mantra. But either way, "na niragnir", actually, one is meant to do
a prescribed duty. That prescribed duty involves a lighting the fire. So that
yajnas can be performed. Krishna has talked in the Third Chapter about how, you
know, you know, yajna, one who does not do yajna:

        aghāyur indriyārāmo
        moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati

So, yajna is important duty. And Krishna is telling, right in the beginning of
the Sixth Chapter that one should not give up yajna. That one should not, you
know, give up lighting the fire in the name of renunciation. So, m...,
Prabhupada explains in the purport, that actu..., you know, he explains now from
a devotional perspective that, hmmm:

"The parts of the body work for the satisfaction of the whole body. The limbs of
the body do not act for self-satisfaction but for the satisfaction of the
complete whole. Similarly, the living entity who acts for satisfaction of the
supreme whole and not for personal satisfaction is the perfect sannyāsī, the
perfect yogī."

So, how, so, the yogi, because, how is such a person yogi? Because a y..., yogi
is connected with the complete whole. So, the, so the person, the living entity
who is acting with satisfaction, supreme whole, is, in that sense, a yogi. And
how is the living entity sannyasi? Because he is free from selfish desire. So,
freedom from selfish desire, sannyasa. And the desire for self this, service to
the Absolute Truth, that is yoga. And that is how the person is sannyasi as well
as yogi. And then, Prabhupada i..., quotes about how the perfect sannyasi,
perfect yogi. He gives the example of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu quoting
Shikshashtakam. So, he said, Lord Caitanya, Prabhupada refers to, as:

"the highest perfectional symbol of renunciation"

So, highest perfectional symbol of renunciation. So, Caitanya Mahaprabhu was so
renounced. You know, he was the example. It is, says that, "chudamani", He is
the jewel among renunciates. So, he, this, talks about his consciousness.

        na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ
        kavitāṁ vā jagad-īśa kāmaye
        mama janmani janmanīśvare
        bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi

So, "na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ". These are actually what people in general
aspire for. People want wealth. They want followers. They want, you know, the
enjoyable association of the opposite sex. You know, enjoyable assocation,
attractive members of the opposite sex. Basically, sexual pleasure. And then,
"kavitāṁ". "kavitāṁ" refers to, "vā jagad-īśa kāmaye". "kavitāṁ vā" v..., refer
to the fame, a, praise, a, learning. Various things it can refer to. There are
things which people want. This is what people define as success. So, but
Kr..., Caitanya Mahaprabhu say..., I do not want any of these things. So,
extraordinary prayer of devotion. So, in one sense, the first part of this verse
is talking about sannyasa. I do not want, want any of these thing..., "kavitāṁ
vā jagad-īśa kāmaye". So, when I do not want all these things, then what do I
want? So, here, sannyasa means rejection. And then, yoga means connection. So,
Krishna, Caitanya Mahaprabhu is saying that as I do sannyasa of all these
things, I do not want sannyasa. But what is the connection that I want? That I
want to be always connected to you in devotion. "mama janmani janmanīśvare".
Even if I have to go through many lifetimes. "bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi".
I want to be fixed in devotion. And what kind of devotion? "ahaitukī".
Unmotivated devotion. That means this connection with the cr..., with the Lord,
I do not want to be, to be conditional. Because the Lord does this for me. So, I
do, I, you know, become devoted to him. So, "ahaitukī". You know, without any
cause. It is selfless. Pure. So, this is the example of "sa sannyāsī ca yogī
ca". One who is disconnected from the world and connected with the Absolute
Truth. Now, you know, hmm, Krishna will explain this point of "sa sannyāsī ca
yogī ca", in the next verse.

        yaṁ sannyāsam iti prāhur
        yogaṁ taṁ viddhi pāṇḍava
        na hy asannyasta-saṅkalpo
        yogī bhavati kaścana

So, "yaṁ sannyāsam iti prāhur". That which is known as sannyasa. That is also
known as yoga. "yogaṁ taṁ viddhi". Oh, Pāṇḍava, oh, Arjuna, know that is also
yoga. So, Krishna is saying that actually, they are the same. So, what he has
talked about in the Fifth Chapter as similarity in destination. Now, Krishna is
saying, there is similarity in content, also. How? "na hy asannyasta-saṅkalpo".
That actually, if one does not give up "saṅkalpaḥ". "saṅkalpaḥ" is desire.
Desire for worldly enjoyment. And "asannyasta" means without giving it up. So,
unless one gives up the desire for worldly enjoyment, one cannot be a yogi.
"yogī bhavati kaścana". One cannot be a yogi unless one gives up the desire for
worldly enjoyment. So, Krishna is telling over here that, you know, how our yoga
and ka..., sannyasa are, sa..., how is kar..., ny..., same. That both are, that
actually, they cannot be yoga. Authentic yoga. There cannot be genuine
connection with the Lord unless there is disconnection with the enjoyments that
connect a, take us away from the Lord. You know, just like, if we want to say
that, you know, in, we want to light a fire. And we want to, you know, remove
the darkness. So, actually, you know, you know, we cannot remove darkness unless
we light fire. And when we light fire, darkness automatically goes away. So, the
two are connected. So, similarly, when there is, there is, you know, when there
is two..., when there is sannyasa, there will be yog..., you know, that when
there has to be yoga, sannyasa has to be there. If there is no sannyasa. And
there is not much, yo..., yo..., real yoga happening. So, if people are claiming
to practice spiritual life. Prabhupada says this in the, one of the Second Canto
purports. That if a person is chanting Hare Krishna, but is still engaged in all
kinds of sensory activities, is engaged in all kinds of sen..., sensory,
looking, especially immoral sinful sense gratification. Then, that person is not
actually genuine devotee. That person's, a, devotion is ex..., pseudo-devotion.
Of course, chanting is good. It will help. You know. But if we are chanting
sincerely that, K..., we should lead to detachment. It may take a little time
for different people. The amount of time may differ for different people. But
still, you know, there will be progression in that direction. So, now,
Prabhupada, a, now, he uses this word, real sannyasa-yoga. So, now, Prabhupada
combines the two words, as a compound word, sannyasa-yoga. So, sannyasa is
disconnection from the world. Yoga is connection with the word. And he says "or
bhakti". So, he equates sannyasa-yoga with bhakti. And he says that, you know,
we, this means, we simply act according to our constitutional position. And, and
Prabhupada points to this, how these two are combined.

"The real aim is for a living entity to give up all selﬁsh satisfaction and to
be prepared to satisfy the Supreme."

That means we work, you know, not for our pleasure, but for Krishna's pleasures.
Krishna's pleasures. So, in that way, sannyasa and yoga become combined
together. Now, Krishna will elaborate on this theme of "sannyasta-saṅkalpo" in
the next verse. Next two verses. So, He, before He elaborates, He gives the,
some technical terminology over here. You know, so, let us look at this
terminology.

        ārurukṣor muner yogaṁ
        karma kāraṇam ucyate

So, "ārurukṣor". "ārurukṣor" means, as I said, one who is just beginning to
climb. "muner yogaṁ". So, when one is in the beginning stages, in the process of
yoga, at that time. "karma kāraṇam ucyate". "karma" is the cause. The, it is the
cause of what? Cause of one's s..., progress. It is the cause of one's spiritual
advancement. And then one, when, is advanced in yoga, "ārūḍha". "yogārūḍha" is
at the same. And then, what is the, you know, what is the cause? "śamaḥ kāraṇam
ucyate". "śamaḥ" is inactivity. Pacification. Calmness. "cessation" of
activities as Prabhupada translates it. "kāraṇam ucyate". That means, now,
Krishna is telling that yes, there is a stage when one has to renounce activity.
But that is an advanced stage. And He is giving a structure. He says, first, in
the "ārurukṣoḥ" stage, work itself will lead to advancement. And then, when the
"yogārūḍha" stage, you know, the, a, cessation of work will lead to advan...,
you know, lead to advan..., will lead to advancement. So, Prabhupada says, the,
hmm, hmm, m..., here, the yama, niyama, asana, what are all they meant to do?

"All such activities lead to achieving perfect mental equilibrium to control the
senses. When one is accomplished the practice of meditation, he ceases all
disturbing mental activities."

And, so, the point is, first that we regulate our physical activities through
yama, niyama, asana, pranayama. And vi..., yama, niyama, asana, pranayama can be
practiced even while one is in the world and doing activities in the world. But
once one goes to the level of pratyahara. "pratyahara" means setting out the
sense objects. Then, one cannot stay in the world. Then, one renounces the
world. And one n..., focuses on turning inwards. And then, there is dha...,
dharana, dhyana, samadhi. There are these other progressive stages in which one
goes inwards and inwards. And ultimately perceives the Supersoul in the heart.
So, the initial stages, initial four stages, one, when one can actually
practice, you know, you know, you know, doing karma, also. Doing karma-yoga.
These are the kar..., la..., Aruduksha stage. So, yama, niyama, asana,
pranayama, they are the Aruruksha stage. And the next four involve a person
rising to the Arudha stage. So, hmm, so, here, let us understand what is going
on once again now. So, in six, you know, in 6.1, Krishna's focus is on the
person. And 6.2, focus is on the path. So, what is the focus on the person? Same
person, Krishna is saying, sannyasi and yogi. And the point is, "anāśritaḥ
karma-phalaṁ". That person, what is the nature of that person? That person is
not talking shelter of the work. So, this is an afformative assertion. This is
what the person is doing. That person is not taking shelter of the fruits of the
work. And person is acting. And 6.2, Krishna is saying, the, focus on the path.
What is that? That sannyasa and yoga, both require a common denominator. There
has to be, that is something common which re..., is required for authentic
sannyasa. And authentic yoga. And that is "sannyasta-saṅkalpo". One has given up
desire. So, he, you know, given up the desire for enjoyment. The, this is a
negative assertion. So, in this way, by giving a specific example. And then,
talking about a generic path, Krishna leads the point clear how sannyasa and
yoga are identical. Then, Krishna will now talk about Yogaruruksha and
Yogarudha. So, here, we will see that Yogaruruksha is, in the first stage...,
yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, these are the, the eight stages of the process
of ashtanga-yoga. Now, in a sense, we could say that this i..., eight stages
apply to all paths. So, yama, niyama refer to the rules for individual
discipline and social discipline. You know, yama, niyama that, some...,
sometime, they are said to refer to dos and don'ts. Do this. Do not do this.
Yama. Niyama. Sometimes, it refers to how we have to regulate ourselves
individually. And how we regulate ourselves collectively. So, both ways, the
important point is that we regulate ourselves. And then, and these are, involve,
these are involved with then, yama, niyama, we sit in a particular position.
So, yogi sit in a particular asana. And that asana, is meant to keep the body in
a position which helps the consciousness move inwards. Then, pranayama is also
for the same purpose. When we regulate our breath, by the regulation of the
breath, the mind becomes calm. E..., when we are agitated, the breath becomes
fast. When we try to, you know, slow down the breath, the mind also becomes
calm. So, the purpose of regulating the breath is to calm down the mind. And
then, after that is, a, next is Yogarudha. Arudha means one becomes situated
inwards. T..., one starts going, you know, converts, you do, in the past, so,
th..., this is pratyahara. So, pratyahara means, ahara is food. Praty means
opposite. So, opposite to the food. That means what. Actually, all the senses,
they want some food for themselves. What is the food that they want? They want,
you know, the eyes want to see the, you know, good-looking objects. The tongue
wants to taste delicious foods. The ears want to hear, you know, melo...,
melodious s..., sounds. So, like that, all the senses have their own ahara. They
all have their own hunger for pleasure. A, with their corresponding sense
objects. So, we, pratyahara. We do not feed the senses. So, wiz..., you know,
the opposite of feeling is starving. So, we starve the senses. In the p..., in
the "pratyahara" stage, a person goes into the secluded, you know, seclusion
place in a forest. Where there is no sense gratification available. And one
turns inwards. Turns inwards and starts focusing on the inner truth. Focusing on
the inner worlds. So, then, that is where is, one, when one cuts off an inner
worlds. So, that is the stage from which one is moving towards yoga Arudha. So,
"pratyahara". Then, dyana, dharana, samadhi. We will look at these stages in our
f..., you know, later classes about how one moves inwards more, and more, and
more. So, Krishna is telling, when one is doing yama, niyama, asana, pranayama,
at that time, one can work in the external world. But after that, one should
stop working in the external world. And start working, you know, and start
focusing on inner development. At that time, outer inactivity. Outer inactivity
means, see, even the yogi who is in the jungle will have to do some activity for
eating, you know, for provi..., for may..., bathing. Basic activities will have
to be done. But here, when say, giving up the work, it means not doing the
duties within the varnashrama system. So, the person may be a brahmana. But the
person does not do "yajan yājan paṭhan pāṭhan dānaḥ pratigrahaḥ". The world does
not interact with the world so much. One focuses more on renouncing the world.
So that, one can connect with the Absolute Truth.  So, now, let us look at the
next verse. So, here, Prabhupada is explaining, you know, a, here, Krishna
explains, ok, what is it that is, situates a person on the "yogārūḍha" stage.

        yadā hi nendriyārtheṣu
        na karmasv anuṣajjate
        sarva-saṅkalpa-sannyāsī
        yogārūḍhas tadocyate

So, "ārūḍhas tadocyate". Such a person is situated. "ucyate" means, he is, he is
called. Such a person is called "yogārūḍha". Who? That person, three
characteristics are described. "yadā hi nendriyārtheṣu". "indriya-artheṣu" means
one engages in sense objects. One, you know, a, engages in sense gratification.
"na karmasv anuṣajjate". One does not engage, "anuṣajjate", engage in fruitive
activities, which will eventually lead to sense gratification. So, one is direct
sense gratification. When we enjoy sense objects. Second is, we engage in
fruitive activities that will later provide us sense gratification. And third
is, not only does one give up these to the external forms of material
activities, you know, direct sense gratification and the pursuit of sense
gratification. But also, one gives up internally, the desire for sense
gratification. This, quite a serious stage of renunciation.
"sarva-saṅkalpa-sannyāsī". So, one has given up all desires. So, su..., t...,
so, at that time, such a person is "yogārūḍhas tadocyate". So, so, Lord Krishna
is telling? Three characteristics of "yogārūḍha". So, in A, that is, you know,
person is not engaging in sense gratification. "na", "indriya-artheṣu". That
person is not pursuing sense gratification. That is "na karmasv anuṣajjate". And
one is not even desiring sense gratification. That is,
"sarva-saṅkalpa-sannyāsī". So, one does not engage. One does not pursue. One
does not desire. Then, at that stage, one is situated in the "yoga-ārūḍhaḥ".
"yogārūḍhas tadocyate". So, I will be describing this. Now, Krishna moves
forward. And describes what is the main obstacle in coming to the "yoga-ārūḍhaḥ"
stage. So, He talks about the mind now. In fact, the whole process of yoga is
largely centered on controlling the mind. So, let us look at this verse. This
and the next is, three ver..., three, f..., next verse in the section talk about
how one can come to the "yogārūḍha" stage by bringing the mind under control.

        uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ
        nātmānam avasādayet
        ātmaiva hy ātmano bandhur
        ātmaiva ripur ātmanaḥ

So, "uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ". So, here, the word "ātma" is used several times.
So, one "ātma" refers to the soul. One atma refers to the mind. So, "ātmanā". By
the mind. The soul. "ātmānaṁ". So, one should elevate. "uddharet" means to
elevate. To li..., lib..., lib..., deliver. To liberate. So, uddhar karna, we
say. So, "uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ". One delivers the soul by the mind. That means
we u..., direct the mind such a way that the soul becomes elevated. We will
discuss what that means. "nātmānam avasādayet". "avasādayet" means to put to
degradation. So, they are two opposites. Rise up. Raise up. Or push down. So, do
not c..., engage the mind in such a way that the soul become degraded. And, what
do we have to give is, "ātmaiva hy ātmano bandhur". That the atma, here, the
first atma refers to the mind. The mind is the "bandhur". The friend of the
atma. That is soul. So, the mind is the friend of the soul. And "ātmaiva ripur
ātmanaḥ". The mind is also the enemy of the soul. So, in this way, Krishna is
giving us the broad framework of what is involved in purification. He is telling
that in the inner landscape, the soul, the mind has to be directed in such a
way that the soul become liberated, not entangled. And actually, both can
happen. Because the mind can act as the enemy of the soul. And the mind can act
as the friend of the soul, also. So, let us try to understand what is being
talked about over here. We have talked quite frequently about the mind. You
know, In our earlier classes, also. In the context of this verse, the focus is
on, the yogi is trying to now renounce the world and focus inwards. So, now,
generally speaking, we will see that, if we are physically engaged, the mind
also stays engaged. It is not necessary. But it is conducive. You know, if we
have to sit at one place. And we are not doing anything physically. Then, what
happens? The mind becomes idle, also. See, in the conditioned stage, the mind is
very connected to the body. That means where we are physically, la..., you know,
largely determines where we will be mentally. So, if we are physically exposed
to sense objects, then our mind also gets excited about the sense objects. And
if we are physically removed on the sense objects. Then, the mind's excitement
also decreases, will not go away. Because the mind is very cap..., if the mind
is very captivated on sense objects. Then, still, the mind may stay excited. But
in general, you know, when, you know, in the initial stages, the mind is very
connected with the body. And wherever we are physically, affects us where we are
mentally. So, therefore, when this connection is there between the body and the
mind. So, we understand that, now, there are, there is, is two different
connections. There is the connection of the mind with the soul. And there is
connection of the mind with the body. So, this verse is talking of the
connection with the mind and the soul. The mind can act as a friend of the soul.
The mind can act as the enemy of the soul, also. So, what it aha..., how do we
understand this relationship? You know. Suppose, I am sitting here. And now,
there is a door, I am in a room. And there is a door in front of me. And this
room is otherwise dark. If the door is opened, then I can see outside. So,
light streams in. And I can see outside. If the door is closed, I cannot see
anything. Now, just expand this scenario. And suppose, if there are three doors.
And each of these doors, it opens, it shows a pathway. Hmm. And at one time, one
door alone can be open. And I cannot determine absolutely, you know, but I have
some control over determine which door will be open. I cannot say that all three
doors have to be open. So, like that, the door to the consciousness is the mind.

So, we perceive the outer world through the mind. So, the door to the outer
world is the mind. So, wherever the mind is opened, that is the reality that we
perceive. And the other reality, we become blind to that. What does this mean?
You know, sometimes, some materialistic people come to the temple. And when they
come to the temple, you know, their, the door of their mind is open only to
materialistic things. So, even when they come to the temple, all that they see,
oh, there is such expensive marble here. Oh, ch..., is, chandeliers, how
expensive these must be. And then, they look around. You know. How good-looking
are the members of the opposite sex in the temple. You know. They practically do
not even notice the deities. And then, somebody says, d..., Bhagavane ape
darshan. Please take, there is, the God is who, take darshan. And they are, fold
their hands. Ok. I pray something and fold. So, what happens is the door of their
consciousness is not opened towards Krishna, at all. The door, sorry, the door
of their consciousness is the mind. Because the mind is materially conscious.
So, all that they see is material things. They do not see spiritual things at
all, practically speaking. So, like that, our mind, it can f..., it is the door
to our consciousness. So, whatever level the mind is at, that is what we can be
consciou..., we are conscious of. So, now, what Krishna is telling in this verse
is that, actually, the soul can become conscious of spiritual things. Or the
soul can become conscious of material things. When the soul becomes conscious of
material things, then the bond between the soul and those material things
increases. Because the desires are aroused. And those desires bind the soul to
the body. And the soul, by extension to the world. That is how th..., causes
bondage. So, when w..., in our mind, we focus on sense objects. We dwell on the
sense objects. Then, desire awakens in them. And that is how the soul becomes
bound. So, it is like, there is a door. That door can be open towards spiritual
things. It can be open towards Krishna. It can, toward devotees. Toward the
Bhagavad Gita. Towards the holy name. And, or it can be open towards the sense
objects of this world. So, whichever way the door opens, that is where our
consciousness will go. So, Krishna is telling over here, we have a choice. We
can ch..., open the door of our consciousness. That means we can focus our mind
on the sense o..., worldly objects. Or we can focus it on Krishna. And depending
on what we focus on, accordingly, we will get the results. Therefore, Krishna is
alerting us, use the mind in a way that will bring about liberation. So,
Prabhupada quotes here from the Upanishads, from the "Amṛta-bindu Upaniṣad". He
quotes that:

        mana eva manuṣyāṇāṁ
        kāraṇaṁ bandha-mokṣayoḥ
        bandhāya viṣayāsaṅgo
        muktyai nirviṣayaṁ manaḥ

So, "mana eva manuṣyāṇāṁ". That for the people, "kāraṇaṁ bandha-mokṣayoḥ". That
the mind is for the people, for the human being, for the living being, is the
cause of both, "kāraṇaṁ" is the cause of both bondage and liberation. So, the
same truth that is talked about in Gita Upanishad is talked about in other
"Upaniṣad". Here, "Amṛta-bindu Upaniṣad". So, "bandhāya viṣayāsaṅgo". That when
does the mind, mind cause bondage? "viṣayāsaṅgo". When there is, when there is
focus on, when attachment to the sense objects. When the mind fixes on the sense
objects, the mind causes bondage. And "muktyai". The mind will c..., a, lead to
liberation when "nirviṣayaṁ manaḥ". When the mind becomes free from obsession
with the sense objects. So, now, of course, how will the mind become free from
captivation of the sense objects? That also will require some effort. And
ultimately, for that, we need to s..., fix the mind on Krishna. And that is what
Krishna will talk repeatedly in the later chapters of the Bhagavad Gita.

        man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

And even in 6.47, also, He will say that, fix the mind on Me. That person who
does that:

        yoginām api sarveṣāṁ
        mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

The topmost yogi is one who fixes the mind on Me. So, that is the, so, as of
now, in the Gita's progression, the spiritual reality, what it is, has not been
revealed. All that has been talked about primarily is, ok, that materiality
reality is the source of bondage. Therefore, one has to stay away from it. So,
what is the way to stay away? Some people say, will just go, withdraw away from
the material duality. That is the path of inaction. Krishna is saying no. Engage
in the material duality. But for the sake of purification. That is what Krishna
has talked about in the c..., you know, Bhagavad Gita, till now. So, now,
Krishna is telling over here that is why, or, th..., m..., a..., mean, the
"Amṛta-bindu Upaniṣad" is saying over here that fix the mind on, on, do not let
the mind be fixed on the sense objects. So, what it should be fixed on, because
the positive spiritual reality is not known over here. So, one, that may not be
said. But once the positive spiritual reality is known to be Krishna. Then, the
mind will be fixed on Krishna. So, "muktyai nirviṣayaṁ manaḥ". "nirviṣayaṁ"
means when the mind is free from the sense objects, at that time, one becomes
"muktyai". So, we have the choice. So, actually speaking, we may wonder, do I
really have control over what I fix the mind on? So, we have the choice. So,
actually speaking, we may wonder, do I really have control over what I fix the
mind on? The mind goes here. The mind goes there. See, we do not have absolute
control. But we do have significant control. Just like, if we are driving a car,
then, the car will, by default, move off-track. Then, that is why the person has
to be in the steering wheel. And the person is, keep again moving the car. So
that, if it is going off this track, putting it on the, this track. If it is
moving this way, bring it again this way again. So, whichever way there, it is
moving, by its own motion, the steering wheel moving the opposite direction, and
brings the car back on, back, back on its track. So, that is what is, you know,
the pur..., pur..., pur..., purpose is, d..., of the driver. The driver is
trained and paid so that the driver keeps the, you know, car on track. So, what
is required is congi..., conscious, consistent cultivation. Conscious,
consistent cultivation. The mind, by its nature, goes off-track. So, we do not
have absolute control over the mind. We may not be able to stop the mind from
going off-track. But when the mind goes off-track, we can bring it back on track
through cultivation. Congious..., conscious, consistent cultivation. Conscious.
We have to be conscious. Ok, where is the mind going right now? If we are
unconscious, just lost in our own thoughts, then what happens, the, the car will
just go off-track. It may fall into a ditch. And then, we will break our head.
And then, we will really become unconscious. You know. I may come about, once,
what happened. My God. So, like that, we may fall into some terrible, you know,
terrible sort of sense gratification. Then, then, we come back. Then, watch.
What did I do? Why did I do that? It is insane, what happened to me? So, that is
why if we have to be conscious. Actually, many people talk about freedom. We
want freedom. We want freedom. And they oppose. They are fearful. They, dread,
totalitarian governments. The c..., the pol..., the dictator, dictatorships. The
tyrants who say, oh, exercise the absolute control over them. They t..., they
violate their liberties. So, yes, that is one threat to individual freedom. But
the greatest threat to individual freedom is the individual. The greatest threat
to invidiual freedom is the individual.

That means, you know, we are the greatest threat to our freedom. We actually act
in ways by which we hurt ourselves. Then, we hurt ourselves, you know, we, l...,
we lose our freedom because of that. So, we are the greatest threat to
ourselves. And therefore, the mind, there is, what is being said over here is,
conscious, consistent cultivation. Conscious. So that we do not go off-track.
You know, when there is a threat. If we are on alert, then we can counter the
threat before it becomes, before it destroys us. But if we are not alert, then
the threat may destroy us. And after that, it may be too late. So, conscious and
consistent. It is not that, ok, today, I was very alert in my chanting. Next
day, I will go to sleep. That will not work. Consistent. Because the mind can
attack anytime. In fact, whenever war is going on, at that time, the enemy, in
fact, will launch its most ferocious attack when it sees that the other parties
lower the guard. Because then, that, the other party lowers the guard, then
before the guard comes up. Then, tuck. The enemy can be destroyed of the part,
a party can be destroyed, also. That is why, in a war, inattention can spell
destruction. You know. If two people are, two soldiers are s..., facing each
other with a gun. You know. One of them just looks here. And that moment, the
other party is, shoot the bullet. And destruction. So, inattention can spell
destruction. And that is why, what is required is conscious, consistent
cultivation. Cultivation of what? Cultivation of Krishna Consciousness.
Cultivation of fixing the mind on Krishna. So, that is how we will, you know,
use the mind for "uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ". We will use the mind for elevation.
For liberation. Now, Krishna will elaborate on this point, in this, which has
talked about in this verse. The mind can be the friend, as well as the enemy.
So, we may wonder how can the same friend, same entity, the mind can act
as friend, and can act as enemy, also. Krishna describes then, that determine,
Krishna says, that, describes that, that determine, that depends on who is in
control. If the mind is in control, the mind will become our enemy. If we are in
control, then our mind can act as a friend. That is the next verse.

        bandhur ātmātmanas tasya
        yenātmaivātmanā jitaḥ
        anātmanas tu śatrutve
        vartetātmaiva śatru-vat

So, "bandhur ātmātmanas". So, "ātmā". And "ātmanaḥ". So, so, the "ātmā" is the
friend. "ātmanaḥ" is the soul. So, the mind is the friend of the soul when
"yenātmaivātmanā jitaḥ". When by the mind, when the mind has been conquered by
the soul. That means when the mind is controlled, the mind is the friend.
"an...", "anātmanas tu śatrutve". "anātmanas". So, "anātmanas" means, when one,
the mind is not under control, "śatrutve". "varteta" will remain "ātmaiva
śatru-vat". The same very mind will remain, will act as the enemy. "śatru-vat".
As an enemy. So, here, Krishna import these verses 6.5 and 6.6, actually uses
the word "ātmā" to refer to both the mind and the self. And the soul. So, the,
we have discussed varius times that the w..., a, word "ātmā" can have many
meanings. So, here, the verse makes best sense when the word atma is used to
refer to the mind. You know, if the "ātmā" is used to refer to the soul, also.
Then, we have to have, a, actual, we have to con..., think of it, in terms of an
actual soul. And a conceived soul. That means to, the meaning would be what?
That the self is the friend of the self. And the self is the enemy of the self.
So, one should elevate the self by the self. And not, you know, degrade the self
by the self. So, when the self is in control of the self, the self is the friend 
of the self. When the self is not in control of the self, then self will remain
the enemy of the self. So, ok, what is this self? Just leave me to myself. Do
not trouble me. This is too much of an, you know, you know, a, intellectual
headache for me. To think of such things. So, now, that will be difficult for us
to understand. Some acharyas have referred to "ātmā" as the self, also, over
here. So, then, if it is used in that sense, what it means, essentially, is that
actually, there are some commentators who talk about in terms of the lower self
and the higher self. The lower self is what we currenty..., currently identify
ourselves to be. And higher self is what we actually are. And what we
potentially can become. What we essentially are. So, what we essentially are is
the soul. The soul is pure. The soul is a part of Krishna. And the soul is meant
to act in selfless love. So, that is our higher self. And the lower self is, who
we presently misidentify with. That is our body. Our attachments. And our, you
know, misconceptions. Our prejudices. And we think this is what I am. So,
actually, there is a difference between the two. So, the lower self drags us
down. And the higher self, if we act at the level of higher self, we will become
liberated. So, the lower self and higher self c..., are conceptions that can be
used if we want to, for the sake of clearer understanding. So:

        bandhur ātmātmanas tasya
        yenātmaivātmanā jitaḥ

That means that, so the self is the enemy of the self. And the self is the
friend of the self. What are we referring, referred this to? This referred to
the lower self. And the higher self. When there is a conflict going on between
the two. So, if the higher self wins. Then, we become elevated. The lower self
wins, we become degraded. So, that is why, these are words which can be used.
But Srila Prabhupada keeps things simple for us. And that is also true. The mind
is the enemy. The mind is the friend. And how does, what it determines, the mind
is in control. And the mind can become the enemy. The mind is controlled. The
mind is different. Just like a horse, you know, when that person is riding on a
horse. Or that person is riding on a chariot. That is driven by horses. So, at
that time, if the horse is in control, the horse may go here. The horse may go
there. And then, the chariot will meet with an accident. But if the charioteer
is in control. And the horses are controlled. Then, the horses are the means by
which the chariot can go fast. You know, that, that same person has to run by
foot. That person cannot go as fast. So, when we are living in the material
world, we need matter to interact and act in the material world. So, we need the
mind and the senses. We cannot just wish away or reject the mind and senses. We
need them. But we have to regulate them. That is what Krishna is talking about
over here. Now, Srila Prabhupada's whole purport here focuses on the point of
following the superior dictation. So:

"The constitutional position of the living entity is to carry out the order of
the superior."

So, Prabhupada is saying, that, you know, you know, m...:

"As long as one’s mind remains an unconquered enemy, one has to serve the
dictations of lust, anger, avarice, illusion, etc."

Avarice refers to greed. So, these anarthas.

"But when the mind is conquered, one voluntarily agrees to abide by the
dictation of the Personality of Godhead, who is situated within the heart of
everyone as Paramātmā. "

That means we are all servants always. You know, either we can serve Krishna or
we can serve Maya. Either we can serve the almighty or we will find that our
senses will become almighty. You know. The tongue will drag us. Come on. Eat
this. Genitals. Come on. Enjoy this. The mind. Go and do this. Think about this.
Enjoy this. So, the, actually, the soul is a servant. Soul can either be servant
of Krishna. Or the soul will have to become the servant of Maya. So, the, we do
not have any third choice. We may feel that, oh, I am not going to follow sense
gratification. But I will not surrender to Krishna, also. We might be able to
stay in that situation for a little time. But that is a meta stable stage. We
will fall off. Fall off, you know, by, generally, if we try down to sense
gratification. If we try to stay. Unless we are consciously trying to pull
ourselves up. By default, there is gravity, which will drag us down. So, just as
there is gravity there in this world which drags objects down. Similarly, there
is gravity with respect to consciousness, also. By default, in the material
world, our consciousness goes down. It goes down towards sense objects, towards
sense gratification. So, we need to consciously push upwards. And we have to
hold unto Krishna through the process of bhakti-yoga. Through pro..., of the
process of any yoga in general. But bhakti-yoga is the easiest. By which, we
will move upwards. So, here, Krishna is telling that, or Prabhupada is telling
that we have to follow somebody's order. So, we cannot just stay suspended. You
know. Either we have been pulled up. Or we have been pulled down. So, that way,
that is our situation. We have to follow either Krishna or Maya. If we want to
disobey the mind, we need to obey Krishna. And if we disobey Krishna, we will be
bound up, becoming obeident servants of the mind. Mind says, come on. Go to
sleep. So, we will go to sleep. Mind says. Come on. Watch this TV. We will
watch that TV. So, actually, most of the time, you know, we act as very
surrendered servants of the mind. Surrendered servants. You know. When the mind
says, what, you know, come on. Do this. So:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

What happens is, we give up everything else. And we surrender to Maya. Whatever
the mind tells, actually, if we look back at our lives, there are so many times,
when we could have been duch..., you know doing, such, mu..., much more
responsible, you know, a, fruitful, you know, a, joyful activities. But the mind
says, come on. Do not do this. Go there. Go. Talk. Talk with. Talk that. Do
this. And then, we just leave that. And go in that direction. Whatever the mind
is impelling us. That is what actually, we trust the mind too much. You know,
instead, we should learn to trust Krishna. That Krishna is our well-wisher. And
what Krishna is telling us to do, that is in our best interest. What the mind is
telling us is not in our best interests. So, now, Prabhupada m..., m...,
explains how if we follow Krishna, then we can become free from the obe..., you
know, obeidence to the mind. So, the next verse, Krishna will describe the
symptoms of one who has conquered the mind. So, when will the mind become the
friend? And, that is when we go, we have gone beyond equality. That is equa...,
beyond duality.

        jitātmanaḥ praśāntasya
        paramātmā samāhitaḥ
        śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu
        tathā mānāpamānayoḥ

"jitātmanaḥ". The person who has conquered the mind. What happens to that
person, "praśāntasya". That person becomes "śānta". Deeply peaceful. So, not
just peaceful. But deeply peaceful. "praśāntasya". And then, such a person is
"paramātmā". The transcendental soul. "samāhitaḥ". "samāhitaḥ" means one is
approached. Come close to. So, actually, this is the first verse in the Bhagavad
Gita where the word "paramātmā" is used. Before that, there have been references
to the Absolute Truth. But that Absolute Truth has not been you know, a, named
specifically, as the word "paramātmā". Later on, in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna
will refer to who is this "paramātmā". For example, He will talk about in 13.23:

        upadraṣṭānumantā ca
        bhartā bhoktā maheśvaraḥ
        paramātmeti cāpy ukto
        dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ

So, He is saying that, in this body, there is a transcendental p..., you know,
purusa. A transcendental person. And that person is the overseer. And the
permitter. And that is known as the, He is the enjoyer. And He is the
maintainer. And He is known as "paramātmeti cāpy ukto". So, exactly, who the
"paramātmā" is. That will be explained earlier. But it is the first reference to
the word "paramātmā" in the Bhagavad Gita. So, Krishna is telling that, so, we
are, the soul is here. The Supersoul is right next to us. But the soul has
turned away. And the soul is looking outwards to the material world and is
want en..., wanting to enjoy the material world. And what is causing the soul to
enjoy is the mind. The mind is filled with fantasies for my material enjoyment.
And as the mind drags the soul away. So, when we bring the mind under control,
then what happens is, the force that is dragging us away, that is t...,
directing us away, distracting us away from the Supersoul. That force becomes
subsided. And when that, that force subsides, then we can turn towards Krishna.
So, Krishna is telling over here that, you know, "jitātmanaḥ". What, who has
conquered the mind, "praśāntasya". So, the mind is always causing this
agitation. This is wrong. That is wrong. Get that. You know. This is not proper.
So, because of the mind, so many agitations come up. So, when the mind becomes
controlled. "praśāntasya". We will become peaceful. And then, when we are
peaceful, we are not excited falsely by hopes of pleasure in this world. And we
will turn from the outer world to the inner world. And then, "paramātmā
samāhitaḥ". We will become, we will approach the super whole. And then, m...,
the character of such a person is, that person is not too affected or excited by
dualities. And Krishna is talking about dualities at three levels over here.
"śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha...". You know: 

        śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu
        tathā mānāpamānayoḥ

So, "śīta", "uṣṇa" is at the level of the ph..., body. So, pleasure, and, you
know, si..., or, heat and cold. That is the level, a, physical level.
"sukha-duḥkha" is at the mental level. And "mānāpamān" is at the, you know, at
the level of the ego. Honor and dishonor. So, all these three dualities, one
transcends. Then, Krishna describes in the next verse about how such a person is
situated. And what is the vision of such a person. So:

        jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā

So, by "jñāna" and "vijñāna", one becomes "tṛptātmā". So:

        jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā
        kūṭa-stho vijitendriyaḥ
        yukta ity ucyate yogī
        sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ

So, Krishna is telling over here one who has got knowledge and realisation,
"jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā". Such a person becomes satisfied. Such a person is
"kūṭa-stho". "kūṭa-stho" is, means spiritually situated. Not materially
disturbed. "vijitendriyaḥ". That person is, conquered the senses. And "yukta ity
ucyate yogī". "yukta" means c..., well-situated, connected. Prabhupada wri...,
translate it as competent for self-realisation. "yukta ity ucyate yogī". And
that person is, having an equal vision towards material things.
"sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ". That person is having equal vision towards, you know,
what all things? "loṣṭra" is pebbles. "aśma" is stones. And "kāñcanaḥ" is gold.
So, from the material point of view, gold is precious. You know. Gold is
invaluable. And stone is practically not of much value. It is valueless. Then,
how can somebody say gold and stone equally? What it means is that one does not
imagine that worldly things will make me, make me happy. But understands that,
for me, as soul, as, so, neither gold, nor stone matters. Neither of them can
make me happy. They are both material. Whereas I am spiritual. And the person
who is spiritual cannot be satisfied by anything material. So, n..., a, that is
why that person becomes detached. "sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ". Now, Prabhupada
gives a very beautiful meaning of "sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ". And he connects
that first with "jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā". So, only when knowledge and
self-realisation, by theoretical knowledge, and realised knowledge, only then,
that person can become satisfied. Otherwise, we will be, stay dissatisfied. So,
Prabhupada writes:

"Book knowledge without realization of the Supreme Truth is useless."

Useless in terms of, it will not bring any satisfaction. It will not bring about
any transformation. It will not bring about any purification. It is useless. And
Prabhupada quotes that, you know, the famous verse, which is from
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". M..., that:

        ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi
        na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ
        sevonmukhe hi jihvādau
        svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

So, the name and o..., other paraphernalia of Krishna, "na bhaved grāhyam".
"grāhyam" means to be accepted. To be understood. "indriyaiḥ". So, "indriyaiḥ".
The gross senses cannot understand, the materially contaminated senses cannot
understand this. "na bhaved". But "sevonmukhe hi jihvādau". "ādau" is in the
beginning. "jihvā". So, service, "seva" will begin with the "jihvā". Then, what
happens by this "jihvā"? We become "unmukh". We are all currently "vimukh" from
Krishna. Krishna is here. We are here. But we are not "unmukh". To, our face is
not turned towards Krishna. Our face is turned away from Krishna. We are
"vimukh". So, by rendering service to Krishna, we should, Krishna, Krishna, I
want to come closer to You. So, service is the way we change our orientation
180 degrees, from "vimukh" to "unmukh". "sevonmukhe, "jihvādau". And when we do
this, when we turn towards Krishna, then Krishna by His own free will, "svayam
eva sphuraty adaḥ". By His own free will, He is spontaneously "sphuraty".
"sphuraty" means "sphoorthy". There is remembrance which Krishna gives us. That
kind of remembrance when Krishna gives us, that is very absorbing. See, there is
smaran. And there is sphoorthy. Smaran means we are consciously, thank to
cultivate the remembrance of Krishna. And that is a part of our
"sādhana-bhakti". Smaranam is one of the limbs of devotional service. So, we
consciously strive to remember Krishna. Ok. This what I should do. This is what
I should. This is what I should. Smaranam. And on the other hand, "sphoorthy"
mean, so, smaranam is, we are trying to cultivate remembrance of Krishna.
Spoorthy means Krishna Himself gives us remembrance. And when that happens,
just, it is like a wave of spiritual, devotional thought. That takes us rapidly
close towards Krishna. So, in an ocean, say, smaran is like, we are trying to
move towards the particular destination, by swimming. And "spoorthy" means,
suddenly, a wave comes and takes us in that very direction, only. So, we do
surveys. We chant the holy names. And by all this, we are trying to remember
Krishna. And turn towards Krishna. That is our "sādhana-bhakti". But when
Krishna becomes pleased by our endeavors, then He gives a wave. So, that is the
"sphoorthy". And that wave comes, we just puri..., propel towards Krishna. So,
far more rapidly than what we would be by our own conscious effort. So, this is
how we, Krishna reveals Himself. So, what is the connection of this with the
verse? Krishna is telling that, that the real understand..., you know, meaning
of Himself comes by "vijñāna". And then, when we realise the sweetness of
Krishna, then we become "tṛpta". So, otherwise, just by "jñāna", when things are
theoretical. I am not the body. I am the soul. Actually, spiritual happiness is
far greater than material happiness. But I think, material, I feel as if
material happiness only far greater. Spiritual happiness is not there, only. So,
that way, we will not satisfied. T..., we will not be "tṛpta". We will always
be restless. So, actually, what we have to do is, we have to turn inwards. We
have to turn inwards. When we turn inwards, then we move forwards towards
Krishna by that. So, how we turn inwards is by the practice of devotional
service. So, when we turn inwards towards Krishna, we relish. And then, we
become "tṛpta". "jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā". So, when there is only "jñāna". No
"vijñāna". There is no "tṛpta". And that is when we get dragged towards sense
gratification. And when there is no "vijñāna". There is no realisation. Then,
not only the desires come up, but doubts also come up. So, Prabhupada explains
that:

"By transcendental knowledge one can remain steady in his convictions, but by
mere academic knowledge one can be easily deluded and confused by apparent
contradictions."

So, by transcendental knowledge, Prabhupada means that realised knowledge. One
can remain steady in convictions. Because we understand there is a higher
reality. There is pursued when our consciousness becomes elevated. But when, but
by mere academic knowledge, we just, I know. This thing. This thing. This. You
know. Simple. Dry facts, we know. We had not got any rasa. Then, what happens?
One can be easily deluded and confused by apparent contradictions. So, now,
"jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā". And such a person, "sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ". So,
Prabhupada explains:

"For him mundane scholarship and mental speculation, which may be as good as
gold to others, are of no greater value than pebbles or stones."

So, mundane scholarship and mental speculation. So, now, that means, somebody
may has a, m..., may have very lofty degree. A PhD. One P..., two PhDs. Three
PhDs. So, these are like gold. People, you know, spend years and years of their
life to get these degrees. So, now, you know, at one level, the person certainly
requires, a, diligence. And hard work to get those degrees. So, to that extent,
that can be valued. But we have to understand that just academic scholarship
does not le..., equate with spiritual advancement. So, therefore, when one has
this academic scholarship. If one does not, if one mistakes it that, this
itself, a, just the person has so much knowledge. That means the person must be
very advanced. Then, in that situation, we become misled. But at, devotee is not
misled like that. A realised devotee understands, oh, this person may have a lot
of knowledge. But that person does not have attraction towards Krishna, does not
love Krishna. And the purpose of this knowledge is to learn to love Krishna. So,
that is why, that has not become very attractive. So, some people may see
academic scholarship as gold. But a devotee understands, from the point of
spiritual perspective, this has no capacity to provide happiness. This is just
like stone. This is not going to bring any real happiness. So, now, we can look
at this from a, so, from the purely materialistic perspective, gold is precious.
And stone is not tol..., a, not so valuable at all. From the detached jnani
perspective, if one sees, then neither stone, nor gold can give me happiness.
So, I do not care for either of these. Now, from the devotee's perspective,
whatever can be used in Krishna's service, the devotee values that. When Srila
Prabhupada wa..., had asked his devotees, disciples to construct a temple in
Vrindavan. So, Gurudas Prabhu and other devotees were in charge. And of, their
problem, for all of them was getting cement. Cement was not available anywhere.
And, you know, Prabhupada finally, you know, Prabhupada, you know, contacted
life members, whom he, whom he, he had met in different parts. And he did
various things. And finally, they got cement. And then, finally, cement came by
the trucks. Prabhupada himself was there. And he had counted all the sacks of
the cement. And then, he had supervised all the sacks being transformed,
transported to the go down. And then, Prabhupada said, have you sealed
carefully now? Have you counted all of it? Have you locked it carefully? So, the
devotees who were there, they felt as if Prabhupada was treating the cement bags
as if they are gold bags. So, why? Prabhupada was sannyasi. But Prabhupada saw
the cement is essential for the service of Krishna. For building a temple for
Krishna. Therefore, he valued its enormously. So, in this way, actually speaking,
what Srila Prabhupada focused on was the devotion, you know, was the devotional
utility. The devotional potential. So, for a devotee, for one's own sake,
neither gold, nor stone matters. But for Krishna's stake, even stone can be
valued as much as gold. So, that is a transcendental perspective. That is a
devotional perspective. But, and in this Bhagavad Gita verse, Krishna is saying
that one who has understood spiritual reality, has become situated in the
spiritual reality, by knowledge and realisation, that person understands nothing
material can make me happy. And therefore, that person stays equipoised
unaffected by anything material. And sees everything material equally. So, we
will continue in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
