Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vi6NXipv6Rk
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=hbPDFdydMmsmeTeKyvNkvvjjXO18MTU0ODQ4Nzc5OUAxNTQ4NDAxMzk5&v=Vi6NXipv6Rk&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_068_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_04_Text_01_to_06_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We
completed the third chapter, in the previous class. Now, we are moving on to the
fourth chapter. So, the fourth chapter, themes with the concept a, of spiritual
knowledge. "Transcendental Knowledge" as Prabhupada calls it. The standard Gita
press, Gita called this, this chapter as a jnana-karma-sannyasa yoga. So, Third
Chapter is karma yoga. Fifth Chapter is karma-sannyasa yoga. And the chapter
in-between is titled as jnana-karma-sannyasa yoga. Srila Prabhupada translates
it as transcendental knowledge. As we have discussed, different acharyas titled
it in different ways. So, if we look at the theme, the theme is centered on
knowledge. We will see later on:

        na hi jñānena sadṛśaṁ
        pavitram iha vidyate

You know, the most important verse is in this chapter, is 3.38, 4.38. He says
nothing as pure as transcendental knowledge. And that is the means to Supreme
Happiness. That is why:

        tat svayam yoga-samsiddhah
        kalenatmani vindati

When we delight by that. So, let us start with the overview of this chapter. So,
the overview is based on, the five sections in the chapter. So, which, verses
one to ten talk about how Krishna teaches and establishes dharma. So, Krishna
teaches and establishes dharma. So, what is, you know, you know, this got to do
with the previous chapter? Previous chapter ended, we will discuss when we come
to the verses. But the essential point is that dharma is the means by which one
stays protected from kama. And becomes elevated. So, Krishna teaches that part.
Now, dharma involves many parts. So, 11 to 15 makes the point that Krishna is
the goal and the creator of all paths. Whatever parts are there, it is Krishna
who is the, who has made those paths. And it is thr..., through Krishna that all
parts are meant to born. And then, what is the dharma that Krishna is
recommending for Arjuna? There are many dharmas. So, karma-yoga is the dharma
which Krishna is recommending to Arjuna. And, you know, wha..., how does
karma-yoga bring about liberation? Because karma-yoga involves jnana, also. One
has knowledge. And by acting in knowledge, one attains liberation. So, in the
next chapter, next section of this chapter, 25 to 33, talks about achieving jnana
through sacrifices. So, by doing fire, various kinds of sacrifices. Not just
fire sacrifices, one can eventually come to jnana. You know, and then, th..., a,
what is the glory of that jnana is talked about in the last section, from 34 to
42. So, there are 42 verses in this chapter. The third chapter had 43 verses.
So, let us look at the verses. Beginning with the first verse.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ
        proktavān aham avyayam
        vivasvān manave prāha
        manur ikṣvākave ’bravīt

So, "imaṁ". This. This, we, first word. This knowledge. "yogaṁ". As I said. This
knowledge of yoga. Knowledge of one's relationship with the Supreme Lord.
"vivasvate". I spoke to Vivasvan. And then, "proktavan aham avyayam". I p...,
spoke it long ago. "proktavan". "avyayam" refers to imperishable. This
knowledge is, it is imperishable. It is very important knowledge. It lasts
forever. And "vivasvān manave prāha". "Vivasvān" spoke to Manu. And "manur
ikṣvākave ’bravīt". And Manu spoke it to Ikṣvāku. "’bravīt". "prāha" and
"bravīt" are synonyms of "proktavan". It all meaning spoke. So, now, here, the
question may suddenly come up. You know, in the previous chapter, Krishna was
talking about how lust attacks, steals the intelligence, the senses and the
mind. And how lust has to be conquered by regulating the senses. And situated on
the spiritual platform. And suddenly, where is sun-god coming to the picture?
You know, sun-god is there. And Iksvaku is there. And then, all the de..., all
the descendants are there. Where is, all this come from suddenly? So, the point
is that the knowledge which Krishna has told Arjuna in the third chapter, that
knowledge is not something which Krishna has just spun out of his magic hat at
that particular time. You know, those magicians have ha..., magic hat and from
that, when they want, they just pop out a rabbit. So, of course, there is some,
you know, sley of hand over there. And actually, the rabbit is there. But they
make it up with ra..., as it is suddenly, there is coming out of nowhere. So,
Krishna is not just concocted this knowledge. Right now, for the sake of Arjuna.
He actually, you know, this knowledge is eternal. And Krishna eventually, it,
also, in 3.31:

        ye me matam idaṁ nityam

These words are eternal words. So, Krishna is now explaining how these words are
eternal. He is saying that, actually, since from the beginning of creation, this
knowledge has been there. So, the knowledge of conquering lust is required for
all living beings. Because lust is the, always there among all living beings
right from the beginning. So, everybody has to fight and conquer lust. And how
do they fight and conquer? By the power of bhakti. By, ulti..., by the power of
jnana as we will describe in this chapter. And that jnana will ultimately
fructify at its highest level in bhakti. So, A..., Krishna is telling the, how
this knowledge has been coming down since time immemorial. And that is, so,
there, if it was "nityam". Here, it is "avyayam". So, it is similar. 3.31 and
4.1. So, it is coming down. And Krishna is giving a, a lineage by which it is
coming down. Now, Srila Prabhupada's purport is a little technical. So, we will
focus on some other aspects of it first. So, now, Prabhupada gives a very
interesting point. What is the duty of the king?

"The kings of all planets are especially meant for the protection of the
inhabitants,"

And now, we normally think of protection means, ok, there are terrorists. There
are thieves. We have to protect from them. But Prabhupada immediately clarifies:

"and therefore the royal order should understand the science of Bhagavad-gita in
order to be able to rule the citizens and protect them from material bondage to
lust."

So, that is the point. Connection between this and the last chapter is that they
are meant to protect their citizens from bondage to lust. Now, how does this
bondage to lust happen? That has been described in the previous chapter. And the
liberation from that bondage is not just the responsibility of the invidiual
citizens. No doubt. It is a responsibility of the citizens. But along with that,
it is also the responsibility of the kings. So, kings have to create a
socio-cultural environment by which people do not become bound to lust. That is
why Krishna is saying, I give this knowledge to the kings. And Prabhupada
further makes the point that:

"the executive heads of all states are intended to spread the science of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness so that the people may take advantage of this great science and
pursue a successful path, utilizing the opportunity of the human form of life."

So, in general, for any system of, you know, s..., you know, you know, spiritual
advancement to be socially effective, there has to be the union, the joining of
the brahmanas and ksatriyas. If we look at buddhism. Now, buddhism was the
religion of renunciates. Buddha himself renounced the world. And those who
followed him also renounced the world. And buddhism did not have much influence
o..., socially, till it was adopted by a king. You know, it was Ashoka. And once
Ashoka adopted it, you know, after that, he, you know, he, his whole family
adopted, his whole kingdom adopted it. And he practically became a missionary of
buddhism. He sent his son to Sri Lanka. And he sent his other family members,
different places. And that way, they all joined in spreading buddhism. So, that
is how buddhism spread. Similarly, if we see, you know, Christianity, for the
first three-four centuries, it was the prosecuted, persecuted religion by the,
persecuted by the Romans. And then, after that, it took off. And when it took
off, it took off very r..., fast, very powerfully. Once the Roman emperor
accepted Christianity. So, like that, if we look at, even in the Vedic culture,
we see the points that the brahmanas, ksatriyas would be united. And when they
would be united, the spiritual culture would go on very well. So, we see in
recent time, Sri Chaitanya Mahāprabhu, you know, he went to Puri. And he, you
know, was the person who transformed the heart of Prataparudra. Prataparudra
already had a, appreciation for Vaishnava culture. But the way he got captivated
by Sri Chaitanya Mahāprabhu's sweetness, and love, and mercy. Then, he offered
all the state resources for the protection and propagation o..., of Chaitanya
Mahāprabhu's mission. So, like that, in general, for any, you know, f..., esteem
of thought to become socially or culturally influential, there has to be the
joining of the brahmana and the ksatriya. In modern times, we see that, there
were Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. They wrote their book "Das Kapital". That
was The Co..., a, Communist Manifesto. Now, they were in, they were in their
own wiz..., intellectuals. You know, when they wrote their book. That aff..,
influenced some people. But eventually, communism came, you know, communism came
very influential f..., through Lenin and Stalin. When there was the revolution,
1917. When the Russian tsar was overthrown. And communist came to power. So,
after that, communism had a whole 1917 to almost the end of 1980s in the Russia.
For 70 years. So, in general, any system of thought for it to be socially
influential. Whether it is a, you know, it i..., it is a spiritual system of
thought or whether it is an atheistic system of thought. That requires the
joining of the intellectual and the administrator. So, th..., here, Krishna is
telling over here that I give this knowledge to the kings. So, why He is saying
He gives to the kings? Because the kings will influence society. The kings will
influence society. If the kings are materialistic, then people in general will
be influenced materialistically. If the kings are spiritually minded, then that
will influence the general public in a spiritual way. So, Krishna does not give
knowledge to anyone and everyone. Of course, this spiritual knowledge is
available for anyone and everyone. If they seek it. But Krishna will focus on
primarily giving knowledge to the kings. So, similarly, in our outreach, you
know, we would like to give spiritual knowledge to everyone. At the same time,
you know, if we have to concentrate our efforts, we will concentrate our efforts
on people who are socially influential. We say, Srila Prabhupada would be very
pleased when his disciples would bring leaders of society to meet him. So, there
are many conversations of Prabhupada with v..., various prominent thinkers. You
know, wherever he visited. So, the purpose of this is, Srila Prabhupada wanted
to influence those who are influencing society. And if that could happen, that
would influence a lot of people in a mass way. You know, this is not
discrimination. This is simply, you know, precision. What is the differen...,
difference between discrimination and precision? Discrimination means we reject
certain people. And no, you are not allowed. That is not the point. You know,
Prabhupada even went to the hippies. And he invited the hippies to start
practicing Krishna Consciousness. That, this was so extraordinary, Prabhupada
was a con..., was from the external point of view, conservative swami who would
not eat meat or even smoke. And he was wearing a traditional Indian attire. And
he was saying, whatever you are, whoever you are doing, Kri..., just chant Hare
Krishna.

So, at that time, when Srila Prabhupada came to San Francisco, like the people
put a headline. Swami Invites the Happy Hippies. So, it was quite radical for
such a conservative seeming Swami to in..., to invite people who were
considered, a, degraded even by western standards. What to speak of Vedic
standards? So, Prabhupada in that sense was ready to invite everyone to practice
Krishna Consciousness. At the same time, Prabhupada was f..., intending to focus
on certain people. So, in the first edition of the Bhagavad Gita. That was
preq..., req..., printed by Macmillan. You know, Allen Ginsberg's foreword was
there. Foreword is what comes at the beginning of a book to introduce that book
to its potential readers. But then, when Srila Prabhupada wanted to print the
book again, at that time, when BBT, you know, that time, it was ISKCON Press.
Then, it became Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. So, when the IR published the book,
Prabhupada has said, there is no need for Allen Ginsberg's foreword. Because
Allen Ginsberg, although he was famous, he was also controversial, you know, we
could say, he was a scandalist person. Because he openly advocated drugs. And he
also advocated, you know, f..., you know, free sex in many ways. You know, so,
he was not a respectab..., he was a famous person, but is not the social, in the
mainstream media and mainstream culture. He was not considered a very
respectable person. So, initially, when nobody was coming, whoever was coming,
Srila Prabhupada was happy. And whoever was helping, Prabhupada was happy with
that. But later on, Srila Prabhupada wanted to distance himself from the
hippies. This is, this is a movement for everyone, including the hippies. But
this is not a movement only for the hippies. So, Pr..., there were letters,
this, Prabhupada wrote to Hayagriva Prabhu and other devotees. He said, you
know, you know, very clearly said, if any of you still have any affections for
the hippie culture, my request is that you should give that up. So, the point of
Srila Prabhupada was that he wanted Krishna Consciousness to be open to
everyone, including the hippies. But if people thought that we are only a
movement for hippies, then other people will not be able to come to Krishna
Consciousness. So, therefore, you know, other people will feel, oh, this is for
people taking drugs, low class people. We do not want to go there. Srila
Prabhupada did not want that kind of, you know, you know, labeling for his
movement. He wanted influential people, also, to come. So, that is why
Prabhupada was very, you know, shrewd in presenting Krishna Consciousness in a
way which will attract people, you know, in a positive light towards Krishna
Consciousness. So, when he was doing this, what is he, is it discriminating? It
is not discriminating. Here, it is precision. Precision means understanding the,
what we are representing and how we are representing it. So, this is, Srila
Prabhupada would give the example that, you know, when the Red Cross soldiers,
Re..., when the Red Cross volunteers are there on a war field. At that time,
there may be hundreds of soldiers war-wounded. And they all need medical
attention. So, the Red Cross perso..., medical, medical staff is limited in
number. So, if they want to pay attention. How will they prioritise? So, in
different times, situation, there can be different prioritised. But in general,
if there are people who are ext..., very injured and there is practically very
little hope of their surviving. Then, in many cases, the Red Cross officers will
actually fo..., advi..., off..., will, staff will focus on saving those who are
likely to be saved. Those who have greater potential to be saved. Because once
they are saved. Then, you know, the, they, you know, there is a greater chance
that they will be saved. And then, they can in..., help in saving others.
If those who are very wounded are focused on, then, they may still, they may
also die. And in that process, the others who are wounded, their wounds may also
become worse.

So, therefore, what is important is that there has to be precision based on
prioritisation. So, now, our, the focus is not discrimination, but
prioritisation. So, you know, we would like to give Krishna Consciousness to
everyone. Bec..., but because the number of devotees right now is limited. We
would like to focus on those who can influence a large number of people. Some
people have the perception that ISKCON is for rich people. Or ISKCON is for
educated people. Actually, that is not true. We have projects like Padayatra.
Where devotees go from village to village to village. And they propagate Krishna
Consciousness to villagers to a rural community, also. Now, they may not be
educated. They may not be wealthy, also. But the point is, the, Krish..., we
want to also attract people, who are influencing society. So, knowledge is one
kind of influence. So, people who are educated, they influence society by their
words and their example. Similarly, wealth is another kind of influence. People
who are wealthy, they also influence society. So, the point is, a..., it, the,
it is, we will not find at the door of any ISKCON temple. There is a guard. You
can, what is your certification? What is your qualification? If you are not a
graduate, you are not allowed inside. Show your income certificate. If you are
having, you are below the powerty line, you are not allowed inside. There is
nothing like that. Anybody is welcome to the temple. The doors of the temple are
open for everyone to come. So, that way, and if anybody asks questions, somebody
wants to know about how to practice spiritual life. You know, the devotees will
be there to help them. So, that way, there is no discrimination. But with
respect to focusing on whom to give, there is prioritisation. That
prioritisation ensures that there is a ri..., ripple effect by which maximum
number of people get Krishna Consciousness. So, Prabhupada explains in the
purport that now, why has the Sun been given knowledge? Because at one level, Sun
is the eye of the Lord. Sun is the eye of the Lord. And just as Sun gives light
to the, everyone, so, similarly, Krishna gives light to one who gives light to
everyone. Krishna gives the light of knowledge to the sun-god. And the sun-god
gives light to everyone, sun-god is very important deity in the world. And
Prabhupada writes that, actually, now, but then, after that, Prabhupada goes
into the technical history of this knowledge. So, here, the, so, here, Srila
Prabhupada goes into technical calculations of, how, you know, when was this
knowledge was given. So:

        imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ
        proktavān aham avyayam

So, that means, when we start the creation, at that time, we start by focusing
first on the beginning. So, at that time, sun-god is there. And Krishna gives
that knowledge. And from sun-god, the ministry comes down. And like that, when it
comes down, it comes to all of us. So, the technical calculation is here. Let us
look at these calculations. So, Prabhupada is explaining. Prabhupada quotes from
Mahābhārata verse, also, over here:

"At the present moment we have just passed through ﬁve thousand years of the
Kali-yuga, which lasts 432,000 years."

Ok. So, before that, there was Dvāpara-yuga. Now, Prabhupada, a, prompts it off.
It is some 8..., 864,000 years. He makes it 8 hu..., 800,000 years. Hmm, you
know, instead of 8..., 864, he makes it 800, and instead 1, now, 1296, he makes
it 1200, 120. Then, there is some 2050. Now, why was 2050 years ago? 

"Manu spoke the Bhagavad-gītā to his disciple and son Mahārāja Ikṣvāku, the king
of this planet earth."

So, why? Bec..., Why we, why at that particular time? Because IkṣvākuIkṣvāku is
ruling the earth from the start of this particular, you know, Dvāpara-yuga.
Tretā-yuga. So, that way, you know, then Prabhupada gives the age of the, of
Manu. And he says, out of that how much life has passed. In our, you know,
Isopanishad, people, we discussed about Vedic time. So, I will not go into the
technicalities of that. And Prabhupada says that it was spoken at least
12004..., 120,400 years ago. So, there is, how is this? This is referring to
when it came to Ikṣvāku. So, and then, you know, it has been exten..., you know,
it has. You know, So, it has, it was spoken to sun-god at that time. And it has
been existent in the earth for two million years. These two million years refers
to this figure, 200500 years ago. That means, now, Prabhupada is giving two
figures over here. One is when it was spoken first in the, you know, history of
the universe in this particular cycle. And then, he is talking about when it was
spoken on the earth. And then, he says, this is repeated five thousand years
ago. So, hmm, so, now, after describing this, then Krishna will describe, m...,
how does this knowledge, a, if this knowledge has been discussed earlier, what
is the need for Arjuna to, what is the need for Krishna to describe it once
again. So, Krishna says the that dynasty by which this knowledge comes.

        evaṁ paramparā-prāptam
        imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ
        sa kāleneha mahatā
        yogo naṣṭaḥ paran-tapa

So, "evaṁ paramparā-prāptam". In this way, through "paramparā", the knowledge
has come down. "imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ". And the "rāja-ṛṣa"s, the great saintly
people knew it in this way. "sa kāleneha mahatā". And "sa kālene". By "kālena".
It is time. "mahatā". By the great power of time. "yogo naṣṭaḥ paran-tapa".
"yogo naṣṭaḥ". That knowledge became lost. It became covered, "naṣṭaḥ". "naṣṭaḥ"
means to almost, Prabhupada translates, not as destroyed, but as scattered.
"paran-tapa", oh, Arjuna, it became scattered. "evaṁ paramparā-prāptam". So, it
is coming down in "paramparā". Now, there are many significant words here. Let
us look of them one by one. So, "paramparā". What does it refer? It refers to
succession. So, th..., Krishna is telling, He, the standard way in this
knowled..., which, in, in which this knowledge has to be received. This is how
He has been giving this knowledge. And He is saying, this is how the knowledge
has been going on. "evaṁ paramparā-prāptam". The knowledge has been going on.
"imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ". "rāja-ṛṣayaḥ". This is interesting word. "rāja" is king.
"ṛṣi" is a sage. So, normally, think, we will think that these two are
contradicting people. How can the two be together? There is a king. And there is
a sage. So, the king is one who is a ruler. Sage is one who is a, almost like a
renouncer. The sage is not involved much in the world. So, the "rāja" and the
"ṛṣa". They seem to be two opposite persons. What is the difference, in general?
The "rāja" is the outer ruler, is the ruler of the outer world. You know, has
power. Has control. Has servants. Has subjects. So, "rāja" is the outer ruler.
And the "ṛṣa" is the inner ruler. "ṛṣa" is a person who controls the inner
world. Who go, renounces the external world, and focuses on sense control,
focuses on inner growth. By which "ṛṣa" learns to control the inner world. So,
"rāja" controls the outer world. "ṛṣa" con..., controls the inner world. And
these two attributes of controlling the outer world and controlling the inner
world. When both of them are integrated into one person, that person is the
"rāja-ṛṣa". That person is a "rāja-ṛṣa". So, now, "rāja-ṛṣa", Prabhupada
translates this as saintly kings. Now, interestingly, if we say, "rāja-ṛṣa". It
would mean as "rāja" is king. And "ṛṣa" is sage. So, it would be royal sage. So,
there are some scholars, some commentators who translate this "rāja-ṛṣa" as
royal sage. So, the way Prabhupada translates it, you know, as, say, roy...,
s..., saintly kings. That would actually, we could say, it refers to "ṛṣi",
"rāja". Saintly king. "ṛṣi", "rāja". So, anyway, both in combination mean the
same thing. But Prabhupada's translation, you know, helps us understand what his
emphasis is. The point is that they are kings. They are kings. But they are not
normal kings who are power hungry. Who are out to, you know, stamp their
authority on everyone else. They are there to actually serve others. They are
there to understand, you know, what is the real purpose of life. And share that
purpose with others. So, they are saintly kings. So, saintliness is one of their
important characteristics. And that is what Srila Prabhupada emphasis.
"rāja-ṛṣa". So, "imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ". That this knowledge came down through
the "rāja-ṛṣa"s. And "sa kāleneha mahatā". But by the great power of time, "yogo
naṣṭaḥ paran-tapa". That knowledge has become lost. "yogo naṣṭaḥ".

So, now, it is very significant what Krishna is telling over here. That means,
you know, sometimes, we may read the Mahabharata, you know, of which the
Bhagavad Gita is a part. And we may see certain things in the Mahabharata. We
think, why is it like this? You know, why are the ksatriyas gambling at that
time? Why are they doing this? Why are they doing that? We may get so many
questions at that time. You know, so, now, what Krishna is telling is that, He
is saying that the culture that is present now. That means at His time, at the
time of the Mahabharata, that is not standard culture. That itself is a deviated
a culture. Why deviated? Because Krishna is saying, He is talking about His time
five thousand years ago. That that knowledge is lost. So, when Krishna says that
the knowledge is lost at his time. That means the way people are living at that
time, that indicates that they are not aware, aware of that knowledge. So, of
course, Vedic culture was not entirely lost. In many ways, it was there. And it
was there much much more than what it is there now. In Kali-yuga, it is lost far
greater now. But still, the point is, even at His time, it was not that
everything was right. And Krishna says, why has this gon..., things gone wrong?
"kāleneha mahatā". He does not say here, oh, because Duryodhana did, because of
Duryodhana's demoniac activities. Or because of Kaṃsa's demoniac activities.
Because of Śiśupāla and Dantavakra. There is, it has gone down. Yes, they were
the adharmic rulers. They were disrupting dharma. That is true. But Krishna is
pointing to a more generic factor. What is the generic factor? That is "kāle".
By the power of time, things have gone down. So, that is how ha..., h..., things
happen actually. You know, if we just keep cur..., milk and leave it, it becomes
curd. And if we leave curd, it gets spoiled. So, by the power of time, there is
transformation, always. But the transformation is a degradation. Whereas if we
want, a, it to become butter. Then, there is not auto..., automatic
transformation. There has to be conscious effort at bringing out positive
transformation. Then, that curd will become, can be made into butter. And
eventually, we can make ghee out of it. There is a positive, you know,
transformation that has to take place. So, Krishna is saying "yogo naṣṭaḥ
paran-tapa". Now, in this, and several pu..., next purport, Srila Prabhupada
makes the point about how that knowledge is lost even today. So, wh..., what
happened at Srila Prabhupada's time is happening now, also. So, there are many
people who have written commentaries on the Bhagavad Gita. And they have all
written commentaries which are, you know, quite strane, quite deviant. And
actually speaking, those people who have written the commentaries, they may, in
their own right, be respectable people. But their interpretations of the
Bhagavad Gita are often way off-track from what the actual message of the Gita
is. So, for example, you know, one famous thinker has said that the whole
purpose of Bhagavad Gita is to teach non-violence. Now, Krishna does talk about
ahimsa in a few verses, but very few verses as compared to the number of time
when He talks about bhakti. As compared to the number of time when He talks
about yoga. As compared to the number of times when He talks about Himself
Krishna. And as compared to the number of times when He talks about yuddha. So,
these are, first three, which I said, yoga, bhakti and Bhagavan. These three are
actually not related to ahimsa. And when "yudhyasva", Krishna says, that is
directly opposite to ahimsa. So, therefore, that is really not the message of
the Gita. Ahimsa is a good quality. It is recommended, especially for brahmanas.
But that is not the message of the Gita.

So, like that, there are other, there are other commentator who says that, alas,
India, the greatest misfortune of India is that India did not follow the
Bhagavad Gita. Because if India had followed the Bhagavad Gita, within
twenty-four hours of Pakistan being created, India would have wiped Pakistan of
the planet, of the planet. Why? "yudhyasva". Krishna told fight. Now, this kind
of fighting is not what the Bhagavad Gita recommends. The point is, the Bhagavad
Gita's message has been utilised, exploited, at, misappropriated for their own
purposes by many thinkers. So, interestingly, many of the significant
commentaries on the Bhagavad Gita which were written by the leaders of the Indian
political struggle against, for independence against the Britishers. They wrote those
commentaries when they were imprisoned by the British government. So, when they
are in jail. And they have nothing to do. They read the Bhagavad Gita. And write
the commentary on the Bhagavad Gita. And many of them, actually, they write,
also, in the introductions that we have not referred to any other traditional
sources of, you know, Gita commentar..., traditional sources, the Gita,
traditional Gita commentaries. And then, where did you get your, how did you
write your book? That was from their own brains. Now, you know, Prabhupada's
point was that if somebody wants to write a book, that person has a right to
write the book. Nobody can stop them from writing. But if they are commenting on
the Bhagavad Gita, they cannot misrepresent the Bhagavad Gita. If they want to
write their own book, write it. But they are writing Bhagavad Gita. Then,
present it properly. So, Prabhupada often uses strong words to condemn. Because
the misinterpretation is a serious o..., offense. Why? Suppose, we can try to
understands this with an example. Suppose, there is a speaker who is giving
class. Say, there is a vernacular audience. And there is an international
speaker. So, this happens many times in India. There is a speaker who is
speaking English. And then, there is the audience, who is, who does not know
English at all. When the speaker speaks English, the audience is all hindi
speaking. So, there is one translator who is translating from English, you know,
who is translating the English into hindi and speaking to the audience. Now, the
audience is hearing faithfully. Now, actually, the link between the audience and
the speaker is through the translator. Now, speaker does not understand hindi.
The audience does not understand English. Now, imagine, if this translator
instead of translating, starts giving his own class. And as, Krishna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. And translator says, Brahman is the Absolute
Truth. You know, the, this s..., speaker is saying something. And translator is
translating something else. Now, you know, im..., imagine, if there is one
person in the audience, who knows. Immediately, he says, I know hindi, also. He
says, hey, what are you translating? You are mistranslating. You know, and then,
all will say, it is a spiritual gathering. You should not criticise. Be
peaceful. Shanti. Shanti. Shanti. Why are you so intolerant? Do not criticise.
Say, what criticise? Do not criticise my effort. You know, you said, this is
nonsense going on. So, you know, for people who are ignorant. They do not
understand how serious misrepresentation is happening over here. But for one who
is actually understanding, who has knowledge, he says, this is a colossal
misreprenstation. If the translator wants to give his own class, he has full
right to give his own class. But d..., call your own programme. Tell that I want
to give a class. And see how many people come. Let those people come, speak to
whatever, you, whatever that person wants. But when the translator is sitting to
play the role not of a speaker, but of a translator. There, at that time, the
translator has to act as a translator, not as a speaker, independent speaker.

Now, similarly, if people want to write their own books, they have full right to
write their books. But if they said that they are writing on the Bhagavad Gita,
then they have to present the message of the Bhagavad Gita. So, if they are not
presenting the message of the Bhagavad Gita, then that is misrepresentation. So,
at the time of independence struggle, there was one commentator, who wrote that,
actually, just as Krishna, you know, came to destroy adharma and re-establish
dharma. So, they said, what is adharma now? The British colony rule is adharma.
And Krishna has though incarnated as what? He, this is actually, this is what he
wrote in his Gita commentary, the, Krishna has incarnated as the Indian National
Congress. And Indian National Congress will:

        paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ
        vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

We will destroy adharma. And the whole co..., commentary runs like that. So,
now, this is a travesty of justice. There was a European scholar who took almost
like a hundred commentaries, hundred modern commentaries in the Gita. And he
studied all of them. And he tried to give. Ok. This person says this. This
person says this. This person says this. This person says this. And then, at the
end, what was his conclusion? The b..., the book, Gita is a book of such
profound wisdom that it is incomprehensive. That its conclusion is inconclusive.
Nobody can know what its conclusion is. So, now, if we rea..., read the Bhagavad
Gita fairly, open-mindedly, there may be some pl..., spots, where it, some
places where things are ambiguous. But the overall message is very clear. You
know, that is why Srila Prabhupada is very heavy over here. He says, at the
spirit of taking the Lord's property and enjoying it for oneself is demoniac.
So, here, he says is:

"There are innumerable interpretations rendered by different mundane scholars,
but almost all of them do not accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa,
although they make a good business on the words of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This spirit is
demonic, because demons do not believe in God but simply enjoy the property of
the Supreme."

And then Prabhupada says th..., because a proper commentary is needed, that is
why I am writing it. This is how Srila Prabhupada explains how the Bhagavad
Gita's commentary, he himself wrote it. Now, we will describe how Kr..., Krishna
arranges to revive that knowledge.

        sa evāyaṁ mayā te ’dya
        yogaḥ proktaḥ purātanaḥ
        bhakto ’si me sakhā ceti
        rahasyaṁ hy etad uttamam

"sa evāyaṁ". So, "sa" refers to that. That knowledge. "imaṁ", "yogaṁ". Which is
said in 4.1. "sa evā". Certainly. "āyaṁ mayā te ’dya". I am giving this to you.
"te". Unto you. "yogaḥ proktaḥ purātanaḥ". That was spoken a long time ago.
"bhakto ’si me sakhā ceti". Why am I giving it to you? Because you are my
devotee and you are my friend. "rahasyaṁ hy etad uttamam". That this knowledge,
I am giving it to you. Sacred knowledge. "uttamam". So, it is "rahasyaṁ". It is
sacred. And it is "uttamam". It is transcendental. It will take one out of
"tamam". "uttamam". "tamam" is darkness. "uttamam" is that which will, takes one
out of darkness. Krishna says, this knowledge will take you out of darkness.
Now, Prabhupada, you know, uses this verse to explain how actually this
knowledge is to be received by somebody who is in a position similar to Arjuna.
What is Arjuna's qualification? He is a bhakta. So, without being a bhakta, one
cannot understand the Bhagavad Gita. Why is it that one cannot understand the
Bhagavad Gita without being a bhakta? See, every field requires a certain
qualification. Suppose, a person is going by train. And the TC comes along,
ticket collector comes along to say, Sir, where is your ticket? He says, don't
you know who I am? He says, I have got a degree from MIT, not the Pune MIT. The
American MIT. He says, that is good. But where is your ticket? He says, don't
you even know that I was a university topper in a, in MIT. I got a gold medal.
Yes, sir, that is good. But here is your ticket? And don't you know that in the
whole campus, I got the number one jobbing job? And the dean of the institute
personally came to congratulate me. Yes, sir, that is good. But where is your
ticket? Why are you asking me for the ticket? Don't you know my qualifications?
He says, sir, those qualifications are good. But when you are traveling in a
train, you need a ticket. So, similarly, in every field, if we are doing a
particular activity, a particular thing is expected. Somebody may say, you know,
don't you know that I am a pandit of sanskrit. Yes, that is fine. But being a
pandit of sanskrit is not the qualification for understanding Bhagavad Gita or
understanding Krishna. You know, it is, it is, you know, it is actually complete
misunderstanding to say, if somebody says that, I am a professor of English. So,
therefore, I can understand quantum physics. You know, the two are different. A
professor of English cannot understand quantum physics just because I am a
professor of English. Yes, one has to know some English. But just the knowledge
of English does not lead to knowledge of quantum physics. There are so many
differents objects written in English. So, like that, there can be so much
written sanskrit. Just because I have knowledge of sanskrit does not make me
qualify to understand Bhagavad Gita. Somebody may say, you know, phew, you know,
I have done tapasya. Every ekadashi, I fast nirjala. Yes, that is good. But that
does not make you qua..., qualify to understand Bhagavad Gita. That is good
qualification. Actually, Bhagavad Gita means that it is the word of Krishna. It
is the, these are the words of Krishna. And Krishna is infinite. So, the
infinite can be understood by the finite in only one way. What is that way? The
finite is finite, tiny. The infinite is infinite. The finite, by one's own
effort, can never understand the infinite. Because the finite is finite. Th...,
the only way the finite can understand the infinite is when the infinite reveals
Himself. And the infinite tells when I reveal Myself. That is through bhakti.
So, when the finite offers himself. The, when the finite living being offers
oneself to the Supreme Lord with bhakti, then the infinite reveals Oneself. So,
that is the only way. We may have material qualifications. We may have even what
some people would consider spiritual qualifications. Actually, they are not
spiritual qualifications. Say, the capacity for austerity. Or the capacity for
scholarship of sanskrit. But even if somebody has that, that does not
necessarily mean that, that person becomes qualified to understand spiritual
knowledge. And now, the Bhagavad Gita especially. So, "bhakto ’si me sakhā
ceti". Only one, who is a devotee can understand. And Prabhupada continues the
theme that people misinterpret. Now, at this point, Arjuna asks the question.

        arjuna uvāca

        aparaṁ bhavato janma
        paraṁ janma vivasvataḥ
        katham etad vijānīyāṁ
        tvam ādau proktavān iti

So, Arjuna's question is quite logical. "aparaṁ bhavato janma". "aparaṁ" means
junior. "paraṁ" is superior, transcendental, higher. So, your, your "janma" is
lower. You are recently born. "paraṁ janma vivasvataḥ". You know, sun-god is far
for owner to you. He is nama om. So, "katham etad vijānīyāṁ". How am I to
understand? "tvam ādau proktavān iti". That you spoke this knowledge earlier to
the sun-god. "tvam ādau proktavān". In the beginning, you spoke it to the
sun-god. How am I to understand this? So, here, the point that Krishna is
making, you know, Arjuna is making is interesting. So, let us look at the
content of the question. And then, let us look at the mood of the question. So,
the content of the question is, that he is, you know, Arjuna has, Krishna has
spoken, I spoke this only to sun-god. You know, sun has been existing for a, for
long long time. And the sun's predominating, the sun-god has also been existing.
The, Krishna and Arjuna are almost at the same age. Prabhupada says that, they
were of around, you know, you know, both of them were around 100, 125 years old.
So, at that time. So, when, if they are at that age. As compared to, the sun is
far far older. So then, this is an logical question. How could you have spoken
to sun-god? If some, some child comes and says, you know, I taught this to my
grandfather. You know, when did you teach this to your grandfather? Does not
make sense. So, like that, this question is valid question. So, you know, Arjuna
is asking this question. But at the same time, the question can seem to
challenge. How could you have spoken to this? So, now, we see that, the, this
question comes at a very significant juncture. You know, in the previous chapter,
in verses 31 and 32, Krishna has said one should have faith. In fir..., 31st
verse, He says, those who have faith will be liberated. And those who do not
have faith, they will be bound.

        ye me matam idaṁ nityam
        anutiṣṭhanti mānavāḥ
        śraddhāvanto ’nasūyanto
        mucyante te ’pi karmabhiḥ

That was 31. And 32 was:

        ye tv etad abhyasūyanto
        nānutiṣṭhanti me matam
        sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān
        viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

So, Krishna is telling clearly, have faith and do not have doubts. And the same
theme, Krishna will repeat at the end of the fourth chapter, also. In 4.39 and
40, He says, so, 4, 3.31, first he says have faith. And then, He says, do not
have doubts. And similarly, in 4.39-40, He says, 4.39, He says:

        śraddhāvāḻ labhate jñānaṁ
        tat-paraḥ saṁyatendriyaḥ
        jñānaṁ labdhvā parāṁ śāntim
        acireṇādhigacchati

So, the faithful will acquire knowledge. And if they are attached to
transcendental knowledge, they are controlling their senses. Then, they will
attain the supreme peace. And in contrast, in 4.40, He says:

        ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca
        saṁśayātmā vinaśyati
        nāyaṁ loko ’sti na paro
        na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ

That the doubtful will perish. They will have happiness neither in this life,
nor the next life. So, right in the middle of two strong contrasting s..., you
know, instructing by contrasting statements of faith and faithlessness, here,
K..., Arjuna is expressing a doubt. And we will see, Krishna will provide a
logical answer to the doubt. Krishna does not say, I have just to..., told you
have faith, why are you having doubts? No. When there is a logical question,
there has to be intelligible answer to that. You know, when people ask
questions, we cannot stamp there, you know, stamp out there inquisitive spirit
by saying, sh..., do not have doubts. It, it is not a matter of having or not
having. You know, if I have doubts, I have to deal with it. So, when somebody
has to, I have to find the appropriate authority who will deal with the doubt
for me. So, if we find that sometimes we ask some question to some devotees,
and, you know, they do not give us the answer. Then, if the doubt f..., we feel
that it is a tr..., major doubt which is troubling us. Then, we should, have to
find out some other devotee who has enough knowledge will answer that question.
And we can keep that question in the car park pending, later on, I will answer,
I will find out answer for this. We do not need to let the doubt nag us and eat
us up. Because we have p..., Krishna Consciousness to practice. And like
purification, also, we will keep making advancement. And we will get deeper
understanding. We will become qualified to get deeper understanding, also. So,
we do not have to stop our practice of Krishna Consciousness just because we
have some doubts. But at the same time, if we are having doubts, it is not that
we have to, you know, shut aside those doubts. We should, you know, you know,
i..., find the appropriate forum where the doubts will be answered. Now, Arjuna,
so, this is the content of Arjuna's question. Now, let us look more at the
qua..., mood of the question. The mood is "katham etad vijānīyāṁ". How am I to
understand that you spoke this? "katham etad vijānīyāṁ". So, He is not saying
you are lying. You are just making up stories. He says, yes. No, I cannot
understand this. I accept that what you are saying is true. But I cannot
understand it. So, can you please help me to understand it?

        katham etad vijānīyāṁ
        tvam ādau proktavān iti

In the beginning, you spoke this to sun-god. So, now, let us move forward and
look at the next verse:

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        bahūni me vyatītāni
        janmāni tava cārjuna
        tāny ahaṁ veda sarvāṇi
        na tvaṁ vettha paran-tapa

So, "bahūni me vyatītāni". "vyatī" means passed. Both of us have passed.
"janmāni tava cārjuna". Me and "tava". So, Me and you. Both of us have passed
many lifetimes. "tāny ahaṁ veda sarvāṇi". So, all those, I am "veda". "veda"
means to know or to remember. "na tvaṁ vettha", "vettha" means to remember. No,
we do not remember them. You do not know them. So, Krishna explains this by
saying, you know, so, somebody may ask, ok, how can you, some sm..., some small
baby is saying, I taught, gave this to grandfather. How could you have given to
the grandfather? So, there, the, the answer has to be given. The scope of the
discussion. The framework for consideration needs to be expanded. So, Krishna is
telling Arjuna that you are thinking only for one lifetime point of view. That I
was born recently. And I have been born it. But before that, I have been through
many lifetimes. So, once you bring reincarnation to the picture. Of course, for
Krishna, it is not reincarnation in our terms. He does not change His body. But
Krishna is talking here about in..., multiple incarnations. He says, in the
past, I gave this knowledge to sun-god in a previous life. You know, Krishna
says, I remember the previous lives. But you do not. So, Prabhupada takes this
point, you know, takes this point of contrast to emphasise that actually the two
are not on the same level. Although, they may be on the same chariot. That is a
world of difference between the jiva and the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord
never forgets anything. Krishna will make this even more clear in the Seventh
Chapter when He will tell:

        vedāhaṁ samatītāni
        vartamānāni cārjuna
        bhaviṣyāṇi ca bhūtāni
        māṁ tu veda na kaścana

That I know everything. So, He says this 25 and 26, this verse:

        nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya

Those verses. Two verses explain this point that Krishna never forgets. Krishna
knows everything. So, here, Krishna is making us most specific statement that,
you know, I remember. But you do not remember. So, now, why is it that we forget
our past lives? There are many reasons. You know, most important reason is that,
actually, our memories are connected with our bodies to a large extent. So, when
the body is lost, many of the memories, the reference point for those bo..., you
know, memories are lost. So, our memories may, are not necessarily stored in the
body. The brain is one place where the memories are stored. The memories are
also stored in the mind. But the reference point for recovering those memories,
just like, if there is some data in the hark disk. But we have for..., not only
forgotten data, but we have for..., we have forgotten not only where the file
is. But we have forgotten the filename, also. Then, there is no reference point,
the, for searching it. It is there. But it is almost like irrecoverably lost.
So, like that, whatever past lives we have gone through, that, that im..., you
know, some impressions of that are there. But they are so deep back in the mind
that if there is no stimulus to recollect, there will be no recollection, only.
It is like the filename is forgo..., the file is forgo..., file location is
forgotten. Filename is also forgotten. So, like that, all stimuli are wiped out.
So, when, because the, when the body is lost. A new body is coming. You know, a
come, whole come, new reference, you know, system comes up for this soul. So,
that is how we forget most of the time. We forget means, things get buried so
deep that we do not remember. And beyond that, death and rebirth are quite
dramatic experiences. So, you know, the human body has an innate psychological
defense mechanism by which it forgets painful stimuli. By, that is how one can
survive. You know, if we had to remember all the miserable situations that we
went through in many lifetimes. Then, it would be horrendous. You know, we will
not be able to move forward in life. And also, beyond that, we also forget
because, actually, the whole process of, you know, human memory is based on
its fallibility, its volatilit..., volatility. Volatility means it does not last
for long. Fallibility means it airs. It blurs. So, you know, what to speak of a
previous life? Even this life, also, if some, we are, if we were asked, last
week exactly at this time on this day, what did you do? You know, difficult for
us to remember. Most of us will not be able to remember. So, we tend to forget.
So, as it is, we tend to forget quickly. And further, death and rebirth, they
asked, they act as, sort of memory-wipers. And f..., beyond that, the change of
body, also, causes further wiping away of the memory. Where the references
themselves are lost. That is why we forget. But the Lord does not change His
body. And the Lord does not lose His memory. In fact, because the Lord's body,
mind and soul are the same. So, here, th..., the transcendental position of the
Lord is pointed out. And Krishna says that, I have not forgotten. So, in a
sense, so, Prabhupada explains that, they are diffe..., they are, two are
different. And that is how the, the Lord and His devo..., you know, Lord and His
body are non-different. And that is how they continue to live on. So, now,
Krishna uses Arjuna's question as a starting point for emp..., talking about His
own position briefly. So, He will make His further position further clear in the
next verse. How is that He does not forget? He says, my body is different.

        ajo ’pi sann avyayātmā
        bhūtānām īśvaro ’pi san
        prakṛtiṁ svām adhiṣṭhāya
        sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā

So, "ajo". Although, I am unborn. Mmm. "sann avyayātmā". And I am imperishable.
So, now, actually, "ajaḥ" and "avyaya", these are characteristic of both the
soul and the Supreme Lord. The soul is also unborn. And the soul also never
perishes. But the difference is "bhūtānām īśvaro ’pi san". For all the other
"bhūtānām", for the other living entities, the Lord is the ishvara. The Lord is
Supreme Controller. And "prakṛtiṁ svām adhiṣṭhāya". That, you know, taking, 
being c..., com..., bringing the "prakṛtiṁ" under My control, I come "sambhavāmy
ātma-māyayā". I manifest my presence. How? By "ātma-māyayā". By my own nature.
Now, this is a very important verse. And this is quite a technical verse. You
know, the vaishnava and mayavadi achar..., mayavadi scholars have practically
fought wars on this verse. What does it mean? You know, does it refer to the
Supreme Lord taking a material form? Or the Supreme Lord still maintains His own
self-fame form? So, the word "prakṛtiṁ" often is used to mean material nature.
But "prakṛtiṁ" essentially means energy or nature. And when Krishna says
"prakṛtiṁ svām", it refers to His own nature. His material nature. When Krishna
is saying, my "prakṛtiṁ". That means He is saying that "prakṛtiṁ" is in, under
My control. Not that I am under the control of "prakṛtiṁ". So, Krishna says,
material nature is my nature. And adjusting it, I manifest myself. Now,
"sambhavāmy". "sambhavāmy" can mean, you know, "sambhavā". It can mean creation.
It can also mean manifestation. "sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā" refers to I manifest
myself by my internal potency. I manifest myself by that, by my internal
potency. So, what Prabhupada explains is, you know, now, "sambhavāmy
ātma-māyayā". I still appear in every millenium. So, now, somebody may say there
is no in every millenium in this tra..., in this translation. So, where is
Prabhupada getting it from? So, actually, that is "sam...", next verse says
"sambhavāmi yuge yuge". So, Prabhupada is simply putting what is gi..., later
here itself to make the point, you know, clear here itself. So, Prabhupada says:

"Prakṛti means “nature,” as well as svarūpa, or “one’s own form.” The Lord says
that He appears in His own body. He does not change His body."

And Prabhupada further makes the point, what does the word maya mean?

"The word māyā, or ātma-māyā, refers to the Lord’s causeless mercy,"

So, it is by His mercy that He appears. It is by His mercy that He appears in
this world. And He appears for the sake of benefitting all living beings. So,
here, Krishna is making the point very clear that He is coming by His own
arrangement and for the sake of benefitting everyone. So, when He appears, He
does not come under the control of material nature. Rather, material nature
always remains under His control. So, Prabhupada gives the example that a
prisoner goes into the jail. At that time, the prisoner comes under the control
of the laws of the jail. But if the Prime Minister goes to the jail to just
visit the prisoners, to see all the prison..., prisons, prison situation is.
Then, the Prime Minister does not come under the laws of the jail. The Prime
Minister is always above the laws. Because the Prime Minister is not coming
there on, due to being sentenced for jail. The Prime Minister is there, is
coming there to, to visit. To encourage the j..., prisoners to reform. So,
similarly, when the Lord comes, the Lord is not sentenced, you know, to bondage
in material existence. The Lord comes by His own will. And He comes to liberate
the soul from material existence. To en..., to give them the knowledge and to
give them the process by which they can become liberated. That is why He does
not become bound. And when the, Krishna comes in His own body. At that time, His
own form. At that time, His form remains spiritual. So, that is actually the
mistery of incarnation that n..., normally we cannot see a spiritual form.
Though we cannot see a spiritual form. When Krishna manifests, people are able
to interact with Him as if He is just like one of them. So, at occasional times,
Krishna just manifests His extraordinary power. Duryodhana was thinking that
Krishna is just another ksatriya. I will catch Him. And arrest Him. And
suddenly, wooh, it was, go..., form that is sky-high. The Virata rupa,
Vishvarupa, Krishna manifested. And Duryodhana and all the soldiers are stunned.
What is this? So, Krishna can manifest at anytime in any forms, extraordinary
power and opulence. But it is a great mistery that when Krishna appears in this
world. To people who are there at that time, they think that He is just like
another person. Yes. He is powerful. He is heroic. He has done things which we
cannot do. But they think He is just another person. Ok. So, the ksat..., not
all the ksatriyas at His time understood that He is the Supreme Lord. So, you
know, you know, when Shishupala blasphemed Krishna in the Rajasuya Yajna,
Shishupala was not alone. The che..., along with the king of Chedi, there was
Shishupala. There were others, also. Chaidya, Daya and Rupa. Chai..., the, he and
others, kings were also there. They, these other kings supported Shishupala,
blasphemy of Krishna. Why? Because they did not understand that Krishna was the
Lord. So, the evata..., concept of, the principle of reincarnation of avatars
are great mistery. That the Lord manifests from the spiritual level to the
material level. And makes Himself visible and accessible to people with material
version, also. But then, those who are with material vision, this, because their
vision is grounded in matter, is rooted in matter, is trapped in matter. So,
they see the Lord, also, material. Only those who are fortunate, those who try
to become purified, and elevated. They can understand that this person is not an
ordinary person. This person i..., is the Supreme Lord. And then, you know, they
can also, you know, devote themselves. And attain liberation by that. So, here,
Krishna describes how even when He comes in the world, it is "prakṛtiṁ svām
adhiṣṭhāya". It is by His own nature. By His own free will. And He remains
unbound. He remains transcendental. Now, why He comes to this world? He, in this
verse, He has described how He comes. In the next two verses, He will describe,
next three verses, in fact, He will describe why He comes. That we will discuss
in the next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
