Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n3PMOdXwEb8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=n3PMOdXwEb8&event=video_description&redir_token=2eKhL0vQZkiegeY2eYxh0Q0PRZV8MTU0ODQ4NzA2N0AxNTQ4NDAwNjY3&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_046_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_01_Text_26_to_36_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. So, we continue with the first chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. We
have completed the first part of the first chapter. The chapter has two
divisions. Sanyan Vikshan Yoga and Arjuna Vishada Yoga. So, Sanyan Vikshan Yoga,
observing the armies. That is from one to twenty-five. And twenty-six to
forty-six, second part is Arjuna Vishada Yoga, Arjuna's lamentation. So, we will
start with that section now. So, here, we see, Arjuna speaking in twenty-six
verse. In the previous verse, Krishna has just spoken to Arjuna saying that you
wanted to come in-between the two armies? Yes. You can come now. I have brought
you here. And "paśy...", "pārtha paśyaitān". Oh, Arjuna. See. "paśyaitān". So,
he is "bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ". So, he has been brought in front of Droṇā,
Bhishma, and saying, see. So, then, this the third occurrence of the word see.
Now, the fourth occurrence is in this particular verse.

        tatrāpaśyat sthitān pārthaḥ
        pitṝn atha pitāmahān
        ācāryān mātulān bhrātṝn
        putrān pautrān sakhīṁs tathā
        śvaśurān suhṛdaś caiva
        senayor ubhayor api

"tatrāpaśyat", so, there, he could see. "sthitān pārthaḥ", they were situated.
Who were there? His whole, his several generations of relatives were there.
"pitṝn atha pitāmahān". So, normally, you know, when a family get together, gets
together, it is a joyful occasion. And even nowadays, if you see, a family
get-together is sometimes even for the, today, with both the husband and the
wife working sometimes. You know for the husband, wife and children to get
together, itself is sometimes difficult. But for the, for the children, the
parents, and the grandparents to get together, that is almost like a rare
occasion. So, now, is three generations coming together is often rare nowadays.
But here, we have five generations coming together. So, that is a family
get-together, it is normally a joyous occasion. But this is a very grievous
occasion. It is, you know, because the family is getting together not for
some celebration, but it is for destruction, mutual destruction. So, these f...,
what are these five generations? "pitṝn atha pitāmahān". So, "pitṝn" is the
people who are in his father's generation. So, for example, there is Shalya who
is the relative of Madri who is his mother. So, who is the, like a stepmother,
the mother of Nakula and Sahadeva. So, there, we see that in the father's
generation. And then we also have in the father's generation other people, also,
several other people. There is Bhurishravas and his father. So, both of them are
there. So, that is another generation which is older. And then we have Bhishma
Pitamah who is in the grandfather's generation. So, "ācāryān mātulān bhrātṝn".
So, "ācāryān" refers to his teachers. So, they are his, two teachers, Kṛpacarya
and Droṇācārya. Both of them taught. Although, Droṇācārya is the prominent
teacher. But Kṛpacarya is also an ācārya. He also taught in the gurukulā, a
little bit, not so much. "mātulān". "mātulān" is maternal uncle. So, this refers
to Shakuni. So, he is the, not directly the maternal uncle. Maternal uncle in
the sense, stepmother's brother. So, then, "bhrātṝn", the brothers, yes, so,
whole hundred Pa..., Kauravas are their brothers. And "putrān pautrān sakhīṁs
tathā". So, "putrān" refers to sons. So, there, there, there is Duryodhana's
sons were also there in the battlefield. So, they are like Arjuna's sons. And
actually, by that time, Duryodhana was old enough that his "pautrān" were also
there. His grandsons were also there. You know, on this side also, Abhimanyu was
by the time of the war, he was already married. And Abhimanyu had already
impregnated Subha..., Uttara. And from her, you know, Pariksit was born. So,
Pariksit was born after the war. But the point is that, there were other people
in that generation of Abhimanyu who were old enough to be married. And who had
already begotten children. And you know, those children were not necessarily
small. They were also on the battlefield. So, "putrān pautrān sakhīṁs tathā".
And his friends were there. Who were the friends? You know, Kŗtavarmā was a
friend for him. And Aśvatthāmā was also a friend. Aśvatthāmā and Arjuna were
together in the gurukulā. And both were expert archers. Although, A..., there
was some envy in Aśvatthāmā's heart for Arjuna. Because Aśvatthāmā had wanted to
be the best student of his father. But Arjuna had defeated him, and excelled
him. But still, they were close friends while they were in the gurukulā. So:

        śvaśurān suhṛdaś caiva

And fathers-in-law. And "suhṛdaś caiva", there were many others who were
actually his well-wishers. So, in this way, "senayor ubhayor api". So, all of
them assembled over there. And when he saw all of them. Now, the fathers-in-law
were not necessarily on the opposite side. The fathers-in-law were on his side,
also. He saw Draupadī's father, Drupada. He was around in the battlefield. So,
actually, even Arjuna came and saw. Arjuna was not just seeing the opposite
side. He saw his side, also. So, when he saw both sides, "atra pasyati", came in
the middle, his primary vision was "bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ". But he was
looking around. And he saw all of them. So, "senayor ubhayor api", in the middle
of the two armies. Then, what happened? So, then:

        tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ
        sarvān bandhūn avasthitān
        kṛpayā parayāviṣṭo
        viṣīdann idam abravīt

"tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ". So, again, here, we have the word "īkṣya" coming
for the fifth time, seeing. 

        tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ
        sarvān bandhūn avasthitān

All of them were relatives. "avasthitān", he was situated. "kṛpayā parayāviṣṭo".
So, he was overcome by emotions, strong emotions. So, here, the, he is talking
about the emotion as compassion. And "parayā", he is very strong. So, here,
"parayā" is not, "para", it is not transcendental compassion. It is material.
But w..., "ā parayā", it is so strong that is overwhelming. And that is why it
is "āviṣṭo". "āviṣṭo" means, it, overwhelming, came over him. He came under the
vasa of that. That put him in his, in its vasa. And "viṣīdann idam abravīt". And
then, "viṣīdann" means lamenting. So, when that compassion came upon him, it
made him lament. And when he was speaking, he spoke at that time. "idam
abravīt", these were the words he spoke. So, we see that, the perception shapes
the emotion tremendously. Now, what we see affects us. Of course, all the senses
affect us, whatever perception come via our senses. But vision affects us,
emotion quite strongly. And when Arjuna sees, immediately, his emotions get
affected. And we will see the contrast between his perce..., his thinking
earlier and his thinking now. So, let us look at the next verse. Here, for the
first time in the Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna has now started speaking in a prolonged
sequence. Earlier, he has just spoken "senayor ubhayor madhye". Now, I will
speak several verses over here. So:

        arjuna uvāca

        dṛṣṭvemaṁ sva-janaṁ kṛṣṇa
        yuyutsuṁ samupasthitam
        sīdanti mama gātrāṇi
        mukhaṁ ca pariśuṣyati

So, when, now, the first thing that we observe is that his whole perception has
changed. Earlier, he was saying that, there were:

        dhārtarāṣṭrasya durbuddher
        yuddhe priya-cikīrṣavaḥ

Who are the friends of that evil-minded Duryodhana? Who have come to assist him?
So, those whose idea was, those who are assisted that evil-minded person, they
will also be evil-minded. But those who was earlier talking about
"dhārtarāṣṭrasya durbuddher", now, suddenly, he is, he calls them as
"sva-janaṁ". "sva-janaṁ", they are my people. So, earlier, he was saying, oh,
they are Duryodhana's people. They are on Duryodhana's side. And Duryodhana is
evil-minded. But he says, oh, they are my people. "dṛṣṭvemaṁ sva-janaṁ kṛṣṇa",
then, oh, Krishna, this is the first reference to also Krishna in the Bhagavad
Gita. The word, Krishna has been referred to as Acyuta, Hṛṣīkeśa, by many names.
But Krishna is very affectionate name. Generally, in the Mahabharata, the name
Krishna does not come as frequently as the name Keśava. Keśava is a little bit
more formal. Vasudeva is also name that comes. And those are the names by which.
Yadava is also there. So, he is often referred to by these names. Krishna
definitely comes, but not all that frequently. Krishna is a very intimate name.
So, "dṛṣṭvemaṁ sva-janaṁ kṛṣṇa", He is, oh, now, I am seeing. Again, "dṛṣṭvā".
So, we see, another occurrence of the word, "seeing". And then, what is
happening by seeing? "yuyutsuṁ samupasthitam". They are my people. But they are
fighting against me. They are ready for fighting. "yuyutsuṁ samupasthitam". And
then, what is happening by that? "sīdanti mama gātrāṇi", all my limbs are
quivering. "mukhaṁ ca pariśuṣyati", and my mouth has dried up. So, here, we will
see that Arjuna is ge..., showing the symptoms of an emotional breakdown. He is
getting overwhelmed by strong emotions. "kṛpayā parayāviṣṭo" as it was said in
the previous verse. And now, that overwhelming compassion that has come over
him, that is having a physical effect. The physical effect is tr..., trembling.
"sīdanti mama gātrāṇi", and the throat is dried up. Actually, when the emotions
become very strong, then we hea..., start feeling a parching of the throat. So,
here, what we see, the Bhagavad Gita teaches a very important lesson, right from
its setting. That pratyaksha puts us into illusion. And sabda takes us out of
illusion. So, Arjuna was ready to fight. Arjuna had come on the battlefield to
do Krishna's will. But he says, "avekṣe ’haṁ", I want to see that r..., desire
for Pratyaksha Pramāṇa. And not just Pratyaksha Pramāṇa, o..., overreliance on
Pratyaksha Pramāṇa. That is the problem. See, we all have to use Pratyaksha
Pramāṇa. You know, it is not that Pratyaksha Pramāṇa has to be rejected. But
Pratyaksha Pramāṇa is not to be treated as all important. Pratyaksha Pramāṇa
means the Pramāṇa, wherein, we see..., sensory, we have, we get knowledge by
sensory perception. So, you know, Pramāṇa means, it is also valid. So,
Pratyaksha Pramāṇa is also a valid source of knowledge. You know, but it is not
the final source of knowledge. You know, for example, if we have, i..., if
somebody is caught doing something wrong. You know, if somebody is robbing
something. Or somebody is doing something, And then, the police come and catch
him. Hey, he says, do not believe in Pratyaksha Pramāṇa. You know, seeing is not
believing. That would be ridiculous. Isn't it?

So, Pratyaksha is definitely a valid way of acquiring knowledge. But it is not
the final way. And especially with respect to transcendental matters, where
Pratyaksha is not possible, practically speaking, then, Pratyaksha becomes
useless, largely speaking. Unless there is divya pratyaksha. That means our
spiritual consciousness awaken. And then, we sp..., perceive at a spiritual
level. So, when we are lea..., talking about, here, Pratyaksha. When there is
overreliance on Pratyaksha. And that overreliance on Pratyaksha causes a
forgetfulness of sabda. Then, it is a serious problem. So, Arjuna has become
overwhelmed by emotions. And when he is overwhelmed by emotions, that
overwhelming by emotions d..., disconnects him from his scriptural roots. It
uproots him from the ground of scriptural knowledge, where he has been rooted
till now. And he is just tossed around by the emotions. So, how the emotions
toss him around, we see. You know, we will see in the subsequent verses. But
here, the point is, all of us also, if we rely too much on Pratyaksha Pramāṇa.
If we will get unduly affected, we will get overly affected. So, certainly, we
do not have to close our eyes. Then, we do not have to reject what we see with
our eyes. But we also have to remember that what we see with our eyes, we have
to connect it with scripture. And based on scripture, make sense of things.
Otherwise, we will get overwhelmed. And we will be, get misled. So, sometimes,
the whole point of scriptural study is connect the specifics that we are
experiencing with the universal that are taught in scriptures. And then, learn
from that. We will discuss more about this in, when we discuss about
realisation, later in the Bhagavad Gita. But here, suffice it to say that
Pratyaksha has to be subordinated to sabda. So, pratyaksha puts Arjuna into
illusion. And it, sabda, that takes him out of illusion. Arjuna's credit is that
when pratyaksha starts dragging him into illusion, he does not immediately act
on it. What he does is, he consults. He consults. We contrast Arjuna's response
with Kaikeyī's response. You know, when Manthara started feeling poisoned to
Kaikeyī through the ears. She spoke. And Kaikeyī heard. You know, she was
dragged into illusion. Her whole perception was changed. She was thinking of
Rama as, as dear to her, as her own son, Bharata. But then, she started thinking
that, oh, Rama is my worst enemy. But her error was, she did not consult anyone.
Through pratyaksha, she got some information. Now, that pratyaksha may come from
the ears also. But it means pratyaksha in the sense that, it is sensory
perception. It is not scriptural knowledge. And instead of consulting anyone,
she decided immediately to act on it. So, in this world, we cannot avoid sensory
perception. We have to use sensory perception because we are living in the
world. And sometimes, sensory perception can be misleading. So, when we find
that the sensory perception is misleading, at that time, we have to consult
scripture. We have to consult guru, sadhu, shastra, and get a proper
understanding of the situation. So, Arjuna sets that example also that he now
moves towards a proper understanding. Let us see. What does he say? So, Srila
Prabhupada makes an interesting point in the purport that the:

".. symptoms in Arjuna were not due to weakness but to his softheartedness, a
characteristic of a pure devotee ..."

So, feeling emotion is not wrong. And here, the emotions are positive. They are
healthy. They are compa..., compassion is very noble emotion. When one sees
others suffering, or others about to suffer, at that time, we think, oh, why
should they suffer like this? Let them not suffer. And if I can avoid the
suffering, let me do what I can to avoid their suffering. So, thinking like this
is actually noble. And when he is doing this, it is very good. So, now, moving
forward from him. Let us see what Prabhupada quoted "yasyasti bhaktir", the
famous verse which says that devotees have good qualities. Now, Arjuna is
describing further the symptoms of his physical breakdown.

        vepathuś ca śarīre me
        roma-harṣaś ca jāyate
        gāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt
        tvak caiva paridahyate

So, "vepathuś ca", "vepathuḥ" means that the hair on the body are standing up.
"śarīre me", the hair on the body are standing up. And "roma-harṣaś ca jāyate",
so, actually, "vepathuḥ" means hair. "vepathuḥ" means, "vepa" is trembling. So,
"vepathuḥ" is trembling of the body. The body is trembling. So, earlier, the
limbs were quiv..., quivering. But here, now, the whole body is trembling. And
s..., "roma-harṣaḥ". "roma-harṣaḥ" is, actually, the hair on the body is
standing. Now, Prabhupada will write that the hair on the body can stand because
of ecstasy or they can, because of in..., intense positive emotions, or intense
negative emotions. I am very happy that my hair stands on its end. Or I am very
scared. So, here, actually, Arjuna is scared. Not just scared for himself, but
scared for the bloodbath that is going to spread over the whole Kurukṣetra war.
And he is scared for the, fearful about the desctruction and death of so many of
his relatives. And "gāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt". He is saying, so Arjuna has given
a first person report about what is happening over here. He is telling that, I
am observing Arjuna..., Krishna, I am talking with you. Against my will, the
Gāṇḍīva is slipping from my hand. You know, sometimes, we may see in movies
that, you know, somebody is just coming along in a house and then, they bring,
some ladies bringing a plate of food. And then, suddenly, she hears, oh, phone
comes, and yeah, ah, my husband has got a heart attack. And then what happens?
Tuck. The plate just falls. And she falls unconscious. So, what happens over
there is when emotions are very strong, we lose control over our physical
faculties. That, that plate may fall, and crash, and break. And the person also
falls after that. So, now, so, generally, emotions have physical effects more
quickly on females. You know, any females may cry immediately, much qui...,
much, of course, males may also cry. But emotions may affect, generally affect
females more quickly. For a male to get affected and in such a way that a
warrior, for a warrior to feel that my weapon is slipping off my hand. This is
extraordinarily, you know, harrowing experience. Harrowing means very
emotionally troubling. So, he is observing. He says, it is not that I want to
let go. It is not that I have to set and put. Slipping off my hands, just
cannot hold onto it. Oh, how was this happening? "gāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt". And
then, "tvak caiva paridahyate". So, what was described in some parts of the body
earlier. You know, "mukhaṁ ca pariśuṣyati". He says, ok, my throat had dried up.
But he says, now, my whole body is burning. Tox..., whole skin, it is in, now,
in flame. Very strong emotions are there. And, and Arjuna is describing this
emotions. What is he trying to say? He is trying to convey through this to
Krishna how seriously he has been affected. You know, how strong his reaction is
in terms of "āviṣṭaḥ", in terms of how he is being overwhelmed. Now, Prabhupada
explains further that, now, he is telling, he is moving from the physical to the
mental. And now before we move to that, Prabhupada seems to give another
perspective over here. So, he becomes so impatient, "gāṇḍīvaṁ" was slipping. All
these are due to the material conception of life. Now, just in the previous
purport, Prabhupada said that, actually, all this is, Arjuna is a pure devotee.
And the compassion is a sign of a pure devotion, devotee. That is twenty-eighth
purport. And twenty-ninth purport is, all these are due to the material
conception of life. So, what exactly is happening over here?

Even the, we have to understand that when the scriptures are being narrated, or
when the events are happening within the Lord's pastimes and they are presented
in scripture. Now, there is no, the emphasize is not just on an absolute
deciding. This is right. Or this is wrong. The emphasize is on learning what we
can learn. Learning what is there for us to imbibe. So, at one level, we can say
that, everything that happens in the Lord's pastime, especially involving His
intimate associates is orchestrated by the Lord. And when it is orchestrated by
the Lord, then the devotees are exhibiting exalted qualities over there. So,
Arjuna's concern, so when we look at, from that perspective, that Arjuna is a
devotee. And as a devotee, he is exhibiting the quality of concern and
compassion for others. That is a noble quality. That is a devotional quality.
So, that is one perspective of looking at things. And from that, we can learn,
we should all become passionate. Another perspective of looking at things is
that, yes, Arjuna is a pure devotee. But now, by the arrangement of the Lord, he
is coming under yoga maya. He is coming under illusion. And when he is coming
under illusion, he is acting like a conditioned soul. And when he acts like a
conditioned soul, at that time, we have to see, you know, what is the
philosophical point that we can learn from his action as a conditioned soul. He
is not a conditioned soul. But under the influence of the illusory energy, he is
acting like conditioned soul. And then, from that perspective, Srila Prabhupada
is telling over here, that he is acting under the material, under the bodily
conception of life. So, this is not necessarily contradictory. It is depending
on the perspective that we are taking. So, we can take both perspectives. And
through both, we learn the point that, we, that we should not, we should see the
Lord's associates as exalted. At the same time, when they are brought under
illusion, we should understand that I should not go under illusion like this.
Now, when we, one goes under illusion, one thinks like this. So, actually, the
acharyas have also described that the whole purpose of first chapter where
Arjuna is speaking all these reasons. He is saying, I will not fight. I should
not fight. That is actually to demonstrate the need for spiritual qual...,
knowledge. And Arjuna's qualification for receiving spiritual knowledge. So, the
need for spiritual knowledge is that, when one is in bodily conception, at that
time, one will eventually be bewildered. When they think that, I am going right.
And I am going this. I am doing this. I am doing that and in this way. One may
think that I am well-situated in life. But eventually, one will become
bewildered. And if one does not want to be bewildered, then one has to raise to
a higher consciousness. And that raising to a higher level of consciousness
happens when one gets spiritual knowledge. So, on one side, the setting, the
first chapter of the Bhagavad Gita illustrates how worldly situations create
perplexities for those who do not have spiritual knowledge. And how spiritual
knowledge is essential. Another level, they also, the first chapter also shows
Arjuna's qualification. Arjuna is soft-hearted. Arjuna is thoughtful. Arjuna is
compassionate. Arjuna is submissive. So, we will see so many of these qualities
as we move forward in this chapter. And all of them illustrate Arjuna's
qualification. So, here, the point that is being made is, in this, in the
twenty-ninth and thirtieth verses, how material situations create persplex...,
perplexities for those who are in the bodily conception of life. So, now, Arjuna
will describe the perplexity.

        na ca śaknomy avasthātuṁ
        bhramatīva ca me manaḥ
        nimittāni ca paśyāmi
        viparītāni keśava

"na ca śaknomy avasthātuṁ". He says I am unable to stay here. Now, so, Arjuna is
standing there, ready as a warrior to fight. But his, he feels, I cannot even
stand here, not only is the Gāṇḍīva slipping, but even I am not able to stand.
"na ca śaknomy avasthātuṁ". And not only am I affected physically. "bhramatīva
ca me manaḥ". "bhrama", I am feeling like a warrior, oh, I am feeling like to
see. My mind is just racing here and there. And whatever I think of, I do not
know what I should do.

        nimittāni ca paśyāmi
        viparītāni keśava

So, whatever I am seeing, I am seeing it all as "viparītāni". "viparītāni" means
it is all inauspicious. It is all, way, all, very indicative of disaster, of
tragedy. So, at another level, this "nimittā", I, it can mean causes. Or it can
also mean symbols or omens. So, actually speaking, now, Arjuna is having these
emotions. Then, Arjuna can also say that all these are omens of what is going to
happen. See, when certain, involuntary reactions come up, then, they are
indicative of certain future dangers. So, for example, it is said that if the
right part of the body twitches, then, that is considered, say, inauspicious.
The left part, auspicious. The right part of the, left part of the body
twitches, that is considered inauspicious. So, if this sort of twitching comes,
you know, sudden..., unexpectedly, then, there is a subtle hole, subtle
phenomena that indicates, there is inauspicious. Now, today, people may say, oh,
if my body starts twitching, that maybe I got Parkinson's disease. That is a,
that is inauspicious. Now, somebody may say, or, if you, if you cannot move your
hand. You are feeling pain in the chest. That may indicate you are about to get
a heart attack. That is very inauspicious. Now, this is simply biological. But
there are cosmological factors also involved. So, just as, you know, a person
who does not know about any heart attack, they say, he will say that, oh, you
are feeling, feeling some pain in the arm. Why are you taking it so serious?
I am sorry to get pain in the arm. That goes away. But there is also science.
Oh, pain in the arm. That might be quite indicative of something more dangerous.
Of course, heart attack can come in many ways. But I am just giving example
over here. That when one has knowledge, then one sees something happening,
one can be connected with something much deeper, much more serious, requiring
far more and far graver attention. That is the point which is being made over
here. So, in omens, the idea is that, actually, in the universe, the whole
universes, a ho..., is a coherent hole. And the cosmological factors, the
ecological factors, the topographical factors, the physiological factors, all of
them contribute to give our karmic reactions. So, all of them can point what is
going to come through omens. So, "nimittāni" can also mean an omen. So, this,
Arjuna is saying, all this is inauspicious for a ksatriya to see the, to feel
the body trembling. To feel the bow slipping. All this is inauspicious for a
ksatriya. So, "nimittā" can also indicate inauspiciousness. And it is described
in the Ananda Vrindavana Champu by Kavi Karnapur. That when Krishna is caught in
the foils of Kal..., foils of Kalya, at that time, inauspicious omens were seen
in three places. Topographically, physiologically and environmentally. So, they
saw the dark clouds, and thunder, and the midhyors. And oh, it was very
inauspicious. And on the ground, they saw wools, brain, and the souls shooting.
And in their bodies, they started the, saw that body twitching. Oh, there is a
great calamity about to befall. And everybody in Vrindavan ran out to Kalyaku
when they heard that Krishna was in danger. So, it is described that everyone
from old men, old people, to one year old babies, they all ran to Vrindavan, to,
out of Vrindavan to Kalyakut. What is happening? What has happened to Krishna?
What has happened to Krishna? That was their sheer despair as they ran along
like that.

So, this Arjuna is saying that, oh, such an inauspiciousness is about to happen,
and, I am feeling also my mind deluded. So, "nimittā" can mean all these are
causes. So, Prabhupada explains that, what has been happening is everybody, even
people are self-centered. People think in terms of what is it, in, what is in it
for me? Then, sooner or later, we will come to it, a situation, where, you know,
we find ourselves in a lose-lose situation. Whatever I do, I will lose. What is
the need for me? Actually, there is nothing in it for me. If I do not do this,
also, it is a problem. If I do this, it is also a problem. So, what should I do?
So, Prabhupada says the only way out of this is to raise to a higher level of
thinking. That to raise to seeing things not from our perspective, but from
God's perspective. And then, God's perspective does not mean that we have to
sacrifice our perspective. Because God is the well-wisher of everyone including
ourselves. So, when we are self-centered. We can think only in terms of our
good. And when we find the situation is such that there is no good for us. Then,
we feel, why, what am I, what am I doing? Why am I here? You know, people may
just want to run away from the situation. Or they may even want to quit life
itself. They may commit suicide. Because they feel that, you know, there is
nothing here for me. But the essential message of the first chapter, we could
say is, the imcomprehensible is not insensible. The incomprehensible is not
insensible. That means that, so, when something does not make sense to me, it is
incomprehensible. But just because it does not make sense to me, mean, does not
mean that there is no sense in it. There is sense in it. And what is the sense?
That I cannot understand with my finite intelligence. There is God's plan. And
there is sense in it. So, the incomprehensible is not insensible. So, when we
think that we have to judge everything based on our intelligence, then the
incomprehensible can be very disoriented. It can be devastating. Why is this
happening? Why? Why? Why? Why? So, instead of ask..., instead of asking why? Why
this? Bhagavad Gita teaches us to ask how now? Ok, how should I? I am a servant.
And let me serve Krishna. How do I serve Krishna in this situation? So, what is
Arjuna sho..., shows in the 2.7.., 2.6, 2.7, 2.8. He shows that how now? We, I do
not understand. Ask Krishna. Ask Krishna about how I should. So, one inquires.
So, we might not be able to ask Krishna directly. But we, we can turn to
Krishna's words in the Bhagavad Gita. We can turn to guru, sadhu, shastra. And
we can learn from them slowly. We may not be able to get an immediate
clarification like Arjuna got through question-answers. But there may be a
gradual illumination that will come in our heart if we turn to Krishna and seek
His guidance. So, the important point is that when things do not make sense,
that does not mean that there is no sense in them. It is just that we are unable
to make sense of them. There is a plan of Krishna in everything that happens.
And we just have to pray and do the best that we can. And eventually, the prayed
plan would be revealed. So, here, Arjuna says I cannot make sense of anything.

        bhramatīva ca me manaḥ
        
And Prabhupada writes in the purport that, you know:

"Everyone is interested in himself and his own welfare. No one is interested in
the Supreme Self."

So, because no one is interested in the Supreme Self... So:

"The conditioned soul forgets this, and therefore suffers material pains."

So, when we are self-centered, sooner or later, we will face trouble. And:

"Arjuna thought that his victory in the battle would only be a cause of
lamentation for him."

That means that, ok, I am here to fight and win. But if I win, I lose all my
relatives. What is the point? And if I, I, leave also. I am a ksatriya. How can
I leave? What should I do? So, he was saying that, that "nimittāni ca paśyāmi".
Seeing everything inauspicious over here. So, now, he is speaking:

        na ca śreyo ’nupaśyāmi
        hatvā sva-janam āhave
        na kāṅkṣe vijayaṁ kṛṣṇa
        na ca rājyaṁ sukhāni ca

So, he is talking about "śreyaḥ". "śreyaḥ" is long-term good. There is "preyaḥ".
And there is "śreyaḥ". "preyaḥ" is short-term good. Oh, because student does not
go to college. Oh, student says, oh, there is a party. Let me go to the party.
There is a cricket match. Let me watch the cricket match. And there is s...,
there is "preyaḥ". There is, immediate pleasure is there. But then, when the
student is going to think in terms of a career, then I have to study. I have
come to the college for studying. I have come to the school for studying. And
let me study. And as I study more and more, then I will have a long-term career
ahead of me. So, "na ca śreyo ’nupaśyāmi". So, Arjuna is saying that I am
thinking about "śreyaḥ". I am not thinking about "preyaḥ". Arjuna is saying that
I am thinking from the long-term point of view. What will I gain? You may say
that I will win the war. And then I will gain the kingdom. But he says, if I am
thinking not just of gaining the kingdom. I am thinking after that. After we
get the kingdom, what after that? "na ca śreyo ’nupaśyāmi". I do not see any
good. "hatvā sva-janam āhave". If I won this battlefield, I kill my "sva-janam".
So, Arjuna is again using the word "sva-janam". Oh, these are my relatives. And
"na kāṅkṣe vijayaṁ kṛṣṇa". I, I, what will, what will be the pleasure if my
teacher, if my grandfather, they are all dead? What will be the pleasure left
for me? How can I, how can I kill them? So, "hatvā sva-janam āhave". I cannot
kill them. So, actually, in the Mahabharata, it is described that, the Bhīma,
Bhishma was the, was dominating the battle for the first nine days. You know, he
was unstoppable. And after the first nine days, when they saw that they just
cannot defeat him, then Yudhiṣṭhira remembered Bhishma had said earlier that I
will, later on, approach me. Return. I will tell you how I can be killed. So,
then, all the, then the, the Pandavas went to Bhishma. And then Bhishma told
them that if Śikhaṇḍī is in front, then I will not shoot at Śikhaṇḍī. And then,
he told. You know, as Arjuna was going back, Arjuna was thinking. He told
Krishna, he said you know, how can I possibly kill my grandfather? He said, you
know, after I would come, when I was small, after I would come from playing,
then I would climb onto the lap of my grandfather. My feet would be dirty. And
I would soil his clothes. And I would play with his beard. And I would say,
father, father, and then, he would stroke my hair. And he would say, child, I am
not your father. I am your father's father. So, Arjuna is remembering these
moments with a tender heart. Or it is, Mahabharata describes this that many had
to face the gruesome task of fighting and being the cause of the death of
Bhishma. He said, how can I shoot? So, Krishna told him that sentiments are
good. But they should not sway you from the path of duty. Remember that you have
obligation here. You have taken a vow. Your obligation is for the whole c...,
world that ensure that the rule of right, righteousness pre..., prevails. So,
dharma prevails. So, here, he is thinking that if all of them are killed, if my
relatives are killed, you know, what will I gain? And therefore, if I do not
desire the kingdom.

        na kāṅkṣe vijayaṁ kṛṣṇa

Arjuna is feeling as if, you know, suppose, there is, there is a world cup
match. And the captain, Indian captain is told. Or Indian team is told. You
know, yes, you can win the world cup. But in the process of you are winning the
world cup, a nuclear bomb will destroy the whole country. A bomb, and you will
go back. You will have the world cup. But there will be no one to celebrate it
with. You will not have your relatives. You will not have your fans. There will
be nobody in the country. The country will be a country of corpses. He says,
this is the, I do not want the world cup like this. He says, what is the use of
that? "na kā". So, he is saying, this kingdom will be like an empty trophy. With
whom, will I enjoy it? "na kāṅkṣe vijayaṁ kṛṣṇa". I do not desire victory. And I
do not desire what will come by victory. That is the kingdom. "na ca rājyaṁ
sukhāni ca". I do not want all this. And he goes on and describes further.

        kiṁ no rājyena govinda
        kiṁ bhogair jīvitena vā
        yeṣām arthe kāṅkṣitaṁ no
        rājyaṁ bhogāḥ sukhāni ca

So, he says, actually, "kiṁ no rājyena govinda", O Govinda, what will we do with
such a kingdom? "kiṁ no rājyena govinda", "kiṁ bhogair". What can we enjoy in
fact? How, how will we be able to live also? If all our loved ones are
"sva-janam", "hatvā". They are all killed. "yeṣām arthe kāṅkṣitaṁ no". So, for
whom, for enjoying with whom we want all this? "rājyaṁ bhogāḥ sukhāni ca". So,
actually, with those, with whom we want to enjoy, they are here on the
battlefield.

        ta ime ’vasthitā yuddhe

That they are all situated in the war field. And:

        ta ime ’vasthitā yuddhe
        prāṇāṁs tyaktvā dhanāni ca
        ācāryāḥ pitaraḥ putrās
        tathaiva ca pitāmahāḥ
     
So, they are ready on this battlefield. "prāṇāṁs tyaktvā dhanāni ca". They are
ready to give up their wealth. They are even ready to give up their life. And
Arjuna is going to list all those whom he had listed earlier. You know, he, it
was, earlier listing was there. But that was not Arjuna listing. That was
Sanjaya listing what Arjuna saw. Now, Arjuna is repeating that list. And he
sees, he is, many, speaking, these are all my relatives. How can I kill them?
So, going back to earlier example of the world cup. You know, it is not just
that everybody in your country will be killed. But you will have to kill all of
them to win the world cup. So, he says, no, I cannot do that. So, he says, how
can I do that? I cannot kill all of them. So, actually, now, Arjuna is thinking
in ter..., here, more in terms of his own enjoyment. He is not so much thinking
in terms of eternal dharma. So, obviously, the example is not appropriate for
this. But I am talking here, not from the objective appropriateness, but from
the subjective emotions. So, you know, we cannot enjoy anything material if
there are no loved ones with whom we will celebrate the joy. So, Arjuna is
saying the same thing. How will I enjoy? What will I enjoy? And he said, who all
are there? Who all will be facing the war, each other in the war? And who all
will be killed? So, he says:

        ācāryāḥ pitaraḥ putrās
        tathaiva ca pitāmahāḥ

So, we discussed this. And then:

        mātulāḥ śvaśurāḥ pautrāḥ
        śyālāḥ sambandhinas tathā

So, "tathā":

        etān na hantum icchāmi
        ghnato ’pi madhusūdana

He sided the desire to kill them. "etān na hantum icchāmi". "ghnato", even if I
am killed, "ghnato ’pi madhusūdana". And, here, he adds one more relative.
"śyālāḥ" is sisters-in-law. So, there he describes further. "śyālāḥ sambandhinas
tathā". Sorry, "śyālāḥ" is brothers-in-law. So, actually, who are the
brothers-in-law that are there? A..., actually, here, the Dhṛṣṭadyumna is there.
And Dhṛṣṭadyumna is going to fight with Droṇācārya. And then he does not know
what is going to happen over there. And in a sense, there is, they all relatives
are there. "sambandhinas tathā". They are all relatives. And then, he says, I
cannot kill them. Even if they kill me.

        api trailokya-rājyasya

He says, I cannot kill them even for the sake of all the three worlds. What to
speak of this earth. "hetoḥ kiṁ nu mahī-kṛte". I will not kill them.

        nihatya dhārtarāṣṭrān naḥ
        kā prītiḥ syāj janārdana

O, Janārdana, by killing them, what will I, what will one gain? What will I gain
by them? So, actually, here, we see that, you know, Krishna is referred to, by
many names.  So, in the first line of the four-verse sequence, that is in
thirty-one, sorry, thirty-two, He is referred to by Govinda. "kiṁ no rājyena
govinda". O, Govinda, what will, what will the raja king do to us? Then, in
thirty-four, he is referred to by Madhusūdana. "ghnato ’pi madhusūdana". And
then, in the last line of the thirty-fifth verse, he said, "kā prītiḥ syāj
janārdana". So, three names of address are used. So, here, we will see this
repeated phenomena that when they are referring to each other. Krishna and
Arjuna. They will refer to each other by name. And they will refer to each other
by various names also. So, actually, name is also opulence of a person. You
know, we treasure our name. And generally, we will see that if we remember some
other person's name, that person now feels very valued. 40:24
