Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d3ypiHCuu9I
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=w4TtjqEIl72mVIj-3qLt7cJc1xZ8MTU0ODQ4NzcwN0AxNTQ4NDAxMzA3&v=d3ypiHCuu9I&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_065_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_33_to_36_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri course, Bhagavad Gita. We are
doing the third chapter. We have completed till verse 32. So, we have discussed,
let us look at the chapter overview, before we move forward. So, we, this
chapter starts, basically, chapter starts with karma-yoga. And that is the
focus. So, now, Krishna is explaining, we are in the fourth section, now.
Fou..., fourth section, we completed. The difference between Kali-yu...,
karma-yoga and karma-kanda. And now, how karma-yoga elevates. That is what
Krishna is talking about in the fifth section, 30 to 35. So, "mayi sarvāṇi
karmāṇi" was 30th verse. Which says that, actually, offer the fruits of your
work to me. So, it, earlier, it was, karma-yoga was, just be detached from the
work. But now it is, not only to be detached from the work. But also, to focus
oneself on the Supreme Lord. And when one focuses oneself on the Supreme Lord,
offering the fruits of the work to the Supreme Lord. Then, by that, one is able
to, you know, become liberated. And then, Krishna says, have faith. So, when He
says, have faith, at that time, He gives two verses. That either, if you have
faith, then you will be liberated. If you do not have, if that person does not
have faith, then that person will s..., all the efforts will be lost. So:

        sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān
        viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

Now, Krishna will continue the theme of talking about dovetailing the one's
nature and doing one's prescribed duty. Let us look at the verse.

        sadṛśaṁ ceṣṭate svasyāḥ
        prakṛter jñānavān api
        prakṛtiṁ yānti bhūtāni
        nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati

So, "sadṛśaṁ ceṣṭate svasyāḥ". So, here, we see, "sadṛśaṁ". "sadṛśaṁ" means.
"sadṛśaṁ ceṣṭate svasyāḥ". So, "svasyāḥ" is one's own. Acco..., "sadṛśaṁ",
accordingly. "ceṣṭate". "ceṣṭate" means to act. To try. To act. So, everybody
will act according to their nature. "prakṛter", who are even "jñānavān api". So,

        prakṛtiṁ yānti bhūtāni
        nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati

So, "prakṛtiṁ yānti bhūtāni" means all living beings will act according to their
nature. "nigrahaḥ" is repression. "kim karisyati". What will repression
accomplish? What will repression accomplish? So, this seems to be a, a somewhat
confusing verse in the Bhagavad Gita. Because generally, we all say that, you
know, we have wrong desires. And we have to suppress those wrong desires. We
have to get rid of those wrong desires. So, Krishna is telling, what will s...,
repression accomplish? "nigrahah kim karisyati". And He says, everybody will act
accordion to their nature. "sadrsam cestate svasyah". "svasyah". And He is
saying even "jñana" will not help one to, you know, curb one's nature. One will
act accordion to one's nature. So, now, what does Krishna mean here by
"prakrtim"? Th..., understanding that is very important. "prakrtim" here does
not refer to kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada. This is now what He is referring
to by. By "prakrtim", He is referring, actually, to our propensity within the
four varanas. So, brah..., brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, shudra, that cannot be
repressed. See, the Vedic cu..., philosophy, there are two kinds of urges that
come from the contact of the soul with the body. So, some urges are to be
rejected. And some urges are to be dovetailed. So, understanding that difference
is very important if one is to practice spiritual life properly. So, there is
"prakrtim". And there is vasana. Vasana is i..., immoral desire. "prakrtim" is
material nature. So, material nature and material desire. So, m..., m...,
material is innate to our psychophysical nature. So, and it is harmonisable with
dharma. Whereas vasana is material desire. And superficial to our psychophysical
nature. And it is not harmonisable with dharma. What does this mean actually?
What does it actually mean when we say harmonisable or not harmonisable? For a
brah..., for a brahmana, say, person who is intellectually oriented, for that
person to act intellectually is innate, is in...., natural. It is not innate to
the soul. But it is innate to the soul when that soul is embodying in a
particular body. Which has a particular, you know, way of functioning. So, that
is not necessa..., a, a, not, in any way, you know, sinful in itself. On the
other hand, vasana are the desires which are generated by kama, krodha, lobha,
moha, mada, matsarya. So, the brahmanical tendency, or the ksatriya tendency,
that is not generated by kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada, matsarya. That is
generated by the contact of the soul with the body. And that is something which
is meant to be dovetailed. It is not meant to be suppressed or rejected. Now, of
course, anybody from a brahmana to a shudra, or even an outcaste. All these
people, they can get infected by kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada, matsarya. And
when they get infected by these anarthas, then they may also develop vasanas.
And those vasanas, they h..., will help to decide wh..., how to deal with them.
So, in different varanas, they all have to regulate. But the regulation level
and the regulation method may be different. You know, for a, for a, generally
speaking, a shudra is considered lower. Because the shudra is not so much
capable of regulation, of sense control. And because the shudra is not. So, it
is not that the person is, you know, you know, condemned. You know, if a shudra
had to live like a brahmana, it may seem, oh, brahmanas were respected so much.
And, you know, they, good l..., practically just live a very comfortable life.
You know, others will give charity. And they will just teach. And they do not
have to do any hard work. But along with that, brahmanas have to live a life of
cleanliness and purity. And if a shudra had to live like that, shudra would be
miserable. You know. Why? Because that psychophysical nature is just not suited.

So, here, we are not talking about brahmana, shudra by birth. We are talking
about by qualities. So, therefore, the important point is, that now it is not
that the shudra cannot become elevated. Shudra can also become elevated.
Gradually, by practicing, by, you know, that one's duty in varanashram. And
beyond that, shudra can also be elevated by the practice of, you know, the
devotional service. There, there is a rapid elevation that shudras can also do.
You know.

        kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya
        yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei ‘guru’ haya

So, Chaitanya Mahāprabhu describes, it is in Chaitanya Charitamrita, it is
described that, actually speaking, if a shudra understands Krishna
Consciousness, then the shudra can even become a guru. You know. If he
understands "kṛṣṇa-tattva", then, he, he is worthy of being called a guru. Now,
there are two significant points here. First is the inner understanding. And the
second is the outer position. So, what this verse says is, both are possible for
a shudra. That the shu..., just because that person is born a shudra does not
mean that this shudra cannot get, you know, spiritual understanding of
"kṛṣṇa-tattva". He can. And if he gets that, then that person should be
considered to be as respectable as a guru. So, the point here is that the
varanashram system is based on mut..., just gradual progression. And if somebody
practices devotion, then that is entirely different. Then, that person can make
rapid elevation. So, now, when a shudra becomes a, say, a devotee. Will that
person necessarily give up shudra activities? Yeah. As far as the, sometimes,
shudras engage in some illicit activities. Shudras pander to their lust, anger,
greed. They will not do that. But beyond that, they will practice, you know,
they will practice whatever occupational duties they have. They will not
necessarily give them up just because they are devotees. They may continue those
duties. So, what Krishna is telling over here is that even if a person gets,
becomes "jñanavan". When that person gets knowledge, still, that person will act
according to the nature. So, nature here is not referring to what is impelled by
lust, anger, greed. It is referring to the varanashram nature. The varana nature
basically. So, one will act according to that. And Prabhupada further talks
about in the purport of how the Vedic scriptures offer a program for regulating
ourselves. So, Prabhupada says that:

"There are many so-called spiritualists who outwardly pose as advanced in the
science but inwardly or privately are completely under particular modes of
nature which they are unable to surpass."

So, inwardly or privately. What is the difference between the two? Inwardly
means that they do not express it to anyone. And privately means that they
express it, but in private. That means they all have, they have sinful desires.
Which they try to suppress in their hearts. Or they try to keep it hidden from
public view. And under particular modes of nature, which they are unable to
surpass. And then, Prabhupada says that. You know:

"No one should suddenly give up his prescribed duties and become a so-called
yogi or transcendentalist artiﬁcially."

So, actually speaking, it is better to practice karma-yoga. That is what Krishna
is telling over here. And ultimately, Krishna will say that, you know,
karma-yoga will lead to, culminate in bhakti-yoga. So, Prabhupada is talking
about bhati-yoga over here. So, it is better to be situated in one's position.
And act according to one's nature. But offer the fruits of one's work to
Krishna. And practice devotional service. So, you know, the whole thrust of the
verse is that one should act according to one's nature. Because one should not
try to suppress one's nature. That will not a, a, that will not lead to any
good. Now, there are some organisations which actually distort this verse. And
they say, "nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati". That they make like the essence of the
Bhagavad Gita. So, the essence of Bhagavad Gita is, we could, "sarva-dharmān
parityajya mām...", "maha-baho". Those are the verses. Or Catur-sloki Bhagavad
Gita in the 10.8 to 11. Rāmānujācārya says "sarva-dharmān parityajya". It is its
germ sloka, you know, just, mo..., summit verse of the Gita. So, these are
the verses that our ācāryas have described as the most important in the Gita. But
there are these, you know, you know, you know, pseudo-spiritualists. They are
materialists in spiritual garb. And they say that the essence of the Bhagavad
Gita, the most important, "nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati". Therefore, there is no need
to repress.  Whatever be your desire. Indulge in that desire. Indulge in that
desire. And by indulging in that desire, you will enjoy. And is a "nigrahah kim
karisyati". So, these people are completely, you know, misleading everyone.
Because we will see, just a f..., you know, you know, now, we can un..., refute
this understanding of the Bhagavad Gita in several ways. First and foremost is,
if we go into the context, immediately after this, just two verses later. In the
36th verse, Arjuna will ask, what, by what one is impelled to sin? And implied
in that is, you know, qu..., the further question, how can one control that
sinful tendency? And then, Krishna, from 37 to 43 gives an elaborate answer,
where He describes how one can control that propensity. And essentially, what He
says there is, one controls by the practice of, you know, you know, intelligence
and sense control. So, sense control internally and intelligence to situate
oneself on the spiritual platform. But the whole point is that Krishna says, one
has to control that sense control propensity. So, if this verse were a l...,
l..., license or a mandate for unrestricted enjoyment, then why would Arjuna ask
the question by what is one impelled towards sin? Because this verse would then
become, you know, the s..., as a mandate for all kinds of enjoyment, even sinful
enjoyment. So, why would Arjuna have any apprehension of what causes one sin?
And then, why would Krishna, you know, clearly say that lust is our eternal
enemy? "nitya-vairiṇā". And Krishna will say that, control it. Curb this lust
Krishna says. "jahi śatruṁ mahā-bāho". Lust is your enemy. And conquer over it,
Arjuna. "kāma-rūpaṁ durāsadam". He says in 3.43. So, th..., if we look at the
context, this interpretation of the Bhagavad Gita, a, "nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati"
as a license for unrestricted enjoyment, it is a completely unwarranted, you
know, statement. It does not at all support that interpretation. Further,
"nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati". As I said, if we look at the context, it is more
talking about the "prakṛtiṁ". It is talking more about, according to our nature,
we should act. So, i..., Arjuna, you have a ksatriya nature. And trying to act
artificially like a sannyasi is not going to work for you. So, you, what will
repression accomplish, oh, Arjuna? Therefore, act according to your nature. And
even the wi..., even the learned will act according to their nature. So, now, we
may wonder, is it possible to transcend one's nature entirely? For us, do we
need to transcend our nature, also? And is it possible to do it? The important
point is that we stay engaged in a way that we are, that is productive for our
devotional service. Productive means productive in the sense that we are
internally satisfied. We feel comfortable doing the services that we are doing.
And externally, we are competent. That we are good at doing a particular
service. So, if we are doing it that way, then, we do not have to bother whether
I have to transcend my varana or not. Occasionally, by the course of events in,
you know, you know, life itself. We will sometimes, we f..., thrust into
services which we are not comfortable doing. But we are thrust into those
services, at that time, we have to fight. And we have to control ourselves. So,
we may have to do those services temporarily. But in general, we, you know, is,
to, we search for, and find the engagement that, you know, i..., we are
comfortable with internally and we are competent externally.

Sometimes, devotees have the idea that doing the thing that I do not like to do,
that is surrender. You know. I do not like to do something, so when I do that,
then, therefore I am proving my surrender to Krishna. Now, it is a, generally
speaking, it is a mistaken sentiment. No. It is not that we have to prove our
surrender to Krishna by making ourselves miserable. Krishna does not want to us,
to make u..., make us miserable. Krishna actually wants us to be happy. The
important point is that we should not identify ourselves with our nature so
completely that we think our current material nature is our eternal natural. So,
that should not happen. So, therefore, we have our sadhana. And the sadhana is
standard. Whether a person is, you know, whatever the service person is doing.
But that person continues doing sadhana. And that is standard universal for
everyone. But beyond that, we all have our i..., specific individual services.
And we do those services. And by that, we slowly, steadily advance in spiritual
life. Now, beyond this, if we look at the overall picture of today's world. None
of us know what is our varana. You know, Some of us may, most of us, generally,
we cannot just determine our varana by the way, by the particular family in
which we are born. And even if we are born in that particular family, you know,
we do not really have always engagements that are according to our varanashram
propensities, a..., according to our traditional varanas. That means sometimes a
person may be born in a brahmanical family. But that person may choose by the
peer pressure, by one's own individual ambition, by the social trends, you know,
to beco..., or by financial needs, to become an engineer or a doctor. That
person may not be engaged in a brahmanical way. Sometimes, that person may be
born in a business man's fam..., business per..., family. But that person may
choose not to do business. But to do something else. So, that will vary. So, we
do not have to assume, you know, that this particular thing is my varana. We
will have to often go through a process of individual self-discovery. You know,
individual self-discovery means that we talk of self-discovery at one level that
we discover ourselves as the soul. That is important. No doubt. But there is
second self-discovery that is also required. That is ourselves, a discovery. Who
am I? In terms of what is my psychophysical nature? Yes, I am a soul. But I am
a soul in a particular kind of body. And in the body that I am, how can I best
serve Krishna? So, this is something, you know, which each of us has to
discover. Now, of course, in today's society, most people work in such a way
that, you know, I just want some job. You know. I have to earn a living. And I
need to have some job. So, if that, if one is in entire financial straits, or
one is in some institution where one is required to do some particular job.
Then, that is ok. But overall, the Vedic culture is that people are engaged
in accord with their propensities. So, we may have to individually find out what
are our propensities. And even in material life, sometimes, people feel that
they are having job. They, they do not have job satisfaction. That is because
they feel that, actually, my job is not according to my nature. It may be also
that they are not getting sufficiently paid. Or they have a hostile work
environment. You know. Or whatever. Other factors can be there. But one factor
for jo..., you know, absence of job satisfaction can also be that, their job is
not compatible to, with their nature. So, that depends, will depend on the
individual. Whether one is, one is having a reasonably good career. Whether one
will try to change that to work according to one's nature. Or whether one will
continue according to that. And just focus on practicing spiritual life. And
transcending, you know, what is one, whatever one's varana is. So, today, how
things will work out, each of us will have to decide individually. In general,
it is not necessary for devotees to focus on trying to discover their varana too
much. That will be revealed on its own. We have to just, as I said earlier, we
have to disc..., and walk on the journey of individual self-discovery. But that
does not necessarily mean that we have to make that our priority and postpone
our Krishna Consciousness. We focus on practicing Krishna Consciousness and
while doing that, we also observe ourselves. And as we keep observing ourselves,
by that, we learn. You know, how can I best be engaged? So, Krishna is telling
that we will all have a particular nature. And we act according to that nature.
So, "nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati". What will repression accomplish? Now, I will
discuss more about this in the next verse, also.

        indriyasyendriyasyārthe
        rāga-dveṣau vyavasthitau
        tayor na vaśam āgacchet
        tau hy asya paripanthinau

So, "indriyasyendriyasyārthe". So, "indriyasya" and "indriyasya arthe".
So, "indriyasya arthe" refers to sense objects. Senses and sense objects,
"rāga-dveṣau vyavasthitau". "vyavasthitau" means is situated inside. What is
situated in-between interaction of senses and sense objects? "rāga" and
"dveṣau". Attachment and aversion are situated inside that. "tayor na vaśam
āgacchet". Do not come under their control, oh, Arjuna. Why? "tau hy asya
paripanthinau". These are enemies. You know. "rāga" and "dveṣau" are enemies.
They do not come under their control. Now, "paripanthinau". So, "pantha" is
path. "pari" is thieves. "paripanthinau" is, they are thieves on the path. They
are rubbers who will steal away our spiritual m..., our spiritual inclinations.
Our prospects for spiritual advancement. And our capacity to live according to
our dharma. So, Krishna, if we see, immediately after the previous verse.
Previous verse is "nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati". But then immediately in this verse,
He is saying, you know, "pa...", "ta...", "tayor na vaśam āgacchet". Do not go
completely un..., do not complo..., go under a control. So, is this a contrast?
Contradiction? Previous verse is saying, oh, you cannot repress the nature. But
then, here, He is saying, that, oh, but do not succumb to the nature, also. Do
not go its con..., its control. "tayor na vaśam āgacchet". What is in? What does
He? But here, He is not using the word "prakṛtiṁ". He is using the word, what
should we not go under the control of? "rāga" and "dveṣau". Where is "rāga" and
"dveṣau" situated? It is in senses and the sense objects. So, here, Krishna is
talking, not about "prakṛtiṁ". He is talking about vasana. So, now, w..., a male
may, you know, in the male body and mind, there is situated a..., attraction for
the female form. And in the female body and mind, there is attraction to the
male form, males in general. So, this attraction for males is there in the
senses and the sense objects. "vyavasthitau". It is situated. So, what does one
have to do? So, one has to regulate it. One should not go under the control of
it. So, the..., there is prin..., there is the arrangement of marriage by which
this can be regulated. It, a, can be expressed. But it has to be expressed in
regulation. There has, has to be expression with regulation. If there is no
expression, there is repression. Then, that will not work. That is what the
previous verse is saying. And this verse is saying, but there cannot be
unregulated exp..., expression. So, "rāga" and "dveṣau". So, what is the
"dveṣau"? So, Chakravarti pad, Baladeva Vidyabhushana, the acharyas in their
commentary explain that, you know, the condi..., that the conditioned soul wants
to enjoy sense gratification. Therefore, if the male is attracted to the
females. But if the male is, fi..., you know, if the per..., people find some
sadhus who tell them, do not engage in sense gratification. Then, they feel
"dveṣau" for them. Why are these people interfering with my sense enjoyment? And
they say, I want to go away from them. I want them to get out of my life. I want
to go away from them. So, what happens like this? Both i..., these. This "rāga"
and this "dveṣau". They are "paripanthinau". So, if you succumb to the "rāga",
the attachment. And get carried away by it. Or we succumb to the "dveṣau", and
go away from devotee association. Then, what will happen? "paripanthinau". They
will steal away our opportunity for spiritual advancement. Now, Srila Prabhupada
explains in the purport that, hmm, hmm, Prabhupada starts by speaking about
Krishna Consciousness.

"Those who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are naturally reluctant to engage in
material sense gratiﬁcation."

Profound statement. So, they are naturally reluctant. You know, actually, most
of us, we are naturally eager to engage in sense gratification. You know, as
soon as we get an opportunity, we want to engage in sense gratification. So, for
us, in the sadh..., in the conditioned stage, you know, she..., hearing and
chanting are our prescribed duties. And eating, sleeping, mating, defending.
These are our favorite pastimes. We look forward to them. When can I do this?
So, but, one who is in Krishna Consciousness, Prabhupada says, they are
naturally reluctant. Why? Because they have exp..., they have experienced a
higher happiness. And as compared to that higher happiness, this happiness seems
so insignificant. Why should I lose the opportunity for higher happiness by
exp..., by getting entangled in these lower pleasures? So, they are naturally
reluctant. But those who are not in such consciousness, Prabhupada writes:

"should follow the rules and regulations of the revealed scriptures"

And now, Prabhupada talks about how sex relationships will be regulated to the
marri..., marriage itself. And then, he makes another point:

"As long as the material body is there, the necessities of the material body
are allowed, but under rules and regulations. And yet, we should not rely upon
the control of such allowances."

So, now, you know, what does it mean? We should not rely upon the control of
such allowances? That means if there are, there is a control. Ok. That means
o..., say, there is the scripture. For example, there is dharma. And dharma,
even, there is dhar..., say, marriage. So, one relies on the control of
marriage. Yes. Now, that I am married. Now, I will not fall prey to sinful
activities. Yes. Ma..., marriage creates a sort of, you know, protection for
ourselves. But at the same time, if one, you know, does not understand that the
purpose of marriage is not just sense gratification. The purpose of marriage is
for both the sou..., a, people, the male and the female to come together and
serve Krishna. So, if that purpose is forgotten, then, you know, that marriage
itself can become just a fuel and arrangement that fuels one's l...,
sense-gratificatory desires. And then, what may happen is that the desires may
become so great that they may burn away one's intelligence. And one may no
longer follow the dharmic restriction, also. So, Prabhupada says in the purport,
that, there, they, that just as there can be accidents even on royal road. So,
he is referring to royal road as the arrangement provided by shastra for gradual
purification. But even if there is a royal road, there is always the possibility
for accident. You know, similarly, even when one is following the regulative
principles, one should not assume that the regulative principles themselves will
protect me. Yes, they will offer us a safe guard. But at the same time, we have
to recognise what is the, what is it that we have to guard against? What is it
that we need safety from? You know. So, if we start indulging in that unlimitedly,
unrestrictedly, then as these desires start blazing more and more, then the
safeguard will no longer guard us. Because it will, it is not that safeguard is
incapable of guarding us. But we will no longer want that guardianship. You
know, that guard. We will knock it as the, q..., the desires will blaze up so
much that they will knock out all the safeguards. And then, one may have an
accident on the royal road, also. That means one may be intending to practice
dharma. But one may get, one may not be able to practice it. So, now, here,
Prabhupada makes an interesting point that:

"sex enjoyment is a necessity for the conditioned soul, and sex enjoyment is
allowed under the license of marriage ties."

So, now, the wording is very significant. Is it a necessity for whom? It is not
a necessity for the soul itself. It is not necessary for the regulated soul. It
is a necessity for the conditioned soul. Now, what do we mean here by necessity?
So, is it an absolute universal necessity for everyone? Actually, you know, the
word necessity here refers not to a physical necessity. It refers to
psychological necessity. You know, it is not that if a person does not engage in
sex, the person will die. The sex is not a necessity on the level of food. Or
sleep. Hmm. Food, clothing, shelter. We say these are the necessities. So, food,
sleep. These are absolute necessities. Water is a necessity. Without water,
without food, we cannot live. We will die. So, it is not that the person without
se..., you know, that person can, will die without sex. But for most people, it
is a necessity in the sense that what is actually psychological necessity is so
irresistible that it is essential. So, in that, that is why, generally, the
renounced order, and the people are few. You know, in society, not everybody can
be renounced. And not everybody needs to be renounced. It is, that is for few
people who will renounce the world. And they will practice spiritual life
focusing entirely on their vertical relationship with Krishna. And, you know,
for them, is it not a necessity? Well, if they are purifying themselves. If they
are getting satisfaction at the spiritual level, then it is no longer a
necessity. Because th..., ultimately what is a necessity is happiness. So, if
one gets happiness at the spiritual level, one will not need happiness at the
material level. But for most people, to experience happiness at the spiritual
level in a steady and fulfilling way requires substantial purification which may
not be possible in the initial stages of one's spiritual life. That is why
dharmic marriage is what is prescribed for most people. And the renounced order
is there for those people who want to focus primarily or exclusively on their
relationship with Krishna. Now, "tayor na vasam agacchet". Prabhupada writes
that, he concludes with a nice way. In the purport, he says:

"no one should try to be detached from Krsna consciousness at any stage of life.
The whole purpose of detachment from all kinds of sense attachment is ultimately
to become situated on the platform of Krsna consciousness."

So, detached meant, from that people feel, oh, all my suffering is because of my
attachment. No. Actually, our suffering is not because of our attachment. Our
suffering is because of our detachment. You know. How is that possible?
Actually, we are all detached from Krishna. You know, we are all parts of
Krishna. But we have become detached from Krishna.

        mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke

We are all parts of Krishna, but we have become detached. You know. We have
become separated from Krishna. And because we have become separated from
Krishna, that is why we are suffering now. So, we all want to become connected
with Krishna. The purpose of bhakti is not primarily to develop detachment. It
is to rectify our detachment from Krishna by reviving our attachment to Him. So,
when we be develop attachment to Krishna, then that attachment to Krishna will
give us so much satisfaction, that our material attachments fall away. So, we
should not b..., b..., be too much conscious or troubled by our material
attachments. Even if we have material attachments. Now, our focus should be on
developing our sa..., devotional attachment to Krishna. That is the essential
process of bhakti. However much we struggle in our, you know, sadh..., in
sadhana, in our standards. Sometimes, we may struggle. We may fall. And we have
to understand that even if we fall. Still, we have to go on in devotional
service. Sometimes, after we fall, we may feel guilty. And when we feel guilty.
We think, oh, I am good for nothing. I am so fallen. I cannot practice spiritual
life. And that guilt may eat us up internally. So, actually, if I chanting Hare
Krishna. He says. Oh. Oh, I am so fallen. I cannot get purified. I have been
chanting for so long. Nothing is happening. What is the use? So, we may start
thinking like this. You know, even guilt could well be a temptation. You wonder,
how can guilt be a temptation? Actually, temptation is not only that which, say,
promises material pleasure. Temptation in a broad sense is anything that takes
us away from Krishna. So, if, you know, with, say, say, lust or an..., ang...,
greed, it takes us away Kr..., by, away from Krishna, by promising pleasure. Oh,
you will enjoy. Guilt keeps us away from Krishna by creating a wall between us.
Oh, I am so fallen. I can never become purified. What can I do? What is the use?
So, ultimately, when we are, feel guilty, we are becoming self-centered. And if
we are becoming self-centered, then we are not Krishna-centered. We are not
Krishna Conscious. So, just as lest..., lust makes us self-centered. When we
will become lusty. You know, when we feel lusty. Then, what happens is, we can
think only, oh, I and my enjoyment. So, same happens when we feel guilty. So,
guilt, how should we feel guilt? That means, guilt should be as, m..., used to
m..., act as an impetus for K..., moving towards Krishna. So, guilt is like an
internal immune system. That means whenever we get some infection, then there is
fever that comes. So, when the fever comes, then we understand that, oh, there
is some sickness in the body. Now, I have to take some medicine. But if I find
that, when I feel guilty, at that time, I become so disturbed. That I think oh,
I am so sick that the medicine itself is of no use. See, the feeling of sickness
should make us feel the need for the medicine. If the feeling of sickness makes
us feel, oh, the medicine is useless. Then, that feeling of sickness is not
actually guilt. It is pseudo-guilt. It is pseudo-guilt. So, you know, I have
written an article on my website about guilt and pseudo-guilt elaborately. The
essence is that anything that discourages us in the practice of devotional
service, that is pratikul to bhakti. That is unfavorable to bhakti. And that
should be rejected. So, even if it feels like guilt. Oh, I am so fallen. I
cannot practice strictly. What should I do? Just put it aside. Do not bother
about it. Let me practice devotional service.

We see Bhaktivinoda Thakur song..., so many songs about "āmāra jīvana, sadā pāpe
rata,". He says, oh, my, my hard is filled so many sinful desires. I am so
sinful. But what is the conclusion of all his songs? Krishna, I will take
shelter of You. You must deliver me. Apart from You, who can deliver me? You
know, You are my only shelter. So, all his feelings of being very fallen
conclude in a fervent call for Krishna's mercy. He does not conclude by saying,
oh, I am so hopeless. That now, I will stop chanting Hare Krishna. Now, I will
give up bhakti. And I will continue in sense gratification. Why I am so fallen?
There is never this conclusion. So, ultimately, we have to always keep this
governing principle for our bhakti.

        ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ
        prātikūlyasya varjanam

That which is favorable, accept it. That which is unfavorable, reject it. So,
guilt should act like a, a, the, the way, the feelings of sickness. Which are
created by the immune system act. Impell us f..., towards the medicine. It
should not, you know, discourage us from taking the medicines. So, as sadhakas,
Pr..., now, we talked earlier about Prabhupada saying that, we should not let
ourselves become affected by feelings of helplessness or defeat. That is what
it means that guilt should not overwhelm us so much that we do not know what
to do. How should I practice my spiritual life? How do I practice? With
determination. With conviction that if I keep practicing, I will become
purified. So, that is why we should not be too attached when conscious. Because
then, we think, oh, I succeeded in te..., resisting the temptation. I failed
resisting the temptation. Will I succeed next time? Will I fail nex time? Our
focus should be on how can I practice my spiritual life? How can I serve
Krishna? How can I remember Krishna more? If that is our focus, then our
attachments will themselves automatically get subsided. So, we focus not on
removing darkness. We focus on turning on the light.

        kṛṣṇa — sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra
        yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa, tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra

So, we focus not on bothering, oh, will there be darkness? Will I fall in the
darkness? Will the darkness pervade everywhere and make me blind? No. I said.
Ok. Where is the light? Focus on turning on the light. So, if our focus is
always on being Krishna Conscious. Then, we will be able to stay temp..., to
stay free from maya. And even if we fall down to maya, we will come out of it.
So, we should never let anything make us detached from Krishna Conscious. Oh,
guilt can make us detached from Krishna Consciousness. Because how? Oh, I am so
fallen that I cannot practice bhakti. So, we become indifferent. We become
detached. That should not happen. We should always focus on practicing
devotional service sincerely and enthusiastically. So, now, here, you know,
Krishna is telling, this, I said, regulated express..., expression is the
middle-way. It is karma-yoga. So, in karma-yoga, Krishna is telling that we
should act according to our nature. But at the same time, as sadhakas, we will
occasionally have to do things which are not accordion to our nature. So, if we
only do the things which we like to do, then we will get a strong sense of
doership. And we will never learn to discipline our mind and so we will not
develop taste for the core devotional activities. What do we mean by core
devotional activities? Hearing and chanting, these are core devotional
activities. And to develop taste in them, we have to discipline ourselves. How
do we discipline ourselves? We will learn to discipline ourselves by doing s...,
our services. So, we do services which are according to our nature. We do
sometimes services that are not according to our nature. Whenever, it is
required. You know, it is not that we have to go hu..., on hunt out of our way
for services which are not according to our nature. But the point is, we do
whatever is required. You know, when the situation demands. And by that, we
express our surrender. But does, that does not mean that we make ourselves
miserable in devotional service. And beyond that, yes. So, let us move forward.
Now, Krishna, Kr..., again comes back to the point that act according to your
dharma.

        śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ
        para-dharmāt sv-anuṣṭhitāt
        sva-dharme nidhanaṁ śreyaḥ
        para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ

So, "śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ". "śreyān" is better. "sva-dharmah" is better. So,
what is better? Your "sva-dharmah" is better. And "vigunah". "vigunah" means
even it is faulty. Even it has, you know, it does not have "guṇaḥ" in it.
"viguṇaḥ" is virudha rupa in a way. It has false in it. You know. Then, what is
it better than? S..., "para-dharmāt". Somebody else's dharma. "sv-anuṣṭhitāt".
"sv-anuṣṭhitāt" means perfectly done. That means you do somebody else's dharma
perfectly. "sva-dharme nidhanaṁ śreyaḥ". "nidhanaṁ" means destruction. Even
destruction in one's own dharma is preferable to "para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ". That
doing another's duty is "bhayāvahaḥ". It is fearful. It is dangerous. One should
not do like this. So, it is interesting. You know, many sections of the Bhagavad
Gita have been misappropriated, you know, by people who have their own interests
and agendas. So, for example, we ha..., I said that there is this organisation
which recommends unrestricted sense gratification. Their favorite verse is
"nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati". That is 3.33. Here, 3.35, you know, is, that
Krishna will sta..., talk about exactly similar verse in the eighteen chapter,
also. But here "para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ". So, there is, a, there is in India,
there is LIC. Life Insurance Cor..., Corporation. They have taken "yoga-kṣemaṁ
vahāmy aham". So, "yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham". The, now, the, the LIC cannot do
"yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham". They cannot provide and protect. But they had taken
these verses for their own purposes. So, different people take different verses
for their own purposes, like that. But here, Krish..., the, this verse,
"para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ". So, these are taken by some Hindu organisations which
try to, you know, whi..., work to get people who are converted. You know, in
India, especially in the South India, in Northeast India. There is a huge amount
of conversions that are happening. So, Christian missionaries are, you know, in
ways, through various means, getting people to convert to Christianity. So,
there are Hindu organisations. Which feel very agitated. Hindus are getting
converted. And they try to get the Hindus, you know, the converted Hindus back
into Hinduism. And their, their initiatives, those are, they have, they, they
call them homecoming. Come back to your home reli..., original religion. And
their slogan is "para-dharmo bhayavahah". Others' dharma is very dangerous. Do
not follow that. So, now, that is complete, you know, complete i..., i...,
decontextualised application of this verse. When Krishna is using the words
"dharmaḥ", the word "dharmaḥ". He is not referring to Christianity, or Hinduism,
or Islam, or anything like that, at all. In fact, none of these religions were
there at the time of the Vedic culture. When Krishna spoke the Bhagavad Gita,
And Jesus had not come. Muhammad had not come. And even the word "hindu" was not
there in the vocabulary. The word "hindu" came only, maybe a few hundred years
ago. So, therefore, c..., that is a decontextualised use of the verse. You know,
now, of course, we can say that, people who are converted out of the Vedic fold.
If they come back to the Vedic fold, that is good. Yes, that is good. In the
sense that, people will at least have appreciation for Vedic culture. Generally
speaking, most of the people from religions like Chr..., Christianity and Islam,
these religions are exlusivists. Exclusivist means that they believe that their
way is the only way. Now, is that based on their scriptures? Not exactly fully
based on their scriptures. These exclusivist sort of statements are there in all
religions. But they have to be understood in the proper context. When a, so, for
example, if some people say, Jesus is, this is the only way. And, you know, no
one shall go to, of the father, except through me. There is one verse which says
that. If you loo..., go back to the original, you know, hebrew of the verse. We
find that there is a word "cycle". And that means now, presently. Jesus is not
talking for all time of eternity. He is talking presently, I am the way. And
none should go to the father, except through me. But beyond that, in principle,
if we look at it, this sort of statements, which are exclusive, is, they are
primarily meant to create a sense of focus.

Focus means that if a patient is going to doctor. And doctor says, ok, so, you,
medi..., diagnosis. This is the medicine. But the patients are thinking. Doctor,
you know, but I went to that doctor. And that doctor said that is the problem.
He said that is the medicine. I went to that doctor. And the doctor said like
this. And then, that doctor said like that. And that doctor said like that. Now,
the doctor will say, forget whatever doctor told whom what, told you what. Just
do what I am telling you. And you will get cured. So, now, this sort of
statement is primarily meant to create focus. It is not an Absolute Truth. There
is not that this doctor thinks that I am the only doctor right and above, all
the doctors are wrong. No. The patient is not at a stage where the patient can,
you know, systematically get a comparison of all the doctors. And what they are
saying. That can also be done if required. But the statement is this particular
point, is the focus. Just do this. And you will get cured. So, this kind of
statements which are there in the various Vedic scriptures sometimes. They are
meant to create a sen..., crea... s..., create a sense of focus. But
unfortunately, when they are taken as Absolute Truths. And they are imposed on
others. Then, what happens is many of these exclusivist religions, they consider
their religion to be the true religion. And all of the religions to be n..., not
just wrong, but also false. As, you know, things which are taking people away
from God. And when they have that idea that other religions. So, now, we
understand that Christ and Krishna are the same God. But the, many of the
Christians, they do not think like that. They think Ch..., Christ is the true
God. And Krishna is a false God. And they that, actually, when people have to
come to the true God, they have to reject the false God. So, reject the false
God means, if we look at the historical tradition of the Biblical religions or
the Islamic religions. One of the things that they do, whenever they conquer a
particular land. They just, they go and destroy the places of worship over
there. Because their idea is, oh, these false Gods have to be rejected. And
then, the true Go..., God, the worship of the true God will be established. And
that is what they often do. So, because of that, when people get converted, then
they fall prey to a, this narrow-minded mentality. And they start rejecting, you
know, whatever they have worshipped in the past. And people may, when they get
converted, they may reject the, they may be told to throw away the images that
they have. Burn the pictures that they have. And they are told to, in this way,
reject the forms of worship that they had. So, they developed not just, a, a,
they not only give it up. But they develop antipathy. They develop a negative
feeling towards that, hatred towards that. And that is quite unfortunate. That
is very undesirable. So, in that sense, if people are within the Vedic fold,
then, they, they at least have sympathetic attitude towards spiritual life. So,
that is why when Srila Prabhupada was asked, that who is better? You know,
Christian following Christianity, Jesus, or even a, somebody, you know,
worshipping that dev..., you know, devi, or devata within the Vedic fold? So,
Prabhupada said that, you know, the, the person worshipping the devi, devata is
better. Why is that better? Because that person will have lesser cultural and
conceptual barriers in coming to Krishna Consciousness. Lesser cultural and
conceptual barriers. Why cultural? Because if we look at the culture of the, you
know, western religions, it is quite opposite. For example, you know, the, you
know, in the Vedic culture, the deities are worshipped. In the Abrahamic
religions, the deities are desecrated. In the Vedic culture, the understanding
that God can manifest through matter is implicit. So, cultural point of view,
this is just one example of deity especially. But it is prominent example, very
important example. And conceptually the idea that God can manifest through
matter. And God can manife..., ex..., make Himself accessible, that is a bit
alien to that tradition. The, there are within Christianity, also, you know,
there are certain traditions which do accept this point. But they are far and
f..., f..., few. So, because there are more cultural, conceptual barriers, so,
for people who are within the Christian tradition, to take up Krishna
Consciousness. So, that is why somebody who is in the Vedic tradition, that
person's prospect of coming to Krishna Consciousness are greater. You know, so,
therefore, Prabhupada said, that is better. But ultimately, it depends on one's
attitude towards the Supreme Lord and one's intention for pure devotion. This
should not be taken as a blanket statement. That somebody, who is a
materialistic demigod worshipper is better than somebody who is a very sincere,
you know, pers..., sincere, Ch..., Christian, say, Christian saint. Or a sincere
Christian practitioner who is trying and aspiring for practicing, you know,
sincere devotion. So, there can be, so, the ultimate criteria is not, you know,
whether the person is within the Vedic fold or outside the Vedic fold. The
ultimate criteria is whether the person is aspiring f..., for developing love
for God and is advancing on that path of developing love for God. So, here, what
we are talking about is, you know, the "para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ". So, what is
Krishna talking about over here? That we have got nothing to do with these
religions. Yes. For, even we could say that it is true that "para-dharmaḥ", if
somebody Hindu, somebody who is within the Vedic fold, s..., a Hindu gets
converted to Christianity. That person becomes, you know, inimical to Vedic
culture. And that would be undesirable. So, in that sense, we could say it is
"para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ". But it is in this contextual sense. But if we look at
the Bhagavad Gita's flow, Bhagavad Gita is not referring to any of these
dharmas. Krishna is saying that, if a person is a brahmana, the per..., it is
better for that person to act as a brahmana. That person trying to act as a
ksatriya, t..., and even if the person says, I can act as a ksatriya very well,
that will be temporary. That person is going against one's nature. One will not
be able to follow that for a long time. So, interestingly, Prabhupada quotes in
the purport the exceptions. And then, he says, the exceptions are temporary. Our
exceptions are far and few. And the exceptions occur, when somebody becomes
transcendental. So, he gives the example of Paraśurāma at, brahmana acting as a
ksatriya. And Vishvamitra, a ksatriya acting as a brahmana. But these are few
examples. In general, we should act according to our nature. So, a brahmana,
according to act..., acting brahmanical nature will become purified. A ksatriya
acting according to ksatriya nature will become purified. So, Arjuna, please act
according to ksatriya nature. That is what Krishna is talking about over here.
So, now, Prabhupada, so, Prabhupada, the, Krishna is here talking about, primary
about one's material duties. He is not talking about one's spiritual duties. So,
at this point, you know, Arjuna gets a question. The question that Arjuna gets
is, how does one get overcome by these sinful desires? And how can one become
free from those sinful desires? So, where does the i..., where do the idea,
cons..., question of sinful desire is coming over here? He, Krishna is telling
Arjuna to practice karma-yoga. Now, karma-yoga means, one has to be able to
regulate one's kama. Otherwise, there will not be much yoga. That there will be
karma-kanda. Or there can be karma, also. So, what enables one to purpo...,
practice karma-yoga, to do yoga part along with the karma part is one's being
significantly nishkam. So, in the previous verse, Krishna has said that these
are enemies.

        rāga-dveṣau vyavasthitau
        
        indriyasyendriyasyārthe

3.34, He says that there is situated attraction and aversion. And one should
regulate that. Otherwise, one will succumb. So, where is He talking about all
this? Whe.., where is all this leading to? This is leading, all this to the
wo..., go to question, Arjuna's mind. Actually, you know, yes. So, s..., we all
know that we should do our duties. But there is some passion which prevents us
from doing these duties. So, Krishna has said there is, this is, there is this
attachment and aversion that is situated in the, you know, senses and sense
objects. So, where does it come from? That is the question. So, let us look at
it now.

        arjuna uvāca

        atha kena prayukto ’yaṁ
        pāpaṁ carati pūruṣaḥ
        anicchann api vārṣṇeya
        balād iva niyojitaḥ

So, "atha kena". By what, Oh, Krishna? "prayukto ’yaṁ". By what is one engaged?
"pāpaṁ carati". "pāpaṁ carati". One is engaged in "pāpaṁ". So, "carati" means
to, "carati" can, means to move, it can mean to graze. You know. Cows graze.
"carati". And "carati" means to move around. So, one, one dwells on sin. And one
moves around in sin. One has moved toward sin. And then, he adds something
interesting. "anicchann api vārṣṇeya". One does not want to do it. One does not
desire to do it. And see, one feels "balād iva niyojitaḥ". As if by force, one
is attracted, dragged towards the sinful activities. So, what is it, Krishna,
that makes one to act in such a way?

        anicchann api vārṣṇeya
        balād iva niyojitaḥ

What is it that makes one act like this? This is Arjuna's question. So, now,
actually speaking, is it truly "anicchann"? Is it that w..., without our desire,
we are engaged in sinful activities? Against our desire, we are engaged? Not
exactly. Actually, when the desire come, we accept that desire. But other times,
we could not have that desire. At that time, we accept that desire. And that is
how we act. But overall, we may not have a desire to act sinfully. But certain
temptations come, and that time, when the desire come, the desire just
overpowers us. But when the desire overpowers us, at that time, we say yes to
that desire. Without saying yes to the a..., without we saying yes to that
desire, we will not engage in sin. So, so, "anicchann" is one's feeling overall.
I do not want to do this. Like an addict may say that, I do not want to drink
alcohol. Now, it is not that, but then, still, there are other may find that.
Oh, I, you know, I drank alcohol. Why? I f..., I could not resist. I was forced.
Now, when he says forced, what does it m...? It is not that the alcohol bottle
developed legs and came out of the alcohol bar. And came to the home. And opened
itself. And ploughed itself into the mouth. No. Wh..., what that means is that
time, that person developed the desire, which became irresistible. And then,
person engaged. So, it is, "anicchann" means, i..., it is like, say, if this is
a normal state of consciousness. At the normal state of consciousness, we do not
want to do it. And that is why it is "anicchann". But at that particular time,
that "icchann" comes up. So, how does that "anicchann" become "icchann"? How
does, what is undesirable becomes suddenly desirable? That is "balād iva
niyojitaḥ". He says, it is as if by force. I do not want to do it. But at, that
is, some force comes. And tuck. Drags me down. "balād iva niyojitaḥ". So, how
does this happen? So, this, actually, one of the most relevant sections of the
Bhagavad Gita in today's times. Now, people may not believe in the soul. People
may say, even a..., ma..., people may not s..., people may not care about the
soul. People may say that we do not believe in God. Or we do not care about God.
F..., that is, you know, that is up to them, in many ways. That is their choice.
But what people cannot say, say, say, let us say that we cannot care about is,
how we ourselves are. You know, all of us feel that there is something within us
that sabotages us. You know, if there are big big sport stars, or sometimes
they, they can, they have so much potential to perform. But then, they come
under the urge of some passion. And they do something which is stupid. And then,
they, they become disgraced by that. They regret that. And we see, addiction is
such a huge problem all over the world. And there are all kinds of addictions.
Generally, when we think addiction, we may think of alcohol addiction, drug
addiction or cigarette addiction. But there are lesser forms of addiction, which
are also, as, which are also addictive, also. That means there can be TV
addiction. There can be internet addiction. There can be eating addiction. You
know, there can be different kinds of addictions. And all these addictions, they
take away so much of one's time, one's mental energy. And one is forced to do
that activity. One just cannot live without it. One becomes so restless, so, you
know, so incapable of doing anything because of the addictions. So, what is this
force that engages us in, you know, engages, that forces us to act in particular
ways? Now, we may say that watching TV is not sinful. If somebody says,
overeating, that is not sinful. The point is Krishna is asking specifically
about lust over. Arjuna is specifically asking about lust. But the point is that
w..., all of us find that there is some kind of enemy within me. Some kind of
inimical force which impells me to act against my best interests. And I do not
want to act in that way. But at that particular point, something comes and tuck.
It makes me act in wrong way. So, what is that force? Where does it originate
from? And how c..., is it to be controlled? So, this section, 3.37 to 43 is
Krishna's answer. And it is one of the most important section, especially for
sadhakas. Just like 2., you know, 54 to 72, which was also talking about
"sthita-prajña". That is also important. So, like that, this is also mo...,
important. And we will discuss that in our next class.

Thank you very much. Srimad Bhagavad Gita ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya.
Ha...
