Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pNYNHsCRUPU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_069_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_04_Text_07_to_10_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=pNYNHsCRUPU&redir_token=SZvLaaeZRoaM3iiUpnwlBLwdFPt8MTU0ODQ4NzgyNUAxNTQ4NDAxNDI1&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri, Bhagavad Gita course. We are
now in the fourth chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, about to start with some of the
most well-known verses in the Bhagavad Gita. In fact, among all the verses,
this is a verse pair, that is most well-known. There are other verses which are
well-known, like "karmaṇy evādhikāras te". Or "yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham". But two
successive verses, that are the most well-known within the Vedic context as well
as outside the, what we could call the Hindu world. This, this ver...,
successive verse pair is the most well-known. Let us look at these two verses.

        yadā yadā hi dharmasya
        glānir bhavati bhārata
        abhyutthānam adharmasya
        tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

So, "yadā yadā". "yadā yadā". Two "yadā" have meaning. Wherever and whenever,
Prabhupada translates. That means at different times and at different places.
"yadā yadā hi dharmasya". "dharma". "glāniḥ". So, "glāniḥ" means decline or
disruption. Or as Prabhupada translates as discrepancies. "bhavati bhārata".
Whenever there is a decline in religion. So, Prabhupada translates that as
decline in the sentence translation. And discrepancies in the word to word
translation. And then, "abhyutthānam adharmasya". "abhyutthānam" means increase,
predominance. So, when there is a decline in religion and increase in
irreligion. "tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham". "tadātmānaṁ". Therefore, I myself
manifest. "sṛjāmy". So, now, in the previous verse, Krishna has said that He,
He, 4.4 was Arjuna's question. How can, how could you have instructed the
sun-god? And Krishna says in 4.5 that I remem..., I remember all my previous
lives. You do not. And then, He says, He says, He talks about His own position.
And He states in 4.6 that, actually, I remember, because, you know, My body is
transcendental. I am the Lord of all living beings. And I come by my own nature.
In My own transcendental form. By My mercy. So:

        prakṛtiṁ svām adhiṣṭhāya
        sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā

So, this is a mystery of the Lord's appearance. Now, the Lord will describe why
He appears in this world. So, or, first, He is talking about when He appears.
And next verse, He will tell, wha..., why He appears. Actually, in this verse
itself, the why He appears is implicit. So, He is saying that, you know, that
there is always this tension between dharma and adharma in this world. You know,
that is there within our hearts. We have a good side and a bad side. We have
virtuous side and a vicious side. Or, as a native Americans would s..., say
that there is a good dog within us and a bad dog within us. So, both the dogs
are barking. Prompting us to act either in good ways or bad ways. So, this is
always there within our hearts. The conflict between what some, you know,
scholars call as the higher self and the lower self. So, there is this conflict
going on. And this same conflict is reflected in the external world as a
conflict between good and evil. So, the people whose g..., good side is c...,
dominated by the bad side. They become adharmic. And those whose bad side is
dominated by the good sides. They are dharmic. So, now, of course, good and bad,
you know, different people may have different conceptions of that. What is
actually good, and what is actually bad, we have to look at scripture to
understand that. You know, but the point is, there is dharma. And Krishna is
saying when the "dharmasya glānir". When there is a decline of religion. Now,
the word dharma has multiple meanings. So, normally, Srila Prabhupada would say
that dharma refers to our essential nature. So, for example, dharma of water is
liquidity. The dharma of fire is heat and light. Dharma of sugar is sweetness.
That is true. So, that is one meaning of dharma. But the word dharma is not
univalent. It is multivalent. Multivalent means, it has multiple meanings.
Univalent means it has only one meaning. So, the word dharma has multiple
meanings. So, for example, when Krishna says "sarva-dharmān parityajya". So,
give up all varieties of religion. So, if dharma is our essential nature,
then how can we give up dharma? How can Krishna tell us to give up all dharmas
in fact? So, we have to understand that the word dharma can refer to multiple
things. Essentially, it refers to three different things. At the ultimate level,
it refers to essential nature which is to love and serve Krishna. That is a
spiritual nature. Then, but we are not at the spiritual level of consciousness
right now. So, we are at the material level of consciousness. So, when we are at
the material level of consciousness, we have material dharma. The material
dharma is what is given to us by varanashram. And that material dharma keeps us
in harmony with the, you know, world around us. And fulfills our necessities in
a way that does not disrupt the environment. And does not disrupt our spiritual
prospects. So, dharma, artha, kama, moksha is a progression. So, that is the
dharma at the conditioned level. Prabhupada talks about is conditioned dharma.
Material dharma. Sva-dharma. So, for example, bra..., so..., some people may be
brahmana. Some people may be vaisyas like that. That is material dharma. And
then, there is transitional. Transitional means, now, varanashram, in and of
itself, will purify. But it is a gradual process. So, what we are practicing
sadhana-bhakti. Sadhana-bhakti is also a dharma. Sadhana-bhakti is not our
eternal dharma. Bhakti is eternal. But sadhana-bhakti, where we have to struggle
against our mind and senses, and fix them on Krishna, that is not necessarily
eter..., that is not eternal. That struggle will go on as long as we do not
become purified. Once we become purified, that struggle is no longer there. So,
there is a transitional dharma. So, there is here, in material conc..., at the
material level, we have dharma. That is the social order. Then, there is, there
is, we could say sadhana-bhakti. That is also a dharma. That is also a duty. So,
chanting Hare Krishna even if we do not feel like chanting. This will elevate
us. This will take us from the material level of consciousness to the spiritual
level consciousness, ultimately. So, that is also a dharma. So, here, when
Krishna is referring to "dharmasya glānir". He is not referring to this level of
dharma. This level is what? The spiritual level where the idea is that one is, I
am a soul. And I am a servant of Krishna. That is all that I have to do. I love
Krishna. And I will serve him. That dharma is inalianable. And that dharma
cannot be disrupted. But Krishna is here referring to the social arrangement by
which people practice dharma. So, the social arrangement by which people
practice the principles of, you know, the spiritualities. "dharmasya glanir"
means that predominance of irreligion and the subordination, the subjugation of
religion. When sva, "dharmasya glānir" happens. Then, "paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ".
Then, Krishna will describe, what ha..., you know, what f..., he will be doing
in the next verse. But here, He says, "tadatmanam srjamy aham". At that time, I
appear. So, now, Prabhupada's purport focuses on the word "srjami".

"The word srjami is signiﬁcant herein."

What is significance of "srjami"?

"Srjami cannot be used in the sense of creation, because, according to the
previous verse, there is no creation of the Lord’s form or body, since all of
the forms are eternally existent. Therefore, srjami means that the Lord
manifests Himself as He is."

So, again, the point is that, "srjami" can, you know, mean creation. But just
like for the gopis, and for the relationship of Krishna and gopis. Sometimes,
the word kama is used. Now, hmm, actually, the relationship of Krishna with the
gopis, is not based on material lust. So, kama, when it is used over there does
not convey the sensual, selfish, grossly physical, you know, craving that
characterises the male-female attraction in this world. That refers to, m...,
it refer..., that kama refers to the pure spiritual selfless attraction that is
there between the pure devotees and Krishna. Between gopis and Krishna. And
because that relationship is so intense, you know, that, to give us an inkling
of that, to gi..., what is the nature of that relationship? The word kama is
used. So, when terms are used. We also have to understand that, sometimes, we
have certain baggage which we carry in our mind. And because of that, we pursue
terms in a particular way. But, you know, this, so, scriptures do clarify. For
example, many times, we are describing Krishna's rasa-lila. The word kama may
be used. But then, at the end of the Rasa Panchadhyayi, in the last verse, in
33rd Chapter, 39th verse, it says that, 10.33.39, it says that, actually, if one
hears rasa-lila, one will become free from kama. So, it says:

        vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ
        śraddhānvito ’nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ
        bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ
        hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ

So, "kāmaṁ hṛd-rogam". That the, you know, the heart, the disease of lust will
be removed, will be cleansed. So, the point is clear from the whole context,
narration of the Bha..., Bhag..., the Rasa Panchadhyayi that this is meant to
remove lust. If it is meant to remove lust, then how can the attraction between
Krishna and the gopis be lust? You know, if we rehear about lust, others
engaging lusty activities, that does not r..., remove lust from our heart. That
increases the lust in our heart. So, the word lust may be used. But the word
lust does not mean, you know, kama does n..., n..., not, sorry, lust, the word
kama may be used. But kama does not refer to lust as we know it here. So,
similarly, "sṛjāmi", the word is used, the point is the Lord manifests Himself.
The Lord is, it is not that the Lord's form is created. In the previous verse,
only, here, said there, the Lord, is it, form is eternal. "avyayātmā". "ajaḥ".
"prakṛtiṁ svām". So, He has made things very clear. Now, Prabhupada explains
then, what is dharma. So then, at one level, dharma means transcendental nature.
But Prabhupada also says:

        dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam

So, dharma is that which is given by God. "bhagavat-pranitam". This is the
definition which, you know, comes in the Sixth Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam when
Yamaraja is instructing, you know, the whole passing of Ajamil come. And
Yamaraja, yamadutas, Vishnudatas. There are various discussions going on over
there. Now, you know, the principles of God, there are spec..., there are
prin..., there, there are specifics which may vary. But the essential principle
is the same. And the essential message is the same. That the Lord wants the
souls to return back to Him. The Lord wants the souls who are His children, who
have gone away from Him to return back to Him. And for that purpose, whatever is
required, He is, whatever is required, He does that. So, He creates, He gives
dharm..., He gives scriptures. He gives the various, you know, spiritual
manifestations such as holy places, holy names, holy days. But along with that,
He also gives many other things that is He gives essentially the principle of,
you know, His own manifestation. So, Prabhupada writes in the purport that He,
so, He incarnates, some "srjami". "srjamy aham". So, he says that in this,
Prabhupada says, it is not only that the Lord Himself comes. So, Prabhupada
says, it, Prabhupada includes Buddha, also, in this. Hmm:

"Sometimes He descends personally, and sometimes He sends His bona ﬁde
representative in the form of His son, or servant, or Himself in some disguised
form."

So, he descends personally, that is referring to the incarnation of Krishna. He
sends His bona fide representative in the form of His son. So, here, Prabhupada
is referring to Jesus. And sometimes, in some disguised form. So, that is
referring to Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, channa-avatar. And now, Prabhupada gives
that that, actually, the mission is the same. Although externally, the mission
may appear to be different. So, he gives the example of Buddha. Contextually,
circumstantially, because of the kind of mentality in, you know, soc..., you
know, culture that was present at His times, Buddha had to superficially reject
the Vedas. But eventually, his purpose was to elevate people. So, he rejected
the Veda externally. But he made people follow certain principles. Which he was
giving. And so, he is then God. So, by following him, also people become
elevated. You know, at least from the lower modes to goodness. So, now, here,
the Lord's incarnations are described as many. In fact, the Bhagavatam says the
Lord's incarnations are innumerable. There are as many as are the waves in an
ocean. Why are the Lord's incarnations unlimited? Because His love for us is
unlimited. And that is why, you know, "sambhavāmi yuge yuge". That will come in
the next verse. "yuge yuge". Every yuga, He will keep coming. Again. And again.
And again. So, this actually reveals Krishna's compassion far more than the idea
that of certain exclusivist religions. That this particular person is the last
messenger of God. This particular person is the only way to God. So, these
ideas, they, you know, actually do not do justice to the glory of God. Because
if God is great. God is infinite. Then, why will God make the way to Him only
one? And restrict it? Only this much, nothing more. So, that does not make,
un..., unfortunately, does not make, you know, sense. And it not only does not
make intellectual sense. Even to the heart, it p..., p..., it depicts the idea
of God as, you know, being very narrow. You know, m..., limiting access to
certain, limiting access to Him, to only, to certain times, certain people. Who
can get co..., con..., connected with those other people. Who are connected with
God. So, yes, yes. Now, it is true that certainly that there is a way to return
to God. And not that anybody does anything and that one will return, that person
will go back to God. But the love of God that is to be developed, that is not a
monopolised commodity of any particular registration. That is available, you
know, through various manifestations for different people according to time,
place, circumstance. So, this is a universalist verse. Krishna is saying "yadā
yadā". So, that is actually, that is a very important point. And wherever and
whenever. So, that is why it is not that the, Krishna is saying, I am the only
incarnation. Krishna is saying that, oh, wherever and whenever, there is
decline, I will appear. So, it is a very inclusivist verse. Which talk, which
points to the broad mission of the Lord. That is to restore dharma. And He says,
wherever it will decline, I will come. And through that, I will elevate people.
So, now, Prabhupada says that, w..., you know, that there may be some
differences in religions. So, how do we understand those differences in
religions? Prabhupada says that there are higher and lower principles. Now,
there, they, you can say there is exoteric. And there is esoteric. So, exoteric
is external. Esoteric is internal. So, the exoteric ideas will differ. Exoteric
forms will differ. For example, if we see, the hindus fold their hands and offer
respects to God. The muslims raise their hands forward and offer namaz. The
Christians may do mass.

So, now, the forms, externally, are different. But the principle of offering
respect to God is the same. The principle is the same that we all offer respect
to God. So, you know, the, if we focus only on the externals, the exoterics, oh,
they are doing like this. We are doing like this. Therefore, they are different.
We are different. Their God is different. Our God is different. We focus on
externals, then we misunderstand. So, the externals are different. No doubt. But
there can be a lot of difference in externals. Because these arise to this, are
provided according to culture. So, you know, the internal is the same. The
internal is the pres..., pri..., is the principle of offering respect to God.
And showing our devotion to God. So, in this way, we understand that this is a
unive..., this is aspect of the Bhagavad Gita which is universal. Krishna is
saying, wherever and whenever I come, I come. A, whenever there is the decline
of religion, I come. So:

"The whole purpose of the mission of incarnations is to arouse Kṛṣṇa
consciousness everywhere. Such consciousness is manifest and nonmanifest only
under different circumstances."

That means, arouse Krishna Consciousness, Prabhupada is taking the whole
discussion at a deeper level. And he is saying that, Krishna Consciousness is
also present. But it just has to be aroused. It is not that Krishna
Consciousness has to be created. The soul has a nature to be Krishna
Conscious. So, here, Krishna Consciousness, you know, can also be used
generically to mean God consciousness. Everybody has some level of God
consciousness. At least at the dormant level. In a different circumstance,
manifest and unmanifest. So, now, let us look at the next verse.

        paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ
        vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām
        dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya
        sambhavāmi yuge yuge

So, "paritrāṇāya". "paritrāṇāya" means to deliver. "trāṇā" means to deli....,
like we have mantra, manas trayate iti mantra, that which delivers the mind.
It is called mantra. So, "paritrāṇāya" is for the deliverance of the devotee.
"paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ". "vināśāya". For delivering the devotees. For delivering
the sadhus. And destroying the dushkritis. "vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām". Of the
miscreants. "dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya". "saṁsthāpana" is establish. "arthāya" is
for that purpose. So, to be, establish dharma. "sambhavāmi yuge yuge".
"sambhavāmi". I appear. So, Krishna is telling three purposes here. In the
previous verse, He said the time when He appears. And now, He says, three
purposes. So, so when there is adharma, what is going to happen? Actually, it is
not that adharma is something avo..., afo..., amorphous. Ok. There is clouds in
the sky. And, you know, there is a, is, adharma is not like that. There are
people who are adharmic. Adharma, this does not automatically arise. There are
people who are adharmic who propagate adharma. And there are people who are
dharmic who practice and propagate dharma. So, when adharma arises, that means
that adharmic people grab power. And when they grab person, they persecute
dharma. So, when they persecture dharma, at that time, the adharmic people,
they, you know, you know, create trouble for the dharmic people. So, they become
tormented. So, "paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ". So, those devo..., those people who are
practicing dharma, those who are troubled. So, Krishna comes to protect them.
So, like when Lord Rama appeared, at that time, what was the situation? Ravana
was tormenting the devatas. He had defeated Indra. You know, with the help of
his son, Indrajit. Then, he had also defeated, even he had also fought with
Yamaraja. And Yamaraja also had to withdraw. Not because Yamaraja was defeated.
But because Brahmaji told him to withdraw in order to honor the promise that
Brahmaji had given to Ravana. But the point here is that he had practically no,
no challenge left for him. He was going around tormenting people. Tormenting the
spiritually minded, devotionally minded people. The spiritually inclined people.
So, those who were devatas, they were troubled by Ravana. And similarly, the
hon..., the earthly planetary system, also. The rsis, they were troubled by
Ravana. So, when all this was happening, at that time, what did Ravana do?
Ravana was thinking that I am the unconquered ruler. And I can go anywhere. And
do anything. So, people were living in terr..., in terror of him. So, Lord Rama
appeared. And, you know, when he was in the forest, he came to a place called
Ramtek. And he saw there actually a pile of bones. And they were human bones.
And yeah. What is this? Say, yes, there, said. But these are actually
rakshashas. Rakshashas are common. There are many rsis who were doing
meditation. But those rakshashas are cannibals. They eat up the rsis. And their
bones are lying over here. So, Lord Rama picked up his bow. And he took a vow.
He says, I will read the word of the rakshashas. These demoniac rakshashas who
are c..., threatening dharma. So, Prabhu..., so, Lord, Lord wants to
"paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ". And then, "vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām". So, for protecting the
devotees, what has to be done is destruction of the demons. "duṣkṛtām". And
then, afterwar..., after that, what? Now, when "vināśā", "duṣkṛtām" does not
mean necessarily that everybody has to be created, cre..., you know, everybody
has to be destroyed. What it means is that "vināśāya", "duṣkṛtām" means that
those who are demoniac, they have to be destroyed. So, when Lord Rama, you know,
devastated, you know, destroyed Ravana and, you know, defeated Ravana's horse.
So, he did not destroy Lanka entirely. What did he do? He re-established dharma
by having the dharmic Vibhishana be established over there.

So, the Lord's goal is to "dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya". So, He does what is
required to re-establish dharma. Krishna Himself, He had Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja
establishes the king. So, by which, "dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya". So, for this
purpose, "sambhavāmi yuge yuge". Now, Prabhupada starts the purport by
explaining who is a sadhu. So, he says, a sadhu is one who is in Krishna
Consciousness. And then, there are demons. So, now, Prabhupada explains, now,
initial..., interesting point over here. He says:

"the Lord especially descends to appease His unalloyed devotees, who are always
harassed by the demoniac."

So, now, here, Prabhupada makes an interesting point that the pur..., that is,
there is a primary purpose. And there is secondary purpose. So, the primary
purpose of the Lord's descend is to satisfy the devotees. The devotees long to
see Him. And especially when troubles come in this world. Then, the devotees'
eagerness, desperation to have the shelter of the Lord. To have the darshan of
the Lord increases all the more. So, with that in mind, they, to satisfy His
devotees, the Lord appears. And as an incidental result, byproduct, the Lord
kills the demons, also. So, the Lord does not have to come to kill the demons.
And Ravana is bragging about his strength, pumping his chest. At that
time, the Lord is present in the heart of Ravana, also. He can just give a heart
attack. Aaa. He is pumping his chest when He collapse into hypochonder itself.
You know. The Lord comes because the devotees want to behold Him. And the
devotees want to relish His pastimes. So, those devotees who are present at that
time. They get His darshan. They get His sangha. And other devotees present at
other times also get His sangha by means of hearing about His pastimes. That
will come in the next verse. Now, Prabhupada quotes about avatāra. Avatāra
science, practically speaking, is talked about in Laghu-Bhāgavatāmr̥ta.
Laghu-Bhāgavatāmr̥ta is a book which is written by Rupa-Goswami based on the
teachings that Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave to the goswamis on the whole
principle of various avatāras. So, in the Madhya-līlā, Chapter 16, 17, 18, Lord
Caitanya Mahāprabhu meets, goes to Vrindavan. He decides to go to Vrindavan.
Travels to Vrindavan. Reaches Vrindavan. And Chapter 19, he meets Rupa Goswami.
And then, Chapter 20, he meets Sanatana Goswami. And the Chapters 20 to 25, 24,
is his instructions to Sanatana Goswami. So, now, Prabhupada quotes from that
section. Now, so, all, especially, his instructions to Sanatana Goswami are
about avatāra. So, Rupa and Sanatana, when they went to V..., Vrindavan. And
they wrote books together. Sanatana Goswami told Rupa Goswami all that
Caitanya Mahāprabhu had told him. And then, Rupa Goswami wrote that in the book
Laghu-Bhāgavatāmr̥ta. So, you know, here, from Madhya-līlā, he is quoting over
here. "sṛṣṭi-hetu yei".

        sṛṣṭi-hetu yei mūrti prapañce avatare
        sei īśvara-mūrti ‘avatāra’ nāma dhare

        māyātīta paravyome sabāra avasthāna
        viśve avatari’ dhare ‘avatāra’ nāma

So, "sṛṣṭi-hetu yei mūrti". "sṛṣṭi-hetu" means this is for, for the sake of
material manifestation. So, one, who manifests at the material level, "mūrti
prapañce avatare". That form which appears in "prapañce". "prapañce" is material
existence. So, "sṛṣṭi-hetu". For the sake of material appea..., app..., a...,
manifestation. That "avatāra" which comes here is called as "sei īśvara-mūrti
‘avatāra’ nāma dhare". So, that form of the Lord called as "avatāra". "māyātīta
paravyome". So, "māyā", "māyādin". And "māyātīta". "ātīta" means beyond. "din"
is under. So, "māyātīta" in the "paravyome". "paravyome" refers to the spiritual
world. From that spiritual world, which is "māyātīta". Which is beyond the realm
of "māyā". "sabāra avasthāna". All, "avasthāna" means si..., situation. So, all
the "avatāras" are situated in that spiritual world. "viśve avatari’ dhare
‘avatāra’ nāma". "viśve avata...", "avatari’ dhare", matlav, means "viśve". In
this world. "avatari’ dhare". That which descends. That form which descends
called "‘avatāra’ nāma". So, here, we have to understand the point. Wha...,
"avatāra" means avatāriti iti avatāra. So, that which descends from the
spiritual realm to the material realm is called as "avatāra". So, the Lord
eternally exists in His f..., original spiritual forms in the spiritual world.
But that particular times in history, the Lord chooses to descend to this world.
So, those forms which are manifested in this world are called as "avatāras". So,
when the Lord manifests, what all does He do? So, Prabhupada talks about four
different kinds of avatāras here. S..., so, "puruṣāvatāras". This is fr...,
again from the Laghu-Bhāgavatāmr̥ta and Caitanya-caritāmṛta, both.
"puruṣāvatāra", "guṇāvatāra", "līlāvatāra", "śakty-āveśa avatāra",
"manvantara-avatāra", and "yugāvatāra". So, "puruṣāvatāra" refers to the three
"puruṣā"s. Mahavishnu, "Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu", and "Kṣīrodakaśāyī Vishnu". So,
these three "avatāras", Mahavishnu, "Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu", "Kṣīrodakaśāyī
Vishnu", they are the, you know, "avatāras" that look after the manifestation of
material nature. They interact with "prakṛtiṁ". And "puruṣā" and "prakṛtiṁ" are
considered to s..., two ele..., primary elements in sankhya. So, the, through
the interaction of "puruṣā" and "prakṛtiṁ", "puruṣā" is the, is the, is
consciousness. And "prakṛtiṁ" is material nature. So, through the interaction of
"puruṣā" and "prakṛtiṁ", various things happen in this world. So,
"puruṣāvatāras" are these three. The Vishnu murtis. M..., and they are among the
various incarnations. They are quite directly connected with the material world.
"puruṣāvatāra". How are they connected? Not that they are material. But they are
connected with the material world. They are connected with the process of
creation. We will discuss about "puruṣāvatāra" once again when we discuss
a little bit of sankhya in the Seventh Chapter. Then, "guṇāvatāras" refers to
those manifestations of the Lord who supervise the modes. So, Brahma, Vishnu and
Mahesh. Often, this is the world trimurti. Or trinity is usually described them.
So, what is this trimurti? Actually, they are three forms who look after various
aspects of the material existence. So, the material existence is governed by the
three modes of material nature. And Lord Shiva is in charge of the mood of
ignorance. He is not ignorant. Manyu. He is himself, you know, extremely
powerful devata. So, then, there is Lord Shiva, who, apart from Lord Shiva, who
in the mo..., who, who supervises the mood of passion. There is Lord Brahma. Who
creates and who is supervisor of the mood of goodness. And Lord Vishnu
himself, he is supervisor of the mode of, sorry, Brahamaji is passion. And
Lo..., and Lord Vishnu is goodness. So, like that, these are, three are
"guṇāvatāras".

Then after that, there is "līlāvatāra". So, "līlāvatāra" refers to those
manifestations of the Lord who pa..., come to perform particular pastimes. Then,
there is "śakty-āveśa avatāras". So, "līlāvatāra", and before that, means that
the "līlāvatāras", they just perform pastimes. They may or they may not teach
Yuga Dharma. So, for example, Krishna Himself is not a yuga avatāra. Now, He,
Krishna descends, He is a "līlāvatāra". Lord Rama is also "līlāvatāra". He is
not a yuga avatāra. Yuga avatāra refers to that avatāra which actually teaches
Yuga Dharma. So, for Kali Yuga, the Yuga Dhar..., Yuga Dharma is Harinam
Sankirtana. And the teacher of Yuga Dharma is Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So,
Krishna, you know, now, He, it is not that, what is the Yuga Dharma of the age
when Krishna appeared?

        dvāpare paricaryāyāṁ

        tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ

So, in Dvāpara-yuga, "paricaryā". That is deity worship. So, deity worship is,
a, taught by the Lord? Yes, definitely. He were, in Bhagavad Gita, He teaches
that. But that is only one of the many teachings that are given in the Gita. And
when the Yuga Dharma is to be taught, Yuga Dharma is taught at the start of the,
you know, Yuga. It is not started, the, taught at the end of the Yuga. So, Lord
Ra..., Krishna comes at the end. So, Krishna is a Yuga a..., a..., "līlāvatāra".
Now, of course, as a part of the līlā, He may give teachings, also. For example,
He teaches Bhagavad Gita over here. So, the "līlāvatāra" performs pastimes. And
one of the pastimes may also be teaching, educating. So, that is fine. But the,
the, that, that is category, differentiation between "līlāvatāra" and "yuga
avatāra" is that what is the primary focus. The primary purpose is to teach
dharma, by teaching dharma, teaching the Yuga Dharma, one may do "līlā", also.
Or the primary tea..., purpose may be to teach "līlā", al..., "līlā",
demonstrate "līlā". And then, while mostly teaching "līlā", some dharmic
principle will also be taught. That will become "līlāvatāra". When there is
"śakty-āveśa avatāra". "śakty-āveśa" refers to a living entity who is empowered
by the Supreme Lord. The living entity is empowered by the Supreme Lord. Then,
that per..., that person is called as "śakty-āveśa avatāra". And then,
"manvantara-avatāra". "manvantara-avatāra" refers to those "avatāras" who appear
in every millenia. In every manus. In..., intervene. And they helping to
establish Yuga Dharma periodically. So, now, Prabhupada talks f..., about Lord
Caitanya. And he says how Lord Caitanya is  maha-vadanyaya. He does not do
"vināśāya", "duṣkṛtām". He actually purifies the "duṣkṛtām". He gives them the
process of Krishna Consciousness. Encourages them to practice their spiritual
life. And thereby, purify themlves. So, he is maha vadanya. He does not kill
anyone. Now, let us move forward to the next verse. Hmm.

        janma karma ca me divyam
        evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ
        tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma
        naiti mām eti so ’rjuna

So, in this verse, Krishna is telling that "naiti mām eti". That such people,
they do not come back here. But they come to Me. "mām eti so ’rjuna". Those
people. That person. Krishna is using singular over here. "janma karma ca me
divyam". One who understands that My "janma" and "karma". My birth and my
activities are "divyam". "divyam" means transcendental. Such people, "evaṁ yo
vetti tattvataḥ". They understand it in truth. "tyaktvā dehaṁ". When they give
up their body. "punar janma", "eti". When they give up their body, they do not
come back to this world again. They come back to Me. So, if we look at Srila
Prabhupada's teachings. Srila Prabhupada actually quotes this 4.9 much more than
4.7 and 8. Although, other people may quote 4.7 and 8. "sambhavāmi yuge yuge".
"sṛjāmy aham". So, they are important verses. And they can be quoted. But
Prabhupada's quo..., the way, a, the frequency and the regularity with which he
quoted certain verses, that itself is of significance depending on what was the
context of that particular time. And what was the contemplation that Srila
Prabhupada was having based on which he spoke certain things. All this has to be
understood. So, now, you know, when people have materialistic conception of
religion, materialistic conception of religion means, their idea is, the purpose
of God's existence is to look after us. And they think that this world is a
place, for which, we, we, in which we are supposed to perform pastimes. And God
is meant to protect us. So that we can perform our pastimes here. So, we want to
enjoy here. And God's business is to make sure to provide for our enjoyment.
That is the idea. So, for, with that purpose in mind, people think, oh, God's
purpose is to come here and restore dharma here. And if there is, if things are
ok, well, then, God is not required. Then, we say, God, You will stay there. We
will stay here. You will be happy there. We will be happy here. You do not
interfere with my life. People think like that. But, yes, Krishna does come here
and restores dharma. But the purpose of restoring dharma is not so that we can
enjoy over here. Actually, the purpose of restoring dharma is so that we can go
back to Krishna. So, that is why when we understand this complete, i..., system
of the Lord's arrangement. Yes, the Lord does provide us some arrangement by
which we can, by which our life over here can be taken care of. But after that,
you know, important thing is that we ultimately return back to the Lord. So,
"janma karma ca me divyam". This verse says how we can return back to the Lord.
And by become..., understanding the Lord's activities and pastimes as "divyam".
We can return back to Him. So, this verse actually describes the ultimate
purpose of the Lord. The purpose of the Lord's coming here is to
"dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya". But what is the purpose of
"dharma-saṁsthāpanā"? What after that? Th..., if the purpo..., after the
"dharma-saṁsthāpanā" is done, then the soul should take shelter of Him. And by
taking shelter of Him, they will return back to Him. And that is the ultimate
goal of life. This verse has many significant points. So, first is "divyam".
Now, the word, see, there can be, m..., you know, the word "divyam" can mean two
different things in different places. It can mean celestial. Or it can mean
spiritual. So, there is terrestrial, celestial, and spiritual. Terrestrial
refers to earthly. Terrestr..., territ..., so, then celestial refers to
heavenly. It does not necessarly have to refer to the spiritual. So, anything
higher than the, you know, earthly can ref..., can be referred to by various
names. So, celestial refers to va..., sva..., svarga loka. That is celestial.
Similarly, chandra loka, that is celestial. But spiritual is that which is
beyond the three modes. That which is entirely transcendental. That which is not
perceived by our senses right now. So, when Krishna is using the word "divyam",
He is not referring to His activities, thus celestial. And certainly not
terrestrial. They are not just earthly, nor are they heavenly. They are
transcendental. That is why Prabhupada says, one who understand, knows the
transcendental nature of my birth and activities. My appearance and activity.
"janma" and "karma". So, what is transcendental about His activities? So:

        apare vasudevasya
        devakyāṁ yācito ’bhyagāt
        ajas tvam asya kṣemāya
        vadhāya ca sura-dviṣām

So, Kuntī Maharani in her prayers, there are many prayers which say that, that
actually, it is so wonderful that you are unborn. And yet, you take birth from
the womb of Devaki. So, how is it possible? When Kri..., Vasudeva and Devaki
were in trouble. They were distressed. They called out to you. And you appeared
through their, you know, through them, through the womb of Devaki. How did that
happen? So, actually, what he says over here is that that is because You are
transcendental. You know, what child is born with hair on the head? And nicely
decorated in clothes and with a necklace, and everything around, all
paraphernalia that are nicely dressed, royal child may have. And not only that,
not what o..., ordinary child may have, some more, also. This child was born
with four legs. And those two extra were not appendages which have come because
of some genetic deformity. Sometimes, we feel perhaps some six fingers coming
out instead of five. Some genetic misfiring happens, gen mutation happens
because the six finger may come up. So, those were these extra appendage, that
is. So, Krishna's true arms, when, you know, one sees Vishnu forms, they are
not like extra appendages that have come because of a genetic misfiring. They
were manifestation of transcendental glory. They were completely beautiful,
extraordinarily transcendentally all-attractive. And that because He, that is
also Krishna Himself. So, Krishna says, he one who understands my nature to be
transcendental. You know, that person comes back to Me. So, when we talk about
Krishna, we have to understand that, you know, Krishna's activities are
transcendental. You know, when people do not understand Krishna's activities to
be transcendental, then they see them as just sources of entertainment. What
does sources of entertainment mean? So, when some children do some mischievous
activities. So, m..., the l..., la..., a, the la..., ladies, the relatives of the
child. You know. They may all like to talk. You know, what that child did that
time? You know what he did? Oh, you do not know what he did? I will tell you.
And they are excited talking about it. It is good that, you know, parental love
for children among the parents as well as other relatives. That is nice to see.
But beyond that, there is something higher. What is that higher? That actually,
Krishna's activities are not just like that. This is God Himself. And He is
concealing His divinity so that love can range Supreme. What is Krishna doing?
Krishna is concealing His divinity so that love can rain Supreme. Krishna is
Himself God. But He does not delight in being God. He delights in simply loving
His devotees and letting His devotees love Him. And absorbing Himself in that
world of love. So, for that purpose, Krishna conceals His divinity. And Krishna
acts like a small child. So, when we understand that this is God. Then, the
level of appreciation for Krishna-līlā increases enormously. Increases
enormously. You know, a, if we go to some, a, say, slum area. And we see that
over there, you know, some children are just playing. And they, then they are
studying. And there is one child who looks quite clean. Well-dressed. And he is
there. And he is playing with those children. And he is also, you know, you
know, studying with them. And he is teaching them. We want to know, who is this
child. And then, we come to know that, actually, he is the Prime Minister's
child. So, what are you doing here? So, he says no. He just wants to be friends.
He wants to help those children. That is why he is coming there.

So, when we just see the actions, there may be some curiosity. But when we
understand the position of the person who is doing the action. Then, the action
acquires so much more meaning. Oh, the Prime Minister's child is doing like
this. Who is training? The Prime Minister is training. Very special values this
person has got. So, actions, who is doing the action, the position of the person
doing the action makes a huge difference. So, therefore, when Krish..., so,
when just some children are playing, stealing butter, or at the, herding the
cows. Ok, that is fine. Nice to hear about. But when we understand God does
this. Then, my God, it co..., a, fo..., completely different dimension comes
upon. God does like this. Why does God do like this? So, the fi..., first time
when the Europeans came to India. And they started con..., they co..., they took
political rule of India over period of times. And then, when they went into
North India towards Mathura Vrindavan and even Bengali, they saw these pictures
of Krishna stealing butter. And those were, they sa..., they would hear about
this. You know. Who is this? So, this is God. Now, in their tradition, the idea
of God was a stern-looking person who sits high in the clouds and sends
thunderbolts down. Which send the sinful down reeling to hell to burn in the
fires forever, eternal damnation. So, the idea of God was a stern-being who
punished the sinful. So, the idea of the small child being God was just too
difficult to digest. And then, after that, the idea, he said that, ok, what is
he doing? You know, Krishna would have His hands in the butter pot. And with the
hands, maybe sticking that butter. Maybe, the lips will also be sticking the
butter. He is stealing butter. What? He says, the God? Stealing butter? You
know, first of all, why does God have to steal? And stealing is immoral. You
know, in the Bible, one of the command may say, daosal, not steal. Daosal, not
steal. And here, so, God is telling everyone do not steal. But God Himself is
stealing. What is this? And then, if you have to steal, also. You know, you have
some class. You know, small thieves, small, steal small things. Big thieves
steal big things. So, why butter? Butter is not what is stealing, also. You
know. You know. So, they just got completely intellectually short-circuited.
They just could not understand. What is this happening? So, actually, Krishna
does not have to steal anything at all. Everything belongs to Him. So, even if
He takes something from someone, that is not actually stealing. Because
everything, whatever whoever has, that ultimately belongs to Krishna. You know,
if I take some money from one pocket and then put in another pocket. Is that
stealing? No, the money belong to me, only. So, from one pocket, I put it to
another. So, it, so, like that, Everything belongs to Krishna. So, if He takes
it from one place and puts in another place, then He is not stealing at all. And
then, beyond that, actually, in the virata-rupa is shown that everything is
inside Him only. So, the butter pot is also inside Him, only. So, if what is
inside Him, but in, in the "līlā", it is manifest outside. But if He takes the
butter pot, takes the butter from it and puts it inside Him. What is the
difference? Everything belongs to Him, only, ultimately. In fact, not only
everything belongs to Him. Everything resides inside Him, in his virata-rupa.

So, Krishna performs this kind of pastimes for the sake of love. You know, He,
when He takes the role of a child, of a in..., baby child, what He does is, He
acts in a way that will attract the heart of His devotees to Him. So, Krishna,
k..., subordinates, Krishna subordinates His position as God. So that He can
reciprocate love with His devotees. So, by reciprocating love with His devotees,
He can actually go deeper and deeper into the world of love. So, He is God. But
He conceals Himself as God. So, if we want to understand this, then consider the
example for drama. You know, in a drama, there is a, there are various actors.
But there is one, the hero. Then, there is a director. And there is
scriptwriter. So, scriptwriter writes, ok, this is the storyline. And the
director says, ok, for this story, we have to dress like this. Make the
setting like this. Do the actions like this. And then, the hero acts. So, when,
if we want to understand Krishna's pastimes, you know, this metaphor of a drama
is good. You know. You know. The, Krishna is the hero. So, Krish..., the
yoga-maya is the director. Now, the yog..., word yoga-maya is an o...,
oxymoron. In English, oxymoron means those words, o, x, y, m, o, r, o, n.
Oxymoron means those words which have two contradictory senses brought together.
So, for example, somebody says that that person is a courageous coward. You
know. How can somebody be a courageous coward? He is either courageous or the
, co..., cowardly. Or somebody says that person is a stu..., is an intelligent
fool. He cannot be intelligent fool. Or somebody says that that person is a
chaste prostitute. Now, how can somebody be chaste and prostitute both? So, and
so, when there are contradictory, you know, words brought together, that is
called as oxymoron. So, yoga-maya, the word yoga-maya is actually an oxymoron.
Why? Because maya refers to illusion. And yoga refers to connection. So, c...,
a, illusion means we are disconnected from God. And yoga connection is we get
connected with God. So, the whole purpose of yoga is to come out of maya. Be,
practice yoga to come out of maya. And when we are in maya, we cannot practice
yoga. You know, when we are chanting Hare Krishna. You know. You know. We want
to be in yoga. But often, we go into maya. We start looking here and there.
What, who is doing what? You know, we are attentive to everyone's chanting
except our own chanting. That, phew, that person is sleeping. That person is not
pronouncing properly. That person is looking here and there. But we are looking
everyone else. So, what is happening? Instead of yoga, we are in maya at that
time. So, maya and yoga are normally opposite. But yoga-maya, when both the
words are brought together, that is, creates a sort of oxymoron. But it is not a
meaningless oxymoron. It is meaningful. Why? If there is one kind of maya, that
is a worldly maya. Which is called as maha-maya. Which makes us forget Krishna.
And puts us into sense gratification. Puts us into material consciousness where
we become utterly disconnected from Krishna. There is another kind of maya.
That is yoga-maya. Which makes us forget Krishna. Not in the sense that we go
into materialistic illusion. But it makes us forget Krishna's supreme position.
So, when we forget Krishna's supreme position, then that does not mean that we
no longer are connected with Krishna. Rather, that connection with Krishna
deepens. Because Yashoda Mayi cannot love Krishna as intensely as she does if
she remembers Krishna is God. You know, Krishna is, if she thinks Krishna is
God, then God does not need my breast milk. God does, I do not have to take care
of God. God has to take care of me. So, hmm, Yashoda Mayi, is sh..., does she
know that Krishna is God? In the background, somewhere, the vrajavasis know that
Krishna is God. But that is not in the foreground. Just like in the sky, even in
the daytime, the stars are there. But the Sun is so bright that the stars are no
longer seen. So, like that, the facts, the spiritual facts of Krishna's
supremacy, they are there. But they are in the background in the consciousness
of the vrajavasis. When required, they come to the foreground sometimes. So, in
the Gopi Gita, the gopis s..., say that, yes, Krishna, we know that you are God.
That actually, you know, it was by the prayer of Brahmaji that you have
appeared.

        vikhanasārthito viśva-guptaye
        sakha udeyivān sātvatāṁ kule

So, they are saying, we no. "vikhanasārthito". "vikhanasārthito" goes to
Brahmaji. "ārthito". When he was distressed. A, "viśva-guptaye". For the sake of
protection of the world. Same point were "dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya".
"viśva-guptaye". "sakha udeyivān sātvatāṁ kule". "u...". "udeyivān". You have
arisen. Like, Suryodha. Sun rises. So, like that, "udeyivān". You have arisen in
"sātvatāṁ kule". In the Sātvata dynasty. So, they are, know that Krishna is God.
But even in, while they are talking about how He is the Supreme Lord who is
prayed to, you know, by Brahmaji. They are also still using the word. "sakha
udeyivān". "sakha". "sakha" means "sakha". You are our friend. So, the gopis,
they are aware of Krishna's supreme position. But that not, awareness is
subordinated, is put aside so that they focus on Krishna as their beloved. So,
the yoga-maya means that energy which makes the soul forget Krishna's position
so as to enhance devotion. "maha-maya" is that energy which makes the soul
forget Krishna's position by which devotion becomes not enhanced, but cut down.
You know, it becomes d..., decreased, even eliminated. So, now, why are we
talking about all this? We are trying to understand the concept of "līlā". So,
Krishna is, Krishna is the Supreme Lord. And He is all-attractive. So, but He
subordinates His power, His position, so that love can flow through, you know,
uninhibited, und..., unrestricted. So:

        aiśvarya-śithila-preme na aiśvarera priya

Krishnadasa Kaviraja Goswami says that, when there is awareness of aiśvarya.
You know, awareness of Krishna's greatness, then "śithila". That makes the
"preme" la..., love lax. The love cannot flow as forcefully as enthusiastically.
And Krishna, re..., Krishna does not like that love so much. Krishna likes
spontaneous love. Which is not inhibited by the fact of His divinity, of His
supremacy. So, what Krishna does is, He makes the knowledge covered of the
vrajavasis. So that they can re..., reciprocate love. So, the, a, Krishna is the
actor. Yoga-maya is a director. So, now, in a movie, who is in control? Is the
actor in control? Director in control? The director. D..., director does act,
act like this. Punch the face like this. Do like this. Do like that. And the
actor does. So, then, if Krishna is controlled by yoga-maya. Then, how is
Krishna supreme? Krishna is God. And God means, He should be supreme. So, if
Krishna is controlled by yoga-maya, how is He supreme? Because, I said, there
is, there is the, there is actor who is acting on direction of the scri...,
director. But the director, he is directing based on a script. That script is
written by the scriptwriter. And the scriptwriter is Krishna Himself. The
scriptwriter is Krishna Himself. So, that means the whole pastime is happening
according to Krishna's will. And yoga-maya is directing Him. And yoga-maya is
directing the other devotees, also. So, then, this way, Krishna is
simultaneously not in control and in control. As the actor, you know, when
Krishna is being a, m...., chased by mother Yashoda. Because He is, you know,
because he has stolen butter. At that time, Krishna is not thinking I am God.
Who is going to catch Me? Krishna is actually afraid. When Krishna wants to, you
know, relish Pathshala rasa wi..., w..., with his devotees. Very, He actually
feels like a small child. He is not just doing an act. He actually feels like a
small child. He is not just m..., faking it. He is feeling it. And how is He
feeling it? That is via yoga-maya. So, He is wondering. Will Yashoda catch me?
No. No. I cannot, better catch me. I must run fast. She is coming this way. I
will go this way. Which, let us have a, later on this, so she is not able to
catch me. So, He is actually planning it, trying His best to stay away. He is
running. Running. Running. So, all, when Krishna enters into a particular role,
He enters completely. And He forgets. But by His plan, whenever He wants, He can
remember. So, He is caught by Yashoda Mayi. And Yashoda Mayi is, after great
effort succeeds in tying Him. And in, and He is not able to break the ropes. But
then, He thinks, oh, you are not, look over. Maṇigrīva, these trees are there.
These trees are there. They are not able to think, they are actually Nalakula,
Manigriva. And my devotee, Narada Muni. Now, how can a small few year old baby
have my devo..., my devotee? Who are His devotees? He remembers that I am the
Supreme Lord. My devotee, I promised that I, I deliver them. So, I must deliver
them now. So, Krishna, by His plan, can He re..., He can remember whatever He
wants. And even forget whatever He wants. He is a scriptwriter. And yoga-maya,
the director directs Him according to the script. So, Krishna is, as far as the
"līlā" is capa..., concerned. When He is in the "līlā". He may not always seem
to be in control. Whatever their, pastime is going, He is in control. He is not
in control. But in tattva, even the "līlā" is happening according to His will,
only. So, He is always in control. You know, but why does Krishna create all
this? So as to have reciprocation of love. So, in this way, actually, love rains
supreme. And when we understand how much Krishna, you know, loves us devotees.
That He even conceals His divinity so that love can flow unhibited. Then, we
understand, oh, such a wonderful God. I want to love this Lord. I want to return
back to Him.

This word happens. When we understand Krishna "tattvataḥ". When we understand
Him in truth. Then, that understanding attracts us to Him. And that
understanding inspires us to direct our love to Him. And by that, we return back
to Him. So, when we understand Him, "tattvataḥ". So, without Krishna tattva,
Krishna "līlā" will appear amusing. Amusing means, oh, good entertainment. Nice
play. Nice story. Good you told me this story. I like to hear about such small
children doing mischief. But with Krishna tattva, Krisna "līlā" becomes amazing.
With, without Krishna tattva, Krishna "līlā" is amusing. With Krishna tattva,
Krishna "līlā" is amazing. Amazing. God does this. My God. It is amazing. Such a
wonderful God. How can God become so tiny? And how can God act in this ways? How
sweet. How endearing. How well-attracting. I want to love such a God. So then,
"māhām eti"

        tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma
        naiti mām eti so ’rjuna

Then, when we give up the body, we return, go back to Krishna. And we never come
back to this world. So, actually, all this happens when we understand who
Krishna is. So, Prabhupada, now, in the purport, quotes from the Brahma-saṁhitā
how:

        advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam

So, Krishna has many many forms. And what is the concept of "līlā"? The
"Puruṣa-bodhinī Upaniṣad", Prabhupada quotes that:

        eko devo nitya-līlānurakto
        bhakta-vyāpī hṛdy antar-ātmā

So, "bhakta-vyāpī hṛdy antar-ātmā". That there is one Lord who perform, who is
constantly performing pastimes. And what kind of pastimes? He is presenting the
heart of His unalloyed devotees who had performed pastimes. And then, the,
Prabhupada quotes many verses over here. So, now, he quotes from, further point,
now. He makes a philosophical point. Ti..., "tat tvam asi". "tat tvam asi" is a
famous Vedic aphorism. In fact, it is considered, Śaṅkarācārya to be one of the
Mahāvākyas. So, what does "tat tvam asi" refer to? So, what the ji..., you, what
the impersonalists say is that "tat tvam asi". That Absolute Truth, you are. So,
they, that say they, you, we have to point ourselves. That, you know, oh, I am
here. I am that Absolute Truth. "tat tvam asi". So, you are God. That is the
esse..., that is what they say it means. But Prabhupada says, this "tat tvam
asi" is to be applied to the incarnations. When Krishna comes to this world, He
appears to be like one of us, only. You know, He also lives this world. He
has family. He has His children. And He has His, you know, kingdom. He seems to
be a, one of us, only. But then, when we look at Him. "tat tvam asi". "tat tvam
asi". You are that. So, that means you are that Absolute Truth. So, when we
poin..., when we understand this way. What the aphorism means. It is not
referring to ordinary living entities. It is referring to the Supreme Lord's
manifestation in this world. That manifestation is still, still the Absolute
Truth. And then, the same point of how by knowing Krishna, we will return back
to Him. That is quoted in the "Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad", also. So, Prabhupada
quotes that. This is a verse which Prabhupada quotes often.

        tam eva viditvāti mṛtyum eti
        nānyaḥ panthā vidyate ’yanāya

So, "tam eva viditvā". By knowing You. "mṛtyum eti". "āti mṛtyum eti". One will
go beyond "mṛtyum". One will go beyond the cycle of birth and, "nānyaḥ panthā".
There is no other path. "vidyate ’yanāya". There is no other path that remains.
And Prabhupada then quotes the famous example of, which Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura will quote. And Prabhupada will also quote frequently that,
you know, dha..., we have to understand Krishna "tattvataḥ". You know, without
understanding "tattvataḥ", we may get theoretical knowledge about Krishna. But
that will not purify or liberate us. That will only keep us bound in material
existence. Those academic scholars may know a lot about Krishna. But they are
like licking a honey bottle from outside. They do not come to know Krishna
"tattvataḥ". They know only Him in, you know, some, this, some, fact..., some
details. They do not know the essence. And they cannot love Krishna. They will
stay on in s..., material existence until they get the mercy of the Lord. So,
later on, in 18.55, Krishna will com..., complement this knowledge. He is
saying, here, we should know mi..., "tattvataḥ". But how can we know Him,
"tattvataḥ"? He will tell in 18.55:

        bhaktyā mām abhijānāti
        yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

So, who can, how can I be known "tattvataḥ" as I am? "bhaktyā mām abhijānāti".
Only by bhakti, we can know Him, Kri..., so, this is what, this verse is
pointing to. That we have to know Krishna in truth. And how we can know Him?
That is by bhakti. So, what that bhakti is, and what are the obstacles to
that bhakti, that Krishna will talk in the next verse which we will discuss in
our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna. 
