Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fpEoR6iSe2E
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=boUxVL0NDZdrX3k63bltdLyuzZZ8MTU0ODQ4NzY0NkAxNTQ4NDAxMjQ2&v=fpEoR6iSe2E&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_063_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_21_to_26_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhakti Shastri, Bhagavad Gita course. We will
continue with the third chapter. We have discussed in the third chapter, the
first two sections. And now, we are going to the third section in the third
chapter. So, we are discussing, essentially, the aspect of the setting an
example for others. So, let us look at this chapter overview. So, we have
discussed the section of practice karma-yoga. Because you are not qualified for
jnana-yoga. If you are not qualified for karma-yoga, also. Then, practice
karma-kanda. Which also involves doing one's duty. And now, 17 to 24, we have
discussed until 20. If you are qualified for jnana-yoga. Still, practice
k..., karma-yoga to set example for others. "loka-saṅgraham evāpi". So, you
know, Krishna turns around, gives, first, He tells the principle that, you know,
act in a detached way. Then, He gives the example of Janaka and others. Now, He
gives the general principle of how those who are leadership positions, they need
to act exemplary. Let us look at the verse.

        yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhas
        tat tad evetaro janaḥ
        sa yat pramāṇaṁ kurute
        lokas tad anuvartate


So, "yad yad ācarati". "ācarati" means to, you know, behave. "ācarati". Act. So,
"śreṣṭhas". "śreṣṭhas" is the great people. The leaders. The exam..., the, those
who are influential in society. Those who have position. Those who are
"śreṣṭhaḥ". "tat tad evetaro janaḥ". The other people act accordingly. "sa yat
pramāṇaṁ kurute". And, "pramāṇam". Therefore, is to standard. You know,
"pramāṇa". We also have "sabda pramāṇa". "pratyakṣa pramāṇa". So, the standard
ways of acquiring knowledge. So, authoritative way. So, whatever standard, they
said. 

        sa yat pramāṇaṁ kurute
        lokas tad anuvartate
        
So, general, people, "anuvartate", they follow that. So, Krishna talks about the
principle of how we a..., cannot act in a, i..., isolated, self-obsessed,
self-concerned way for our own good, even if it is for our spiritual good. We
have to consider what is the effect on others. And we have to, you know, behave
in an exemplary way accordingly. You know, th..., th..., the caliber of a
society can be judged by, there are many ways, but one important way is the
ca..., by the caliber of its heroes. The con..., the kind of people that are
considered i..., ideal, exemplary, heroic. You know, that shapes the character
of the society. India, say, fif..., even fifty years ago, the social and
political leaders, who were striving for independence. And who were striving for
social well-being. They were considered to be the heroes. So, they were, in many
way, models, role models for people. And even if the, many, most of these p...,
you know, political leaders were not spiritually minded, in proper devotional
sense. But still, they were in other, many others ways, exemplary. So, for
example, you know, Gandhi is considered, with father of the nation. And he was
given the title "Mahātmā". So, he was considered to be a person who had, you
know, simplicity. In many ways, he was considered to be a, a person, widely
concerned about others. And he was a model for many people. So, when people have
these kind of models. Then, they shape their behavior accordingly. And today, we
see, if we ask people, in general survey, who are their models. Actually, for
most people, their models will be film stars. Or they will be sport stars. Or
maybe some business magnates. And in the more immediate sense, they may say, ok,
who is my mo..., who is my model? Ok. My, this person who has get, who has got
such a good career. Who has got a, such a good salary. Who has got such a good
position. So, if we look at the level of models that people have, that, that
iself has declined. That itself has not only declined. In some cases, it has
become distorted, also. So, for example, if we look at the entertainment. Even
the entertainment, say, fifty years ago, was much more holistic. Now, in much of
the entertainment, the, what people look for world in most is sensuality,
violence. Sex and violence. So, the hero is reduced to a, often a
one-dimensional character. Who goes around beating other, and beating others,
and, you know, enjoying with women. So, if these are the kind of models that
people find attractive, then that also indicates that their level of
consciousness is declined. So, similarly, it is not just in India. In the West,
also, if we take back the clock for hundred, two hun..., hundred, two hundred years
ago. Then, at the time of American Independence, you know, and thereafter. And
the formative years of that nation. Actually, you know, the models were people
who were, in many ways, exemplary. You know, they were concerned for the
socie..., a, society in general. And they were diligently working for that
purpose according to their capacities. So, when people have, as their models,
those who are, you know if they are spiritually minded, that is the best. But if
they are not spiritually minded, at least those people who are in goodness, who
have concerns beyond the concerns of their own immediate gratification. Then,
that, those models elevate people. Otherwise, the models are such that they,
that, people become degraded.

So, in today's society, sin is considered fashionable. So, for example, in
Bollyword, the movie stars, be, the females, they wear scanty clothes. And then,
the women, in general, for them, in some ways, these become m..., models. And
then, they also start wearing, you know, scanty clothes accordingly. And this
modeling happens in subtle ways, also. For example, you know, in the movies,
when there is vulgarity. When there is exposure of the body and there is an
obscene language, and imaginary. So, when some movie stars, especially females
do that. Then, they are called as, these are bold scenes. Now, actually, it is
not boldness. It is shamelessness. So, but, now, when it is called bold.
Now, everybody wants to be bold. So, by a subtle way, by calling this as bold,
and glamorising this, then people become attracted to this kind of dressing. And
this kind of living. Which, in, you know, many ways, leads to disaster. So,
actually speaking, you know, this kind of, w..., when the third chapter, Krishna
will discuss in, through the date of part of lust. And how lust, you know, is a,
the worst enemy. "nitya-vairiṇā". Eternal enemy of the soul. But you know, when
this is called as bold, then it is only a step maybe in the future, 10-15 years
down the line. People who dress modestly, that kind of dress will be called
as cowardly. So, now, it is not cowardly at all. It is intelligent. It is, so,
to be model, to dress modestly, is actually desirable. So, you know, this sort
o..., the modeling happens at various levels. So, what Krishna is telling over
here is that there are certain people who act as natural leaders. So, He says
that the, for the child especially the parents, the teacher, and then the king.
They are natural leaders in society. The king, you know, of course, this is not
only for the children. Because ultimately, all of us were children in one time.
And all of us have grown up. So, these all create formative influences, you
know, during our growing years. So, then, to the extent, these, the parents, the
teachers, and the leaders, you know, they, the kings, you know, they set a good
example. To that extent, people will be molded accordingly. And if they do not
set a good example, then people will be molded in a distorted way. So,
therefore, it is vitally important that those who are in positions of influence,
they behave in an exemplary way for others. Now, this may lead to the question,
what exactly is em..., exemplary behavior. Somebody may say that, actually, you
know, for we want women's liberation. And therefore, for a woman to dress,
whichever way, she plesad..., pleases, that is exemplary. See, when we talk
about exemplary, there has to be some standard. You know, we cannot just have
a changing norms in society which will decide what is exemplary. We have to have
a universal standard. And that universal standard comes from scripture. So,
therefore, you know, from scripture, we come to know what is the proper
behavior. And then, those who live according to scripture, they can influence
others in an enormous way. You know, enormously influential way. So, therefore,
it is important that scriptures be recognised as standard. And the leaders in
society live according to scripture. And we see, this is a power of good
examples, you know, in the case of George Harrison. When Srila Prabhupada made
George Harrison in "The Beatles", especally George Harrison was receptive among
all the beatles. And Prabhupada talked to all of them. Prabhupada quoted this
very verse. This section comes in the, the "līlāmṛta". And there, Srila
Prabhupada explained that, you know, you are so, you know, you are so
well-known. So, you chant Hare Krishna. And you tell about Krishna. And this is
purifying. So, it will benefit people.

So, actually, in the initial days, when, you know, drugs were being introduced
in the West. Many people thought that drugs are the means to higher
consciousness. So, even George Harrison encouraged that in his, his early days.
But later on, now, George Harrison was from Britain. And he was, he was
enormously influential all over the world. Not just in Britain, in America, in
Australia. So, when we he came to America, you know, like thousands and
thousands of fans came to see him. So, the American may have called it as the,
like second conquest of America were Britain. Britain were earlier called,
con..., conquered America. Then, they were driven away. So, but a, when George
Harrison went to the places like New York and San Francisco. New York Lower East
Side or San Francisco Haight-Ashbury, especially New York, San Francisco,
Haight-Ashbury. There, he saw, what had happened because of drugs. You know,
people were, the hippies had not become free. Actually, they had become more
drug addicted. They were living dirty, bedraggled, you know, destitute lives.
They felt guilty at that time. They had some sense of moral responsibility. And
then, when Srila Prabhupada, you know, encouraged them to chant Hare Krishna,
then he did that. He wrote many songs in which he chanted. And the thousands of
people, not just thousands, actually, millions of people were introduced to the
Hare Krishna maha mantra through the songs of George Harrison. So, at one level,
it was George Harrison. Because his, practically, his music was so popular. That
especially in the first world, it went everywhere. You know. And he, to some
extent, even the second, second world, and third world, also, it went in many
places. So, actually, so, Chaitanya Mahāprabhu said that in every town and
village, my holy name will be chanted. To some extent, that happened when Ha...,
George Harrison's mo..., m..., songs went to various parts of the world. And
they were recited over there. The people heard the holy names through that. So,
the point which I am making is mill..., thousands of devotees, thousands of
people were introduced to Krishna Consciousness. And the, many of them became
devotees, also, after that. So, that seminal instruction by Srila Prabhupada set
a good example for others. So, chant Hare Krishna. So, that had a tremendous
influence on so many people's lives. So, that is, of course, with respect to
one's profession. But apart from one's profession, even one's personal life, how
one lives is also important. So, the power of example is far stronger than the
example of power. The power of example means, when people say, somebody is
living accordingly. You know, somebody is, if somebody is satisfied, act, truly
peaceful and joyful. And chanting Hare Krishna. And practicing devotional
service. Then, people around it see it. How is this possible? So hap..., so
peaceful. So joyful. How? I want to know about it. So, the power of example is
far greater than the example of power. Example of power means, there are some
fanatical religions which say that, you have to follow what we are saying.
Either you convert to our religion or we are going to kill you. We will send you
to hell. So, this example of power may lead to some force conversions. But that
is, the heart does not get converted by that. And even if people get converted,
actually, they do not become purified by that. But the exam..., the power of
example is such that it transforms thousands, thousands of people. Srila
Prabhupada was an example. You know, Srila Prabhupada, he was an old man.
And the, practically, at the age of 69-70, when he went to America. And his
l..., last ten years, he traveled tirelessly all over the world, sharing Krishna
Consciousness with so many people. And he, you know, let, he, he had such a
tremendous influence. Because of the example. You know. Devotees could see it.
That Srila Prabhupada, although he was old, many of the hippies, when they met
him, they found that he seems to be younger and more energetic than us. Because
Prabhupada, he, especially, in the first years of his preaching, he was, he had
lived a very regulated life. And he was healthy. He had health issues,
occasionally. But he was healthy. He had so much energy. You know, you could see
that. Oh, this is such an energetic person. So, that itself, that at that old
age, to see so much energy that itself was amazing for most people. And beyond
that, to see not just energy, but such a, you know, a, joy. There was wisdom in
what Srila Prabhupada's book. But along with that, Prabhupada really did joy.
So, that joy which come from, a, came from his love for Krishna. That attracted so
many people.

So, now, we may say, ok, leaders have to set an example. And then, we can start
talking. You know, our temple leader. Or, you know, he does not come at, in the
morning. He does not do this. He does not do that. He does not do that. So, this
verse, we can use it to point fault with our leaders, or without leaders. Oh,
you are, leaders are meant to set examples. You are not setting examples.
However, we have to understand that, actually, every person who has been given
the opportunity to practice Krishna Consciousness is called a point to become a
leader. Now:

        manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu
        kaścid yatati siddhaye

In 7.3, in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says that among thousands of people, one
endeavors about Me. So, somehow, by Krishna's mercy, by devotees' grace, by
Srila Prabhupada's mercy, we have been given the opportunity for practicing
Krishna Consciousness. So, in that sense, we have already been made into
leaders. We may not have many followers. We may not have big influence. But we
are already leaders. So, setting an example is a, is a responsibility of not
just the leaders of the devotee community, or leaders of the social world, it is
the example, it is a, it is a responsibility of every devotee. So, yes, if some
devo..., some leaders are having some unexemplary behavior, then our behavior
should be exemplary. We should be models, not critics. You know, what does it
mean? Models means just this is how, we should be, so we can be as proper in our
sadhana. We can be, a, enthusiastic in our services. And we can set examples
properly. So, the important point is that for us, to be exemplary, let us be
models, not critics. It is easier to be critics. Oh, this person is not
behaving. This person is not behaving. This person is not behaving. Yes, for, we
do not know about the reasons are, why somebody is not behaving exemplarily. You
know, there is, definitely, if somebody is not behaving exemplarily, that is
unin..., you know, that is uninspiring. But rather than be a critic, we can be
a, you know, we can be a l..., model. And we can try to behave in a way that
sets a good example for others. So, when this happens, then, we, each of us can
become, you know, a part of the solution, not a part of the problem. So, this is
what Krishna is calling upon. So, in the context of the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna
is telling Arjuna, that "ācarati śreṣṭhas". That, Arjuna, act in such a way that
you will be able to set an example for others. So, you are going to set a
standard. If you leave the battlefield and go away, people, other people, when
they have difficulties, you know, they have, their duties present them with
difficult situations, they will also say, oh, oh, great person, like Arjuna. He
left the battlefield. He abandoned duty. Why should not, I not abandon it? So,
you will set a bad example for others. So, please do not do that. Now, Krishna
will tell that, He will give one more example of a person who acts to set a good
example. Yes.

        na me pārthāsti kartavyaṁ
        triṣu lokeṣu kiñcana
        nānavāptam avāptavyaṁ
        varta eva ca karmaṇi

So, "na me pārthāsti". Oh, "Pṛthā", there is n..., "nās..", there is no, not
there, "āsti". "nāsti". It is not there. "kartavyaṁ". There is no prescribed
duty for me. "triṣu lokeṣu kiñcana". In all the three worlds, I have no duty.
"nānavāptam avāptavyaṁ". I am not in want of any..., a, thing. "avāptavyaṁ". So,
nor do I want to gain anything. So, want means what we require. And gain means
fu..., further what I want. "varta eva ca karmaṇi". Still, I am engaged in my
duty. So, Krishna has not yet, in the Bhagavad Gita, revealed that He is God.
Although He has revealed in one point, 2.61. When He says "yukta āsīta
mat-paraḥ", fix, my mind, fix your mind on Me. Hmm. So, you know, that indicate
that, He is not just a, a teacher. But He is the Supreme Lord. But that has not
been explicitly s..., explicitly stated. Now, in the general Indian culture, in
the general Vedic culture, it i..., people know that Krishna is God. But here,
in the Bha..., flow of the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna has not revealed Himself as
God in the first person directly. But here, He drew..., He points towards that
when He says "na me pārthāsti kartavyaṁ". There is no duty for me. Now, why is
there no duty for Him? Because He is the Supreme Lord. He is not subordinate to
anyone. So, in fact, there is a well-known Up..., Upanishadic verse which
quot..., which Prabhupada quotes in the purport here. So, it is a long verse.
Let us look at the verse here. This is from the Upanishads. Svetasvatara
Upanisad 6.7–8.

        tam isvaranam paramam mahesvaram
        tam devatanam paramam ca daivatam
        patim patinam paramam parastad
        vidama devam bhuvanesam idyam

So, "tam isvaranam paramam mahesvaram". There are many Isvharas. But among them,
you are the Supreme Maheshvara. "tam devatanam paramam ca daivatam". Among the
various devatas, you are the supreme devata. "patim patinam paramam parastad".
So, He, actually, there are many masters. But He is the Supreme Master. "patim"
can mean master. "patim" can mean husband. "vidama devam bhuvanesam idyam". So,
"bhuvaneśam". So, He is the Lord of all places. And then, the important point.
So, this is talking about the position of the Lord. Now, related to our point.
"na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate". That person has not prescribed duty. "na
tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate". There is no higher authority equal to Him,
or above Him, who will tell. Do this. Do not this. You know, He is the Supreme
Lord. And when He does not have any duty. But when He say, the God is the
con..., God is the controller. And not even a blade of grass move without God's
sanction. So, God is the ultimate cause of all causes. Then, how those, all this
thing happen? If God does not have any duty, then how do all these things
happens? That explain in next part. 

        parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate

So:

        svabhaviki jñana-bala-kriya ca

So, "parāsya śaktir". That Absolute Truth has many many energies. "vividhaiva
śrūyate". "parāsya". There is many energies. And jjust like, say, now, if a
person is a very wealthy, you know, business person, then that person can just
press some buttons. And whatever wants. Ok. Transfer this money from here to
there. Start this business. Sell this business. Purchase that. Whatever wants.
Just press some buttons. And that will happen. So, but..., but.., press buttons
like that. So, "parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate". So, like that. The Lord, He
just desires. He does not even, at least, you see, in this world. We desire, we
have to press buttons. Krishna does not even have to do that. Krishna just
desires. And things happen. He is called as "satya-saṅkalpa". He desires. And
things happens. Things happen. So, "vividhaiva sruyate". And "svabhaviki
jñana-bala-kriya ca". So, how does He acquire knowledge of everything? So, there
are aspects talked about. "jñana", "bala" and "kriya". So, "jñana" is knowledge.
"bala" is the capacity of action. And "kriya" is the action. So, for Him, all
these are "svabhaviki". So, "svabhaviki" means, it happens naturally. So, for
example, now, you are looking at me. And I am looking at you. When we are
looking at each other, then naturally, we see each other. So, now, if while,
at this time, if some fly, if you notice there is some fly has come and set on
your tie. Then, your hand moves there automatically. And then, we move away the
fly. So, like that, if there is a scratch, we, we just gently, if there is
an itch, we scratch the itch. So, the, here, Krishna is talking about the
sub..., the, subconsciously, things happen. At a subconscious level, things
happen. And when they happen at a subconscious level, for us, also, I am giving
example, we may not even be consciously aware. Ok, the fly has come. And
something is happening. We just, we, our consciousness elsewhere. But we just
move the hand away. So, that way, we can move forward and understand that,
actually, you know, Krishna, for Him, everything happens automatically. He does
not have to struggle in any way to do anything. He just thinks, automatically.
So, let us move forward. It is, the point is, Krishna does not have any duties.
Still, He is doing his duty. And now, Krishna turns around Arjuna's fourth
argument about "varṇa-saṅkara" here. So, let us look at this verse. Then, we
will look at the argument.

        yadi hy aham na varteyam
        jatu karmany atandritah
        mama vartmanuvartante
        manusyah partha sarvasah

"yadi hy ahaṁ na varteyaṁ". If I was not engaged. "ahaṁ na varteyaṁ". "jātu
karmaṇy atandritaḥ". "atandritaḥ" means with great attention. If I had not been
engaged in my karma with great attention, then what would have happened? "mama
vartmānuvartante". Peo..., others would have, others would have acted similarly.

        mama vartmānuvartante
        manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

That all living beings would have also acted similarly. Now, this verse, the
same line, three and four, the, 3.23C and D will again come in a more famous
verse, 4.11. That also C, 4.11C and D is:

        mama vartmānuvartante
        manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

But here, the meaning here is different. There, we will discuss what the meaning
is. Here, Lord Krishna is saying is. "mama vartmā" means My path. "manuṣyāḥ
pārtha sarvaśaḥ". All living beings will follow. That means, if I do not engage
in duty attentively, "ye yathā māṁ prapadyante". Then, what will happen?
Everybody will act accordingly. And when everybody acts accordingly, then that
will lead to disruption. So, "atandritaḥ". "atandritaḥ" means very attentively,
Krishna engages in His duties. So, in the 69-70th, 71st Chapter in the Tenth
Canto of the Srimad Bhagavatam, there is a description of Krishna acting in, you
know, in householder life. Of course, this is distributed throughout the
Bhagavatam, Tenth Canto. But especially these chapters, it is talked about. And
Nārada Muni comes to see Krishna's opulence. And then, he says in various
palaces, Krishna is engaged in various duties. S..., so, he sees that, for
example, somewhere, Krishna is arranging for the marriages of His, you know,
daughters. Somewhere, He is arranging, you know, for the marriage of His sons
and His welcoming brides. Other places, He is in the, in, you know, of, palace,
Krishna is visi..., taking, you know, we..., you know, H..., He is welcoming
visitors and attending to their needs. He is listening to the, He is listening
and sorting out the grievances of some citizens. In some places, He is welcoming
brahmanas. Other places, He is giving charity. So, in each of the palaces,
Krishna is doing duty responsibly. Now, Jīva Gosvāmī makes a very interesting
observation in this, you know, section of the Sandarbhas. So, actually, Krishna
says basically that, a, you know, the, the Bhagavatam says how Krishna's
opulence is that, Krishna was simultaneously present in all these places. There
is Nārada Muni, he has the capacity to fly. So, he can just quickly go from one
palace to another. So, it was not that Krishna was in this palace and before
Nārada Muni could reach that, Krishna was running to that palace. There was no
race between Nārada Muni and Krishna at th..., over there. You know, Krishna was
simultaneously there. But Jī..., Jī..., so, this is Krishna's opulence that he
pervades space. But the significant point that Jīva Gosvāmī mentions is that
actually Krishna was present in different palaces. And actually, even when
Nārada Muni went, the timings were different in different palaces. In some
palace, it was morning. And Krishna was doing morning ablutions. Or morning
meditation. In some other palaces, it was afternoon, Krishna was taking lunch.
In some other palaces, it was evening. And He was with His family members. And
some other palaces, it was daytime. Where Krishna was atten..., a, listening to,
doing admin..., administra..., manag..., managerial, administrative duties. So,
like that, the time also was different in different places. What this indicates
is that Krishna not only controls space. But Krishna also controls time. Krishna
also controls time. Krishna pervades time. And therefore, He can manifest at
whatever time He wants, along, at the s..., as per His will. So, anyway, with
our respect to our discussion is, Krishna, although He can do anything and
everything, He can be anywhere and everywhere, you know, any time and every
time. Still, what Krishna does is "atandritah". He is an..., attenti...,
attentively do..., doing His duties. And that is how He sets an example for
others. Now, someone may say, but Krishna, He, what duties did He do?
Especially, when He was Vrindavan. He was stealing butter. So, is stealing
butter exemplary? You know, do we want all the children in the world to start
stealing butter? Do we want, you know, say, Krishna, say, danced with the gopis.
So, from the external point of view, the gopis were other men's wives. So, why
was Krishna doing such a thing? There is, is that what we got, Krishna wanted
to do? How is that example? 

So, there are several points to understand in this. That Vrindavan is the abode
of love. And when Krishna was in Vrindavan, He did not take up any public
leadership position. He was just a small child. And when He became an
administrator. When He became a part of..., a, public, officially, publically of
the Yadu dynasty. You know. And then, He started taking, you know, active role
and protecting them. And in safeguarding their interest. So, then, from that
time, Krishna was "atandritah". So, what happens in Vrindavan is, Kri..., at
that time, Krishna had not taken any leadership position. Another point to
understand is in Vrindavan, it is, Vrindavan is a transcendental abode. So,
there, there is no n..., no need for setting an example. There, it is simply the
example of pure love. And the example of pure love is whatever will increase and
in..., intensify the love in the hearts of the devotees, Krishna does that. So,
that is what Krishna will do in Vrindavan. So, there is the, Kri..., role of
dharma, and there is, the, there is there, a, arena, the realm, the arena of
dharma. And there is the arena of prema. So, when Krishna is acting in Mathura,
in Dwarka, in Hastinapur, He is in the arena of dharma. And there, He sets an
example. In Vrindavan, there is the arena of prema. There is also an example.
The vrajavasis in fact are examples for all, a, Gaudiya Vaishnavas. In fact, for
all Vaishnavas about how one should be absorbed in Krishna constantly. So, that
is also an example of a different kind, in Vrindavan. But with respect to here,
Krishna is talking about social responsibility. So, social responsibility means
that Krishna is saying that, you have to act in a way that will benefit others.
And not harm others. Krishna is saying, I am also doing that. Now, Krishna will
say in the next verse what will happen. What would happen if you did not act in
this way. So, all people will follow My path. So, what is fo..., follow My path
means? What exactly will happen?

        utsīdeyur ime lokā
        na kuryāṁ karma ced aham
        saṅkarasya ca kartā syām
        upahanyām imāḥ prajāḥ

So, "utsīdeyur". "utsīdeyur" means disrupted, put to ruin. "ime lokā". All these
worlds. All these people. "na kuryāṁ karma ced aham". If I did not perform my
karma, my duty. "saṅkarasya ca kartā syām". "saṅkarasya ca kartā". So,
"varṇa-saṅkara" was Arjuna's concern in the first chapter. So, so, I would have,
I will become the creator of unwanted progeny. "upahanyām imāḥ prajāḥ". And in
this way, all the living entities, all the living entities will be destroyed.
So, here, Krishna is gravely point out that, actually, if, if I did not act
responsibly, other people will get justification for not acting responsibly. And
when they act ir..., irresponsibly, i..., if everybody starts acting
irresponsibly, society will crumble. You know, f..., for example, now, why is it
especially talking about "saṅ...", wha..., "saṅkara"? "saṅkarasya ca kartā
syām". And disruption of society. As ksatriyas are to set an example of chivalry
and protection. So, if ksatriyas themselves become neglectful, if ksatriyas
become irresponsible, and ksatriyas do not protect the citizens, then who will?
And if nobody protects the citizens, the citizens will become exploited. And
when citizens ex..., exploited, what will happen? There will be devastation in
society. So, therefore, it is very important responsibility of the ksatriyas to
act exemplary by protecting dharma. And protecting the dharmic people. So, He is
saying, now, to Arjuna, Arjuna, you have to set this example. If you do not do
that, then unrighteousness will prevail. When unrighteousness will prevail, then
ungodly people, demoniac people will take power. And they will exploit, you
know, they will exploit society. They will exploit women. That will lead to
unwanted progeny. And the fury..., future generations will be disastrous. So, in
this way, you, it is our responsibility to, to act i..., res..., a, competently.
Act, you know, exemplarily. Now, you have, the question may come up, that
Krishna is, Himself, sometimes, it seems that He does not act exemplarily. So,
one example gi..., one example, gives butter stealing. So, that, and similarly,
He performed rasa-lila, say. So, now, one point is said, is that, at that time,
Krishna was not in a position of leadership. When, that is, second point I said
is that that is the arena of love. Prabhupada makes another point in the purport
that those who are great people, we cannot imitate them. You know, when we
have to, we can admire them. They have powers which we do not have. And
Prabhupada quotes from the Bhagavatam here. Let us look at the verse. So, this
is from the Srimad Bhagavatam. 10.33.30-31. These are among the last verses, 10,
of the Rasa Panchadhyayi. Rasa Panchadhyayi is from 30, 29 chapter to 33
chapter. And soon after this comes the famous verse, you know, o..., the, about
how hearing about rasa-lila will purify. So, before that, Parikṣit Mahārāja
asked a question, you know, how could Krishna have performed this rasa-lila,
danced with other women's wives at night? You know, so, then, Krishna, A..., I,
Arjuna, he were, you know, Śukadeva Gosvāmī answers. And he gives examples,
also.

        naitat samācarej jātu
        manasāpi hy anīśvaraḥ
        vinaśyaty ācaran mauḍhyād
        yathārudro ’bdhi-jaṁ viṣam

You know:

        īśvarāṇāṁ vacaḥ satyaṁ
        tathaivācaritaṁ kvacit
        teṣāṁ yat sva-vaco-yuktaṁ
        buddhimāṁs tat samācaret

So, "naitat samācarej jātu". "samācarej jātu" means one should not, "samācarej"
should not act like them. "jātu" means certainly. "manasāpi". Even in the mind.
"hy anīśvaraḥ". "anīśvaraḥ" means those who are not ishvaras. So, those who are
not ishvaras should not act like the ishvaras, even in their mind. Why?
"vinaśyaty ācaran mauḍhyād". If we act like that, "vinaśyaty". They will be
destroyed. "ācaran mauḍhyād". "mauḍhyād" mean foolish. They will be destroyed by
such action. And the example is "yathārudro ’bdhi-jaṁ viṣam". You know, "rudro"
is Lord Shiva. "abdhijam". "abdhijam" is, who was borned from the milk ocean.
What was born? You know. What was born from the ocean of these ocean? "viṣam".
So, we know, if the churning of the milk ocean, we, you know, devastating
disaster took place when an extremely deadly poison came about. And what did
Lord Shiva do? Lord Shiva, at the request of all the devatas, under the guidance
of Lord Vishnu, he took the permission of, you know, his consort, you know,
Durgā Devi. And he drank that poison. So, when he drank that poison, it went up
to his tongue, a, tongue. And it went out, down his tongue. It went to his
throat. And it stayed there. And that is why Lord Shiva is sometimes known as
nila-kanta or a kala-ka..., called kala-kanta. You know. His throat became
bluish black. So, nila-kanta is one with a blue throat. And kala-kanta is one
with a black throat. So, now, you know, that poison had no power to go down. You
know, Lord Shiva was so powerful. Now, if we drink something, we cannot control
it. You know, it will go down the tongue. And it goes down. And then, we will go
down. Tuck. After that. So, therefore, you know, "vinaśyaty ācaran mauḍhyād". We
will see, if the "mauḍhyād"s imitate at, the person, like Lord Shiva,
"vinaśyaty". There will be destruction. Now, the, our acharyas describe that
Lord Shiva was, you know, not concerned about dying. Even when, why did the
poison stop over there? Why did he not let the poison go down? Even if the
poison had gone done, he would not have been affected. But he checked the
poison, because he, because he is a Vaishnava. He is:

        vaiṣṇavānāṁ yathā śambhuḥ

He is the topmost of all devotees. And he was thinking that my beloved Lord is
in my heart. So, if the poison goes down the throat through the, through the
elementary canal. Then, actually, my Lord, who is in the heart, He will be
inconvenience. That will go too close to Him. And I do not want the poison to go
close to Him. I do not want to disturb Him. I want to, Him to be present happily
in my heart. And to, you know, know, be happy a..., a..., accepting my
devotional service over there. So, that is why in order to not inconvenience the
Lord, he kept the throat, poison in his throat itself. So, this is Lord Shiva.
He has that power. You know, if we drink poison like that, then we will get
ourselves in trouble. Same applies with bhang, also. The Lo..., does a, Lord
Shiva, the Lord Shiva drank poison. So, his followers drink bhang. You know,
they cannot drink poison. But they drink bhang. And they say, Lord Shiva also
used to drink bhang. But then, bhang is an intoxicant. It is tamasic. And doing
what the Lord has done, you know, the, doing what great personalities, like Lord
Shiva has done, you know, without having that authority, that will simply lead
to, you know, degradation. So, "īśvarāṇāṁ vacaḥ satyaṁ". We should understand
that the, they are the words of Ishavara true. And "tathaivācaritaṁ kvacit". So,
how should we act? You know, "tathaivācaritaṁ". According to their words. So,
that means that when the Lord or the great personalities, they, they come to
this world. At that time, their actions are in two phases. One are those which
are to set an example. And the other are those which are set to, you know, those
which are done to s..., demonstrate their position. That both are important
purposes. One is to set an example. So, for example, Lord Rama, he dutifully,
you know, he was a "Maryada Purushottam". So, he did whatever, as a king, as a
son, as a husband, he acted in, you know, in exemplary way. So, that is, what
is, what is he doing by that? He is actually practicing, you know, the set,
a, p..., a, the principle of setting an example. At the same time, there are
other situations, when other incarnations, their focus may not be on setting an
example. Their focus is on demonstrating the position. So, when Krishna di...,
displays the Virata Rupa, you know, that is not our example basis. When there is,
anybody is in doubt, I will show my Virata Rupa. But I do not have any Virata
Rupa. How can I show? Only Krishna has Virata Rupa. So, when mother Yashoda
asked Krishna to open the mouth. Yasho... saw, He shows the whole universe
within his mouth. So, we cannot do all these things. So, there are certain
pastimes of Krishna which are simply meant to demonstrate His transcendental
position, His supreme position. And those pastimes have to be understood as
such. That they are meant, i..., mean..., they are meant to demonstrate His
supremacy, you know, not to, you know, be imitated. So, Krishna's rasa-lila is
also like that. And Śukadeva Gosvāmī says in the Bhagavatam, the same section,
that, actually, when we practi..., a, when the violation of the laws by the
great people, by the supreme, demonstrates His tran..., His supre..., His, His
superioty to those laws. What is he saying? There are laws which are meant for
all of us. And i..., it is important for us to follow the laws. You know, there
is, supreme is supreme means that the supreme is superior even to the laws. As
supreme is superior to the laws. And that is how the superior, the supreme is
supreme. If the supreme had to be subordinate to the laws, then the supreme
would not be supreme. The laws would supreme. So, that is not the correct
understanding of the Vedic teachings. That is a deviant understanding, called
karma navamsa. It says the laws are supreme. But actually, the Supreme Lord is
supreme. So, now, when we act, why do we need laws? Because we are not always
motivated by love. We are motivated by selfish desires. And that is why there
are laws. You should do this. You should not do this. You know. We cannot, you
know, just, take money from anywhere anytime. We may want to do that. But there
are regulations. There is law. But when it comes to Krishna, you know, He does
not have any selfish desires. He is simply pure. He is simply transcendental. He
is simply all-loving, all-merciful. So, whatever He does is for the supreme good
of everyone. And when He is acting thus for the supreme good of everyone, you
know, He does not need any laws to regulate His lower self. Because He has no
lower self. We need laws to lo..., good, you know, you know, lower ou, to
regulate our lower self. Krishna does not. So, Krishna acts purely out of love,
and care, and the desire for the supreme well-being of everyone.

So, you know, so, when He di..., He seems to violate the laws, that is simply
out of love. And He wants to, you know, demonstrate love-filled pastimes. And
when He acts in this way, we have to understand that, this kind of actions
demonstrate His supremacy, demonstrate how He is in a position greater than the
position of the laws. He is truly supreme. So, then, now, we all know that.
If Krishna, somebody says that I want to imitate rasa-lila. Prabhupada would
say, first, you know, imititate Govardhan-lila. Kri..., when Krishna was seven,
He lifted Govardhan. Then, at eight, He had performed rasa-lila. So, first, lift
Govardhan. We cannot do that, then we should not perform rasa-lila, also. Now,
Krishna will talk about, He has finished set..., the section of setting an
example. Now, He will talk about how we need to, you know, understand the
difference between karma-kanda and karma-yoga. So, for example, now, Arjuna may
say, ok, you are saying, I should set an example. But if I get bound, if I get
sinful reactions, then wha..., what is the use of it all? Yes. I agree to the
point that I will, if I do not, give up my duty, then that will lead to harm. I
will be setting a bad example. And "utsīdeyur ime lokā". The people will be
di..., the "lokā"s will be disrupted. So, that does not solve my problem.
Because I will still get bound. So, how do I avoid bondage? That he will
describe in the next verse here. So:

        saktāḥ karmaṇy avidvāṁso
        yathā kurvanti bhārata
        kuryād vidvāṁs tathāsaktaś
        cikīrṣur loka-saṅgraham

So, "saktāḥ karmaṇy avidvāṁso". "saktāḥ" is attached. And "avidvāṁso".
"avidvāṁso" is one who is not "vidvāṁ". "saktāḥ karmaṇy avidvāṁso". So, those
who are, so, there are two characteristic of these people. They are ignorant.
And they are attached. "yathā kurvanti bhārata". So, as the ignorant and
attached act, "kuryād vidvāṁs tathāsaktaś". So, even the "vidvāṁs". "vidvāṁs"
are opposite to "avidvāṁsaḥ". Even those who are learnt, who are wise, they are
"āsaktaś". "tathāsaktaś". Even they should act like that. Why? "cikīrṣur
loka-saṅgraham". "loka-saṅgraham" means for the purpose of setting an example
for others. So, as the ignorant and deta..., attached acts, similarly, the wise
and the, you know, ythe detached would act for the said purpose of setting an
example for others. "cikīrṣur loka-saṅgraham". So, now, here, what does it mean?
Krishna is telling Arjuna, yes, there may be people. There may be people who
are acting in, in, you know, who do not know. But you should know. So, what is
this referring to? The ignorant and attached are referring to the karma-kandis.
And the detached and knowledgeable, they are referring to the karma-yogis. That
is different from karma-yogis. So, you know, externally, the karma-kandis and
karma-yogis, both act in the same way. The karma-kandis are doing the prescribed
duties. The karma-yogis are doing the prescribed duties. You know, the
karma-kandis are thinking about heaven and material enjoyment. The karma-yogis
are talking about li..., liberation and return back to the Supreme Lord. So,
there is a, consciousness is different. So, one is "saktāḥ". And the other is
"asaktāḥ". Although, there is this different. But still, both of them are acting
i..., for the same purpose. That purpose is to become liberated. It is to
become elevated. It is to go back to Godhead. So, with that purpose in mind,
when the person acts, then that person never gets bound to material ex...,
existence. That person keeps marching forward. And returning back to the
Absolute Truth, eventually. So, Krishna is saying that, enliven the world. And
set an example for others. Yes, there may be others who may be acting attached.
But how will they ever become detached? You know, they need an example which is
accessible for them. Which is available for them. Only then, they will be able
to practice spiritual life. Even, if you see, if we look at the history of our
movement, we will see that, it has passed through phases. In the early days of
our movement, you know, becoming a devotee meant just joining the temple. So,
people would just join the temple. So, men, women, everybody would join. And
then, even when people would become grihastas, they would still, still, stay in
the temple itself. And the, they would be, even, you know, distributing books.
And they would, financially, also, they getting whatever required from the
temple. And, they were living like that. So, at that time, practicing devotional
life essentially meant, Ha..., becoming Hare Krishna meant, practically the
dropping out of society. And just joining the temple full-time. And living like
that. You know, as the movement has expanded. The congregation has developed.
And now, ISKCON is primarily a congregation based movement. And that is very
important. Because the, al..., the renounced order helds very important place,
also. But the, for most people, if they want a rea..., a, a, a realistic example
of how one can be spiritual while being in the material world, that example will
not come from the sadhus. That will not come from the brahmacaris or sannyasis.
That example has to come from the grihastas. So, when the grihastas set a proper
example, then the general people see, yes, all that is being talked is not, not
impractical. It is not hypothetical. It is something which is real. Which can be
done. So, you know, it is important for devotees to recognise the very important
role that grihastas are playing. Sometimes, s..., there is a whole conflict when
brahmacaris think that, oh, we are superior. And then, grihastas are inferior.
Actually, it is not a matter of superior, inferior. It is like two brigades in
the same army. And both of them are, you know, ultimately in the army of Lord
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Lord Krishna. And they are trying to fulfill Krishna's
mission.

So, in the history of our movement, also, we see at some, at one particular
time, then there was a conflict between brahmacaris and grihastas. And that
brahmacaris, sannyasis, and rihastas. And it came to ahead in 1976 in Mayapur.
And then, Prabhupada f... strongly, very strongly spoke the point that:

        yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei ‘guru’ haya

That one who knows about Krishna, one who is devoted to Krishna, that person is
advanced devotee. We cannot just, you know, label certain ashrams as lower, as
label certain ashrams as higher. So, actually, now, the, both the brahmacaris
and grihastas have important roles to play. The brahmacaris, the sannyasis,
they, they, you know, play the role of showing an example of being totally
devoted to God. And, or being disconnected from the world. So, that means, it
is, so, by that, they say, this vertical relationship is actually real. The,
the, we get real happiness. There will be, it brings real meaning, real
fulfillment in life. And what happens by that is the r..., tangibility and this
gravity of spiritual life becomes very evident. When we see people who are
total, who are totally devoted to God. At the s..., so, that is, so, if we
consider a pyramid, then there are, there are there multiple levels. So, there
brahmacaris, there are sannyasis, they demonstrate, a, the focus on the vertical
connection. Then, the grihastas, they have the horizontal as well as the
vertical. And then, they set an example for the broader society who have only
a horizontal connections. And they have no vertical connections. So, it is like
a progression. And everybody plays an important role. So, if there are only
grihastas. And there are no brahmacaris, sannyasis. Then, there, also, the
problem also comes up. That, people f..., w..., always keep feeling that
spiritual life is just meant to be a part-time life. Yes, it is something which
we will do in a part of our life. Another thing that Prabhupada, you know,
Prabhupada's presentation of Krishna Consciousness casc..., characterised, by
the point that, actually, bhakti is not a part of our life. Bhakti is our life.
In fact, we discussed earlier how life is a part of bhakti. You know, bhakti is
something which goes on over many lifetimes. So, bhakti is our life. And bhakti
is our life for brahmacaris, for grihastas, for everyone. But different p...,
members, say, a, different members of the varnashram, s..., contribute different
important and irreplaceable roles, irreplaceable roles. Every single varna is
important. Every single ashram is important. So, here, Krishna is telling that
be in the world. And set an example for others. So, now, Krishna will tell
about, or we are talking about this, He will say that, you should not disturb
the minds of others.

        na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed
        ajñānāṁ karma-saṅginām
        joṣayet sarva-karmāṇi
        vidvān yuktaḥ samācaran

So, "na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed". Do not disturb the minds of others.
"buddhi-bhedaṁ" means disturb the mind. "buddhi" is intelligence or wi..., mind.
So, "buddhi", "buddhi" means intelligence. Do not disturb the intelligence of
others. "na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed". "janayed". "janayet" means to give birth to,
to cause. "ajñānāṁ karma-saṅginām". So, same point, the previous verse was
"saktāḥ", "avidvāṁsaḥ". So, here, it is "karma-saṅgi", that is "saktāḥ". And
"avidvāṁso" is "ajñā...", "ajñānāṁ". So, those who are ignorant and those who
are a..., attached, do not disturb their minds. What should we do? "joṣayet
sarva-karmāṇi". "joṣayet" is what Prabhupada is, translates this as dovetail.
And this is a word which Prabhupada would often use in his presentation. We have
to, we can dovetail, you know, things in Krishna's service. "joṣayet
sarva-karmāṇi". All work. "vidvān yuktaḥ samācaran". A learnt person can do that
while being engaged in devotinoal service. So, the whole principle of bhakti is
centered on this point, this point of "vidvān yuktaḥ samācaran". Act in a way,
"joṣayet sarva-karmāṇi", the wise person should be acting, and should be setting
example to, for others how to dovetail various activities in devotional service.
So, actually, Srila Prabhupada was very resourceful. You know, he engaged
different devotees with different talents, according to their talents in the
service of Krishna. So, he had artists. And they were asked to paint the br..,
they were asked to p..., make pictures for his books and pictures for the
temples. He had devotees, who were, who are, were good at cooking. And they were
asked to cook. He had devotees who were intellectually bright. They were asked
to write. So, all of us have been given some talents. And the perfection of
those talents is to use them in Krishna's service. We do not have to tell the
world that all these talents are useless. Everything is material. Just reject
it. No. We have to focus on utilising things in Krishna's service. And in fact,
this is a theme which will come ag..., a..., again and again in the Gita.
"joṣayet sarva-karmāṇi". Dovetail things in devotional service. So, by
dovetailing, people will gradually become elevated. So, the ultimate purpose of
all the Vedic rituals is to bring people to Krishna. Now, those who cannot
come directly to Krishna, they should be gradually brought to Krishna. So, here,
Krishna is acknowledging to Arjuna, yes, even if you say that the renounced
order is higher than the householder order, that means, you know, giving up
action is higher than giv..., you know, in..., inaction, acting in the world.
But still, He says that, for the people in the world, if they just see, a,
responsible people giving that up, giving up their actions. Then that will, that
will disrupt their minds. See, that means now Krishna is talking about another
point over here. See. Earlier, He was saying that you should set a good example
for others. And if you do not set a good example, if you set a bad example, that
will lead to problems. Because people will act inappropriately. But somebody may
argue that, actually, I am not setting a bad example. I am setting example of a
higher principle. I am not renouncing out of irresponsibility. I am renouncing
out of an understanding of higher responsibility. So, when some..., when
somebody makes this point. What is it? I am renouncing out of compassion. I am
not renouncing out frustration. So, I am responsing with a sense of higher
responsibility, renouncing. When say, people will not understand this. So,
therefore, even if you have a higher res..., c..., sense of higher
responsibility, you have to do it in such a way that people will be able to, you
know, take it. People will be able to understand it. If people misunderstand,
then there might be disturbed. And they will have no, you know, scope left for
further elevation in their spiritual life. Therefore, set a good example for
others. And, you know, engage them. Encourage them according to the le..., their
level to practice devotional service. So, whatever is their level, according
their level, encourage them to practice devotional service by setting a good
example. So, here, Krishna is talking about difference in karma-yoga and
karma-kanda. And the, you know, the Krishna mentions several time the jnani and
ajnani. The "vidvāṁs", and "avvidvāṁs". So, the next verse is, Krishna will tell
what is it the vision of the "avidvāṁs" and what is the vision of the "vidvāṁs".
That we will discuss in the next class.

Thank you very much. Srimad Bhagavagad Gita ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya.
Gaura bhakti vrinda ki jaya. Nitai Gaura Premanande. Hari haribol. Thank you.
