Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4rwG5u9AM3M
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_049_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_06_to_12_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=dPq2UTKsGWNA1qYXvanyK_W0uAt8MTU0ODQ4NzE3OUAxNTQ4NDAwNzc5&v=4rwG5u9AM3M&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita course. Today, we are discussing
the Second Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. And we completed first five verses.
Where we discussed about the spiritual and the current socio-cultural meanings
of the word arya. And then, we discussed about the reasons why Bhīṣma Pitamah
did not fight, did not protest against Draupadī's being dishonored. And then, we
are, are, we are right now discussing the fifth reason of Arjuna for not
fighting. The first four were compassion, enjoyment, sinful reactions,
destruction of family traditions. Now, he is, he, Krishna tried to give Arjuna
peptalk saying that, come on, do not be weak like this. Be a man. Fight. But
Arjuna counters back by saying what kind of man can raise weapons against his
own teacher and his own grandfather? I cannot do that. Better that I live as a
beggar. So, although, Arjuna says that, I, I, it is better to live as a beggar.
Actually, he had said that twice. You know, 2.5, he said this. And before that,
in 1.44-45, also, he said the same thing. Actually, it will be better for us to
live by begging. But now, he says that, actually, I am not sure what we should
do. That is the verse which we start from today.

        na caitad vidmaḥ kataran no garīyo
        yad vā jayema yadi vā no jayeyuḥ
        yān eva hatvā na jijīviṣāmas
        te ’vasthitāḥ pramukhe dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ

So, "na caitad". "etat", "na", "ca". We certainly do not know. "vidmaḥ". I do
not know. "kataran no garīyo". "kataran". We, we do not know which is, "garīyo"
is better, which is better. "yad vā jayema". Whether we should, we should attain
"jaye". "yadi vā no jayeyuḥ". Or we should not attain victory. That they attain
victory. Either we win or we will lose. But, so, normally speaking, there is a
battle. You would say now. If there is a sports match. Whi..., which captain
will say before the match? I do not know which is better, whether my team wins
or the other team wins. He will say, obviously, your team wins. What is the
big, what is the figuring out to be done about, for that? He says, no. That is,
issue is not so simple over here because "yān eva hatvā na jijīviṣāmas". If they
die, "yān eva hatvā". "na jijīviṣāmas". I will have no desire to live. "na
jijīviṣāmas". "te ’vasthitāḥ pramukhe dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ". So, those who have no
desire to kill, they are here, right in front of me to fight with. And
therefore, the issue has become so very complex. So, now, Arjuna has, actually,
essentially, three options. So, one is, if he wins. If he fights. Actually, he
has two options with the consequences. These two options are, one is fight. Or
he does not fight. Now, if he fights, there are two options within that. If he
fights and wins, then, he has killed his relatives. And he will not be able to
enjoy. Because whatever he has got is tainted by the blood of his own loved
ones, his venerable elders. And then, second, if he fights and if he loses.
Then, he will lose his life. But he is not really concerned about losing his own
life. He is concerned primarily, if he fights, he has really not thought about
whether he wins or loses, whether, the possibility of losing. But another option
is that, if he decides not to fight. Then, the only alternative that he has to
live like, live by begging. And that is actually very disgraceful option for a
ksatriya to do. Now, Arjuna is not really just concerned only about the
disgrace. He is thinking about the duty, also. So, Krishna has told him that it
will be "anārya", Ar..., "anārya". "asvargyam-karam". "akīrti-karam". So, it will
be dishonorable for your family and race. It will not lead you to heaven. It
will lead you to infamy. So, he is confused now. So, what should I do? So, in
today's language, Arjuna sees before him a lose-lose situation. If I do this,
also, I will lose. I have to do that, also, I will lose. So, what should I do?
If there is nothing that I can do to mitigate the situation. Lose-lose. That is
what he feels. So, therefore, he is saying, I do not know what to do. How should
I move forward? And, then, when he thinks like this, that I just do not know
what to do. This is actually the beginning of intelligence. You know,
intelligence means to know what to do when we do not know what to do.
Intelligence means to know what to do when we do not know what to do. So, if I
do not know what to do, then how will I know what to do? Actually, it means that
when we do not know what to do, you know, when we look up, we feel there is
nothing I could have. Look around, I do not see anyone there. Look back. That is
not an option. What do I do? Look up. Look up means pray. Pray. Seek guidance.
Seek help from the Supreme Lord. And when we do that, then, it, it is not that we
may have the opportunity to directly hear from Krishna. But Krishna is present
in our heart. And Krishna is present in the world through guru, sadhu, shastra.
So, Krishna will guide us. That is what we have to do. So, now, Arjuna has come
to a moment where he is frozen by indecision. And as he is frozen by indecision
in way, this way, he starts thinking. What should I do?  And he realises, I do
not know. So, what should one do, one, when one does not know? Turn upwards.
Turn towards God. So, normally, we will turn upwards. But Arjuna is so fortunate
that that Supreme Lord who stays high up in sky, in the spiritual world, he is
right next to him. So, Arjuna turns towards his charioteer. He is not his
charioteer. He is the Supreme Lord. And he says, Krishna, I surrender to you.
Please guide me. That is the next verse. So:

        kārpaṇya-doṣopahata-svabhāvaḥ
        pṛcchāmi tvāṁ dharma-sammūḍha-cetāḥ
        yac chreyaḥ syān niścitaṁ brūhi tan me
        śiṣyas te ’haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam

So, "kārpaṇya-doṣopahata-svabhāvaḥ". So, "kārpaṇya" is "krpana". "kārpaṇya" is
miserly weakness. So, Arjuna had, earlier being referred to:

        klaibyaṁ mā sma gamaḥ pārtha
        naitat tvayy upapadyate
        kṣudraṁ hṛdaya-daurbalyaṁ
        tyaktvottiṣṭha paran-tapa

So, you are very weak. So, the same point, Krishna, Arjuna is now acknowleding.
Yes, I have become weak. "kārpaṇya-doṣa". Because of weakness, I am overcome.
"opahata-svabhāvaḥ". So, my "svabhāvaḥ" is become overpowered. I have got
ove..., with the characteristics of a weak person now. And such a situation,
"pṛcchāmi tvāṁ", I ask you. "tvāṁ dharma". I ask you about what is my duty.
"dharma-sammūḍha-cetāḥ". "sammūḍha-cetāḥ" means my intelligence is bewildered.
My consciousness is deluded. And what am I asking you? "yac chreyaḥ syān
niścitaṁ brūhi tan me". "śreyaḥ". I want to know what "śreyaḥ". Now, actually,
Arjuna has himself said what "śreyaḥ". He has said earlier "śreyo bhoktuṁ
bhaikṣyam apīha loke". Just two verses earlier in 2.5. I, I think, it is
"śreyaḥ", better for me to beg. But he says, no. He says, really right? The
Kauravas have done so much wrong. And it is my responsibility as a king also to
act. What should I do? Just completely undecided. So, he says, I do not know
what is "śreyaḥ". So, please tell me, what is actually the long-term good for
me. "syān niścitaṁ brūhi". Tell me of, tell me of, what, what, what is for
certain. My mind is going on this track at one moment, that track of the next
moment. And as it is going on all these multiple track, it is leaving me
undecided. So, "śiṣyas te ’haṁ". I become your disciple. "śādhi māṁ tvāṁ
prapannam". "śādhi" means instruct me. And I surrender unto you. "prapannam".
"śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam". This is a very important verse in the Bhagavad Gita.
And Srila Prabhupada's purport for this is also a classic purport. So,
Prabhupada's pur..., purport focuses mostly on the theme of perplexities. You
know, material world puts us in perplexities. Should I do this? Should I do
that? What, what should I do? When we are put into perplexities like that, we
just do not know, how should I act? How, how, how? So, then, we just do not know
how to act. At that time, it can be a very demanding and draining, you know,
situation, emotionally as well as physically. We feel all our energy is being
sucked down. So, at such times, when we, when we have to work our way up, how do
we do that? We do that by turning towards God. So, he says, please instruct me.
So, Prabhupada c..., says that, the perplexities just come by their own. We do
not want those perplexities. Whether just as the forest fire comes by friction
inadvertently. Similarly, perplexities come in this world. And a wise person is
one who knows how to deal with them. And how does one know? By surrendering to
God. How does one surrender to God? By surrendering to a spiritual master. So,
"śiṣyas te ’haṁ". I surrender to you. So, many times, people say that, we know
the Bhagavad Gita. Yes, we may intellectually know. But truly we know, when we
L..., turn towards the Gita with the desire to do the will of the Lord. As long
as we are not desi..., having that desire to do the will of the Lord, till that
point, our knowledge will remain theoretical. And we may say that, I do not
know the will of the Lord. Yes, that is fine. And that is why the shastra is
there for us. You know, shastra gives us overall guidance about what are the
situations in which different devotees have acted in different ways. And based
on that, we learn what the will of God will be for us. And when we do the, when
the broad situations are, will of God, then gradually, then in specific
situations also, we will be able to do the will of God. I mean, generally, the
will of God is that we be Krishna Conscious. We avoid immoral activities. We
will do those things, gradually, in specific situations also, we come to the
know the will of God. It takes time. But that is revealed to us over a period of
time.

Now, "śiṣyas te ’haṁ". I have become your disciple. Prabhupada writes in the
purport about how there are, there is "kṛ...", brāhmaṇa and kṛpaṇaḥ. "brāhmaṇa"
is a person who is, lives in such a way as to seek the Absolute Truth. And
"kṛpaṇaḥ" is a person who lives in such a way a..., as to, very short sighted,
just wanting quick gains, not thinking of anything long-term. Any, we, we should
live as "brāhmaṇa"s, not "kṛpaṇaḥ"s. So, that is related with the point of
"śreyaḥ". All of us knew the "śreyaḥ". And what is miserly weakness? That is
attachment. Attachment to one's family and relatives based on, based on bodily
conception. You know, the bodily conception, when we are attached. Then, it
leads to bondage. It leads to suffering. It leads to, you know, complications in
life which need, one needs to rip..., pull oneself away from so that one can
focus on God. So, Arjuna is now overcome by bodily attachment. And he is unable
to think of what is right and what is wrong. So, now, is bodily attachment
wrong? Now, if, if we are, cannot, seeing our relatives as parts of Krishna.
And we are seeing ourselves as devotees of Krishna. And then, we are serving
them, and loving them. Then, that makes the attachment spiritual. And that can
help us go closer towards Krishna. But attachment at the bodily level can cause
a lot of suffering. And it causes bondage. Because we get sucked in it. And then
we forget our higher spiritual opportunities, the inevitable destruction of
relationships that are going to be there at this level of reality. And, the, you
know, opportunity that we miss for turning towards Krishna and loving Krishna.
So, when acting at the material level completely seems to be futile. Whatever I
do, it is a lose-lose-lose situation. That is the time when you start thinking.
You know, what should I do now? And that is the time when our enlightenment
begins.

        śiṣyas te ’haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam

That that is the time when Arjuna, who has put this "śiṣyas", he becomes a
disciple. So, for us, as devotees, Prabhupada would often say that we all need a
spiritual master in our life. And now, of course, we all have our spiritual
master. And we may feel that, yes, I have. But, you know, how many times can I
turn to my spiritual master for guidance? See, it is not just the spiritual
master. The spiritual master is not just a person. He is definitely a person.
But it is also a principle. And that principle is, spiritual master is
guru-tattva. He is a representative of Krishna. And when you start following the
process of devotional service. Krishna manifests to us, Krish..., through the
spiritual master, and Krishna manifests us through sadhu, shastra, through the
other devotees, through, through the Supersoul in the heart. But this is, this
act of surrender is very important for us. Because it is the beginning of our
serious search for God. So, Arjuna is, of course, a pure devotee. But by the
arrangement of the Lord, he is being put into yoga-maya. So, when earlier we
said that, oh, Arjuna saw with the eyes. And because of pratyaksha, he came into
yoga-maya. That means that actually, he came under the process of, under maya.
The point here is that it even that, he is observing with the eyes and then
coming into illusion. That is for us to learn. That how a person comes under
illusion. But essentially, what is happening to Arjuna is the will of the Lord.
Now, moving forward, Krishna may say, Arjuna, we are friends. You should, there
is no need for us to change that relationship. If you want some guidance, you go
to some other people. You go to Vyasadeva. He is a great sage. Or you go to
other people. Why are you coming to me? Or, you know, actually speaking, you
just win the war, and then you will forget all this misery. So, it, we may, one,
we may try some solution at the material level. But that does not work. So,
then, he says, you know, the, he says, nothing else will work for me.

        na hi prapaśyāmi mamāpanudyād
        yac chokam ucchoṣaṇam indriyāṇām
        avāpya bhūmāv asapatnam ṛddhaṁ
        rājyaṁ surāṇām api cādhipatyam

So, "na hi prapaśyāmi". I am not able to see. "paśyāmi", see. I am not able to
see how an..., anything else, anything material can solve my problems.
"mamāpanudyād". How it can be driven away. "yac chokam ucchoṣaṇam". This
"śokam", "chokam" is, "śokam" has changed to "chokam" because of the sandhi rule
of sanskrit. So, that is very related to the word, very similar sounding to the
word "choke" in English. So, "śokam", "chokam", chokes. So, "yac chokam
ucchoṣaṇam". So, that "śokam". What is it? It is drying me up from within. And
what is it drying up? It is drying up my "indriyā"s, "indriyāṇām". So, when a
person is in great tension. What happens is, if we listen, the stomach is
roiling. You know, the stomach has been boiled into some bit. The muscles are
grinding. The, my, as Arjuna has said, you know, my limbs are quivering. My
throat has dried up. This is, everything is dried up. Actually, you know, "yac
chokam ucchoṣaṇam indriyāṇām". So, at a, a physicochemical also, when our
emotions become very intense, the fuel content of the body decreases. So, we
feel that "indriyāṇām". "ucchoṣaṇam". I am, I am completely being sucked up by
the grief. And "avāpya bhūmāv asapatnam ṛddhaṁ". Even if I get a "bhūmāv". I get
a kingdom. How Lord? Without any "sapatnam", "asapatnam" means without any
enemy..., enemies. And for a king, actually, there are multiple enemies,
multiple problems. There may be enemies who may attack. And the king has to
defend all in fear. But he is talking about dream material situation. Where he
says, "asapatnam", there are no enemies. And not only that, "ṛddhaṁ".
"asapatnam", there will be no enemies. But nature may act as an enemy. And there
may be drought or famine. And then, the kingdom is in trouble. But he says,
"ṛddhaṁ". So, there is no enemies, also. And there is no natural problem, also.
Natural disasters, also. So, that is, it is a prosperous kingdom. So, he is
actually envisioning a situation that will be a dream situation for a king. Even
if I get that, "rājyaṁ surāṇām api cādhipatyam". So, even if I get some "rājyaṁ"
like that. And not only like that, even if I get a "rājyaṁ" like that of the
devatas. "surāṇām api cādhipatyam". That means even if I get a kingdom
equivalent to heaven, even that will not help. That will not dry up the grief.
See, we exist, our existence currently is three dimensional. You know,
we generally say two dimensional, material and spiritual. Which is true. But
within the material, there are two dimensions. Within the material, there is the
emotional. And there is the physical. So, in this way, phy..., spiritual,
emotional and physical, these three levels of existence are there. So, often,
most of the time, we are thinking of physical protection, physical
gratification, physical titillation. You know, people say, "rautika pramakand".
You know, we are fuled for the food, clothing, shelter. These are important. No
doubt. These are important. No doubt. We need them for a, at a physical level
for survival. However, at an emotional level, things are also very, you know,
intense. You know, if somebody, maybe, you know, maybe very comfortably situated
physically, with respect to food, clothing, shelter. But if that person is
having some emotional trouble. You know, somebody's abusive relative is there.
Or a exploitative boss is there. Or some tormenting misunderstanding with
one's spouse is there. Or some gen..., intergenerational conflicts between
parents and children is there. Then, that emotional conflict can be so
tormenting that the physical comforts do not, be any comfort. So, Arjuna is
saying that, actually, I am tormented at an emotional level right now.

        yac chokam ucchoṣaṇam indriyāṇām

And when I am tormented at the emotional level, a physical gratification cannot
solve the problem at an emotional level. What does it mean? Actually, you know,
a problem needs a particular solution. If I am hungry, you know, then, sleeping
on a comfortable bed cannot solve the problem. So, the, in the Citraketu
Maharaja's pastime, it is said that, although he had such a huge, flourishing
kingdom. But because he did not have a child. It all felt like, you know,
garlands of honor being offered to a starving man. But if that person is
starving, everything else is made irrelevant as compared to the fire that is
burning in the stomach. So, that way, when a particular problem is there, we
need a particular solution. So, he is saying, right now, I am tormenting, torn
apart, practically speaking. You know, at the emotional level. And fighting at
the physical level and winning the kingdom, that is not going to be a solution
for my prob..., emotional issues. So, actually, when we ha..., if we have to
solve emotional issues, we cannot m..., make physical arrangement to solve
emotional issues. People think that wealth will solve my problems. But wealth
cannot bring love. And love, we understand from the Vedic scriptures, is not
just emotional. Ultimately, it is spiritual. Love is an emotion. But generally,
see, our emotional level is between the material and the spiritual. So, we can
get emotions about material things. We can get emotions about spiritual things.
When we get emotions about spiritual things. That means about Krishna and
Krishna's devotees. Those emotions lift us up. They bring us closer to Krishna.
When we get emotions about material things, those emotions drag us down. They
keep us entangled in material life. So, now, when these emotions are there
in-between, between the material and the spiritual, what is the way out? We have
to make sure that our emotions are connected with Krishna. Then, they will lift
us out of existence. So, to, if we see in the fir..., first chapter, Arjuna has
not talked anything on the devotional perspective. He has talked on material
perspective. You know, this, this life or next life. But it is material
perspective. It is not a spiritual or devotional perspective. That is the
perspective that will be brought by Arjuna. So, emotional problems, we do need
some emotional relief. But ultimately, as long as our emotions are, are
connected with the material, there is going to be only trouble, sooner or later.
Only when our emotions become connected with Krishna, then there will be
purification. Then, there will be elevation. And there will be liberation. And
liberation, not just from misery. But liberation will be, release it to ecstasy.
So, that is the important point, you know, of the Bhagavad Gita. So, physical
solutions cannot deal with emotional problems. We need spiritual solutions,
for ultimately emotional problems. Of course, even as devotees, sometimes grief
is troubling us. We need s..., we, we need some emotional support. We need some
friends, some counselling, some solace, some support. Yes, we need that, at
emotional. But ultimately, if we are in the devotee circle, it is all helping us
to come closer to Krishna. It is that, those emotions, during our trouble,
ultimately when we come closer to Krishna, then we get emotional relief. So, he
is telling this solution will not work, oh, Krishna. And then, he move forward.
And then, when he says, oh, I do not know what to do. So, in the next verse,
actually, the, Sanjaya is speaking. And the, he, Sanjaya paraphrases what
Lor..., Lord Krishna speaks. And he says that, actually, you can only solve my
problems. I will not fight till then. So, now, Prabhupada, in a sense, you know,
in some, some purports what Srila Prabhupada does is that he continues the
thought that is going on in the previous purport. So, in the previous purport,
you know, he is saying that how a person has to surrender to a guru. And how
Krishna is the guru. And representative of Krishna is the guru. And Prabhupada
continues same thing and talks about the qualification of the guru. He talks
about through verses from Chaitanya Charitamrita, Padma Purana, about the
qualification of a guru. And then, he says, that the problems of material
existence are there even in well-developed parts of the world. So, even in
heaven, they are there. And therefore, none of these can be dealt with. None of
these are not, none of these are solutions to the problems. Then, he goes to the
next:

        sañjaya uvāca

        evam uktvā hṛṣīkeśaṁ
        guḍākeśaḥ paran-tapaḥ
        na yotsya iti govindam
        uktvā tūṣṇīṁ babhūva ha

"evam uktvā". After having spoken this. "hṛṣīkeśaṁ". So, when the, a, "am"
pr..., prefix come, "a...", "am" suffix come, that indicates it is through that
person, it has been spoken. And when "aḥ" comes, it is that person is speaking.
So, "guḍākeśaḥ", "hṛṣīkeśaṁ". Sorry, "hṛṣīkeśaṁ guḍākeśaḥ". So, through
Hṛṣīkeśa, Guḍākeśa is speaking. Hṛṣīkeśa is the Lord of senses. Guḍākeśa is the
Lord of sleep. So, actually, both of them are "isha". But one "isha" is higher
than the other. So, although, Arjuna is also the, conquered for sleep. But that
one conquered is still a jiva. And he is getting conquered by other forms of
ignorance, other forms of illusion. So, "hṛṣīkeśaṁ". So, in, "guḍākeśaḥ" spoke
like this. So, "guḍākeśaḥ paran-tapaḥ". So, that "guḍākeśaḥ", it is interesting
that he uses one word for glorifying Krishna. "hṛṣīkeśaṁ". But here, Sanjaya is
using, using two words to glorify Arjuna. "guḍākeśaḥ" and "paran-tapaḥ". Why?
That is to indicate that he is a great person. Now, material life can be so
complex, so revetting that, so, a, so compl..., so entangling that even a person
who is so great, who is a "guḍākeśaḥ", who is a "paran-tapaḥ". Such a person can
be dragged down, and can be brought to the means, can be made to feel helpless.
That is what is happening. And "na yotsya iti govindam". So, that "guḍākeśaḥ",
that "paran-tapaḥ", who has been, who has become frozen by indecision now. He
says "na yotsya iti govindam". Oh, I will not fight. I will not fight. "na
yotsya". I will not fight. And then, "uktvā tūṣṇīṁ". He spoke thus and "babhūva
ha". After speaking thus, he became silent. "uktvā". So, the word "uktvā" comes
twice. You know, so, first "uktvā" refers to what he has been spoken earlier, in
previous verses. So, that is four, five, six, seven, eight. That is what Arjuna
has spoken now. Five verses. And then, "evam uktvā". That is for that. And then,
"na yotsya iti govindam". So, he spoke unto Govinda. "na yotsya". Oh, Govinda, I
will not fight. And after "uktvā", thus, then "tūṣṇīṁ", silence. "babhūva",
became, "ha", certainly. So, here, Sanjaya is drawing back to Dhṛtarāṣṭra what
has happened on the battlefield. He says, oh, Arjuna said, I will not fight.
"na...", "govi...", "na yo...", "na yotsya iti govindam". So, after he speaks in
this way, then, what happens, let us see. So, of course, Prabhupada has
mentioned that Dhṛtarāṣṭra is delighted. But Dhṛtarāṣṭra's delight is going to
be short-lived. Because actually, Krishna is Hṛṣīkeśa. Krishna is Govinda. He is
the controller of the senses. He will bring Arjuna's senses under control
properly. They had gone out of control now. "govindam". He will give Arjuna real
satisfaction, to his senses, by engaging them in devotional service. That is the
indication. So, when, what happened next?

        tam uvāca hṛṣīkeśaḥ
        prahasann iva bhārata
        senayor ubhayor madhye
        viṣīdantam idaṁ vacaḥ

So, "tam uvāca". Unto that person is, spoke "hṛṣīkeśaḥ". So, "Hṛṣī...", when
"Hṛṣī...", Hṛṣīkeśa spoke like this. "prahasann iva bhārata". "prahasann" means
smiling. He wa..., now, "iva" is as if. "eva" in sanskrit is certainly. "iva" is
as if, like. So, "bhārata". So, this "bhārata" refers to Dhṛtarāṣṭra. He is
speaking to descendant of Bharata. So, "tam" refers to Arjuna. So, through
Arjuna, Hṛṣīkeśa spoke. Oh, and, oh, Bharata, I am telling this to you saying
"senayor ubhayor madhye". So, this is what is used to, you know, point out the
dramatic nature of the setting of the Bhagavad Gita. It is a scripture that is
spoken right in the middle of a battlefield.

        senayor ubhayor madhye
        viṣīdantam idaṁ vacaḥ

"viṣīdantam". So, the word "viṣīdantam" had come earlier also in the same
chapter, at the sta..., first verse.

        taṁ tathā kṛpayāviṣṭam
        aśru-pūrṇākulekṣaṇam
        viṣīdantam idaṁ vākyam
        uvāca madhusūdanaḥ

So, there, also, Arjuna was lamenting. "viṣīdantam". And one, 2.1, Arjuna
lamented. And 2.2, Krishna spoke. Now, 2.10, also, Arjuna is lamenting. And 2.11
onwards, Krishna will speak. But there is a difference. There, Arjuna was,
there, Krishna, in 2.1, even in, when Arjuna was lamenting, Krishna basically
gave peptalk. Because Arjuna had just, actually, in a sense, communicated his
decision. H..., he said that I cannot fight. And he just put aside his bow. But
Arjuna had not made an enquiry, had not asked for instruction. Generally
speaking, you know, see, many times, all of us are very eager to give
instruction to others. You know, there is nothing which people want to give as
freely, and as eagerly as advice. Everybody feels, yes. I want to give advice. I
want to give advice. I want to give advice. So, actually, even Krishna, He tells
us that we can give some peptalk. But He does not start giving instructions till
He is asked. So, what does this indicate? Now, does this mean, this does not
mean that we should not distribu..., actually, when we are, we giving classes.
When we are giving books. When we are preaching in various ways. Are we not
giving instructions? All those are generic. Now, that is our responsibility to
share the broad principles of Krishna's wisdom, of Krishna's message with the
people in the world. That is our responsibility. But beyond that, actually, when
we have to guide somebody specifically, one of the most important things is that
if we interfere in, some..., someone's life. If people do not want our help.
Then, giving the help can often backfire. Because, you know, unwanted help is
often seen as interference, not an assistance. And when help is seen as
an interference, not an assistance, then, generally speaking, the consequence is
that, that help is not appreciated or accepted, but is ribbed off. And that can
even lead to a straining of further relationships. Because that person, if, I,
why are you interfering in my life? You know, I know what I am supposed to do.
Now, of course, this does not mean that, if somebody is falling off a, somebody
is walking off a ten-storey building cliff. And we just let that person walk
off. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura gave that example of how, we, you know,
when we see that people are going in the wrong track, we feel morally obliged to
help. It is like a child is falling off. So, other person says, oh, come on,
stop, stop, stop. Do not do this. So, that is definitely true. We have
obligation to help others. But here, what we are talking about is, so that
obligation we have, have to fulfill by generically giving instructions to,
giving, Kr..., not our instructions, but Krishna's instructions to people. That
is our duty to do that. Krishna says that one, who does that, is very pleas...,
dear to me. But when it comes to one to one. Unless we have good relationship,
you know, if we offer some instruction to others, it can often backfire on us.
So, we have to be careful. You know, know, it is only when that person asks for
instruc..., for some help, then we can give help. Otherwise, in a general way,
we can offer some suggestions and we see how the response is. And then we
decide. Should I accept this? Should, should I give any further suggestions or
not? In general, the point is very true that, you know, we give advice too
freely to others. So, when people ask, at that time, depending on the trust
level in the relationship, we can give a..., guidance. But here, Krishna is
showing that at both, the, he was, saw that Arjuna was suffering. But when
Arjuna did not ask specifically of guidance. He just communicated the decision
earlier. Actually, Arjuna communicated the decision in the first chapter and by
putting aside the bow. So, Krishna just gave a peptalk.  Hey, how can you do
this? Come on. How, he gave a peptalk. Pick up, man. But then, here, what
happens, it, it is not like that. Here, he, Arjuna has surrendered. And
actually, 2.7 tells us surrender.

        śiṣyas te ’haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam

And somebody may say that surrender, also, somebody is just doing it for name
sake. But 2.8 makes it very clear that it is not for name sake. Arjuna is saying
that nothing else will work. "na hi prapaśyāmi mamāpanudyād". I do not see any
other solution. I need to a higher, raise to a higher level of consciousness. I
need. I need absolutely to develop, to develop a higher vision of life. What is
my dharma? I need to know that. Only then, things will be clear for me. Only
then, this fog that is there inside me will dissipate. So, because Arjuna has
surrendered, now, Krishna, when He starts speaking. He will not give a peptalk.
He will start serious instruction. So, now, here, "prahasann iva bhārata". So,
Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura and the acharyas explained in general about
"prahasann iva". "prahasann" means smiling. So, now, this seems to be a very
contrasting situation. We saw that in 2.1, Arjuna, what was the situation?
"aśru-pūrṇākulekṣaṇam". So, imagine if you are just walking by. And you see two
people meeting. Two people are talking. And one person, the tears are there on
the eyes. The tears are flowing. And then, you see the other person smiling.
What is this? You know, if a person is crying, then we should at least
commiserate. We should sympathize if not empathize. We should offer some
support. So, is Krishna so heartless? That here Arjuna is crying. And Krishna is
smiling. Actually, "prahasann iva", so, smiling as if. What does it indicate?
That smiling as if means, Prabhupada explains in the purport also that,
actually, suddenly, the dynamics of the relationship has changed. They are
friends. And as friends, Krishna and Arjuna are equals. But suddenly, what has
happened is, the friend has become a disciple. The friend has become a disciple.
And when the friend has become a disciple and has surrendered to the spiritual
master. So, the spiritual master is, these dynamic of the relationship suddenly
changing. Kr..., Arjuna is surprised, Krishna is plea..., pleasantly surprised to
see this. Of course, we can say, at, ultimately, will, Krishna is not surprised
about anything. Because Krishna is omiscient. He knows everything. But when
Krishna is performing His pastimes, He does not necessarily act like that. So,
Krishna is pleasan..., pleasantly responding, responding by smiling "iva". So,
generally speaking, how it works is that if one person has a problem. If there
are two friends. And one person has a problem. The other friend may just laugh
of the problem. And he says, so, for example, you know, if say, if sometimes,
if just some friend just laughs off. Then, we also feel like that. There is
nothing very serious. So, just as when Bhīma suggested to Krishna that Krishna,
when you are going as a shanti doot, please try your best for getting peace. So,
Bhī..., Krishna said, oh, Bhīma, you also? You were wanting war throughout and
now, suddenly, you are wanting peace. Truly, it is said that when war actually
comes, people become fearful. Hey, I am not fearful. So, Krishna was joking. And
Arjuna, Bhīma said I am not fearful. Now, sometimes, some weakness, when it
comes up, just by speaking a few words, which are basically, a, goading words,
the weakness goes away. But when a, a, a person becomes a disciple and
surrenders to spiritual master. So, the disc..., spiritual master cannot laugh
at the disciple. The disciple tells some problem. I have this problem. And if
you are not allowed, ahahahaha. You know, the disciple's heart will sing to the
bottom of the pataloka. Isn't it? He says, ahaha, he will feel mortified. I was
just some serious problem. And I need some solution. So, Krishna, when he sees
the sudden change in the relationship. He feels like smiling. But he restrains
the smile. "prahasann iva bhārata". That is why it is as if smiling. And, of
course, Krishna knows that, now, through Arjuna, through this arrangement, now,
He is going to speak a wisdom that is going to benefit, not only, Arjuna. But
there is going to benefit for all of humanity for all time to come. And now,
Krishna begins. That is the next verse.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ
        prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase
        gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca
        nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ

So, "aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ". That which is not worth lamenting. "aśocyān". You
are lamenting, not worthy of lamentation. "anvaśocas". You are greatly lamenting
for that. And by lamenting, "prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase". Your "bhāṣase", your
speech is "prajñā-vādāṁś". You are speaking words which seem to be like wise.
But what is the sign of true wisdom? That is "gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca". So,
"asūn" is actually life or life air, about, to be more specific. So, "gatāsūn"
means when the life air has gone away. That means when a person, when pers...,
when a per..., somebody who is dead. "agatāsūṁś" means life air has not gone
away. That means the person is not dead. "gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca". "nānuśocanti".
So, the word "śoca" is coming thrice in this particular verse. It comes first in
"aśocyān", then "anvaśocas", and then "śo...", "ānuśo...", "nānuśocanti". So,
He is saying that the Pandita, the true learned person, does not lament. But
you are lamenting. "nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ". So, here, by this what is He saying?
You are mourning for that which is not worthy of mourning, you know, mourning.
So, here, Arju..., Krishna, sort of, causes the bluff of Arjuna. So, what does
He do? He actually says, you are speaking big big words. What are the big big
words? He, he said that

        iti śuśruma

He says, I heard from scripture like this.

        narake niyataṁ vāso

        pāpam evāśrayed asmān

We will go to hell. We will get sin. And he is speaking all these big big words.
But what is the practical reality? The practical reality is that you are
overwhelmed by emotions. So, actually, you know, the test, education is not just
meant for verbalisation. Education is meant for transformation. Verbalisa...,
education means, verbalisation means, it is not just for, I know means, I speak
big big things. There should be a transformation. And the real education is not
the education of words. It is the education of emotions. The education of
emotions. So, the education of emotions means that, actually, the education by
which we know what emotions are appropriate. And what emotions are
inappropriate. What emotions are real. And what emotions are illusory. What do
we mean by real and illusory? It does not mean that all emotions when somebody
passes away, or some..., then, the emotions that we feel, it is not that the
emotions are false when relatives are crying. It is not that those relationships
are false. But the, the emotions may not, not false in the sense that that
person actualy feels grief struck. A person actually feels, you know, devastated
at times. So, it is not, we are not saying that the emotions are false. But the
point is that those emotions are false in the sense that they are based on a
false platform, the platform of our bodily identification. The platform that
the material reality is the actual reality. The platform that actually, you
know, this is the way things are. That is the way things will continue to be.
So, you know, when our emotions are uninformed. Emotions are uneducated. Then,
those emotions indicate that the knowledge has not been internalised. So, we may
be verbalising knowledge without internalising it. And if we are doing that, if
we are only verbalising knowledge without internalising it, then, that indicates
that we have not actually made much spiritual advancements. So, Arju..., Krishna
is telling Arjuna, yes, you are verbalising, you know, big big words, you know,
verbalising knowledge. But you have not internalised the knowledge. And because
of that, your emotions remain uneducated. "gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca".

So, it is described that when the soul departs from the body, along with the
soul, subtle body de..., goes. Along with subtle body, also, it is said that the
life air also goes. Now, what exactly is the life air? "āsūn" refers to, you
know, "āsūn" is, in hindi, it may mean tears. But here, it does not refer to
tears. "āsūn", it refers to life air. "gatāsūn" means life air goes away. So,
what is this life air which goes away? Actually, you know, in modern science, we
have the idea of oxygen. 42:01
