Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fTqrV1WC850
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_056_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_54_to_59_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=fTqrV1WC850&redir_token=XOj6uf0fUjOVM492Lr7e-uroZ118MTU0ODQ4NzQwNUAxNTQ4NDAxMDA1

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. So, today, we s..., s..., continue with our second chapter of the
Bhagavad Gita. And we will discuss the last section. This last section is from
verses 54 to 72. While we move forward, let us look at the overview of the
second chapter. So, this chapter has a total of five sections. The first section
deals with Arjuna's further question and eventual surrender. That is verses one
to ten. Then, Krishna systematically answers the various questions that Arjuna
has raised, the various arguments that Arjuna has made against fighting. So,
11 to 30, Krishna gives atma-jnana. The soul is indestructible. Therefore,
fight. This counters Arjuna's argument of, you know, compassion. He says, how
can I kill my relatives? He says, you are not going to kill the relatives. Then,
31 to 38 talks about how you should fight. Because by fighting, you will get,
attain heaven. Or you will attain earthly rule. Either way, you will en..., you
will enjoy. This counters Arjuna's argument that I am not, be able to enjoy. You
know, 39 to 53, now, takes the discussion from f..., karma-kanda, which is
attaining of svarga. That was the discussion, 31 to 37. But now, it moves
forward to karma-yoga. Seek liberation. "padaṁ gacchanty anāmayam". So, this
counters Arjuna's argument of fear of sinful reactions. Because will you get
any sinful reactions if you kill your relatives? No. If you are doing it in the
mood of yoga. "samatvaṁ yoga ucyate" as we discussed yesterday. Then, you will
not get any sinful reactions. Now, after hearing this, Arjuna will get a
question. You know, who is this person who is a karma-yogi like this? "tadā
yogam avāpsyasi". Krishna has said. One who is not disturbed by anything that
is, you know, heard any promises of material enjoyment. What are the
characteristics? That is the question which Arjuna asks here. And then, Krishna
answers. And that is the last section. The characteristic of "sthita-prajña".
So, let us look at, let us start with this. So, when we look at the
characteristic of "sthita-prajña".

        arjuna uvāca
        
        sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā
        samādhi-sthasya keśava
        sthita-dhīḥ kiṁ prabhāṣeta
        kim āsīta vrajeta kim

So, "sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā". So, Arjuna has, asking a question based on his
own l..., level of thinking. So, Arjuna, of course, we know is a pure devotee.
But in this situation, he is o..., orchestrated by yoga-maya. And he is caught
up in bodily misconceptions, bodily misidentification. So, at this level, he is
primarily thinking, should I be fighting? Or should I not be fighting? So, he is
thinking, Krishna is telling about this person who is the "tadā yogam
avāpsyasi". Who is situated in samādhi. Who has attained yoga. Will such a
person be fighting or not fighting? What kind of person is this? So, as the,
that is why he is asking the characteristics of such a person. Generally, when
we hear something from, you know, someone. Especially, if we are hearing in a
formal setting, in a class. It is said that, at the most, the audience hears
twenty percent of what the speaker speaks. And God only knows which twenty
percent it will be. So, often, they hear the thing which either entirely agrees
with what they are speaking or radically disagrees with what they are speaking.
That is what jail, strikes in their mind. So, Krishna has spoken a lot in the
verses from 11 to 53. But Arjuna has primarily con..., should I be fighting? Or
should I not be fighting? So, of course, in 37, in 38, Krishna has clearly told
Arjuna, you should fight. 37 was "yogaya ucyas...". You, Krish..., 37-38 was you
should fight. And if you fight:

        tasmād uttiṣṭha kaunteya
        yuddhāya kṛta-niścayaḥ
        
That was 37. Therefore, arise and fight. And 38 also was, if you fight. You will 

        naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi

        tato yuddhāya yujyasva
        naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi

        ...yuddhāya yujyasva
        naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi

But after that statement, in 37-38, from 39 to 53. There are several verses
which talk about mostly transcendence. Which talk about, not, there is no
explicit reference to fighting. So, along with that, there is a verse 49.
"dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma". Keep distant, keep aside abominal work. So, that
"avaraṁ karma", when Krishna is talking, He is referring to, you know, the
karma-kanda. Because that does not lead to the "varaṁ" of mukti. It does not
lead to liberation. But from Arjuna's point of view, killing one's relatives,
especially one's teacher, and one's grandfather, that is "avaraṁ karma". That is
inauspicious work. So, because in the last fifteen verses, last fourteen verses,
Krishna has not explicitly talked about fighting, so, Arjuna gets a question.
This kind of a person who is a yogi. Does that person, you know, will that
person fight or not fight? So, in that context, He asks this question. What are
the characteristics? Now, the question is interesting. "sthita-prajñasya kā
bhāṣā". What is the, you know, what is the language of such a person?
"samādhi-sthasya keśava". Such a person is situated in samādhi. "sthita-dhīḥ kiṁ
prabhāṣeta". How does such a person speak? "kim āsīta". How does such a person
sit? And how does such a person, "k...", "vrajeta kim". How does such a person
walk? Now, you know, these, if we just look at theses questions from external
perspective, this might seem like the question which are asked Mr. Universe
during a, a, his sport contest. You know, how does such a person sit? What is
the style of walking of a person? What is the style of the speech of a person?
So, now, Arju..., ila..., Arjuna is not interested in a, that sort of thing. So,
this is a serious philosophical questioning going on. So, that is why these
words are indicative of something deeper. So, "kim bhā...". "kim bhāṣā". "kā
bhāṣā". "kiṁ prabhāṣeta". These, in this context, are not to be taken literally.
So, Baladeva Vidyabhushana explains that "bhāṣā" refers to "bhāṣāte iti bhāṣā".
Th..., so, generally, we use the word "bhāṣā" to refer to language. That is
true. But the word "bhāṣā" has, like "bhāṣā". "bhāṣā" is a commentary. A
"bhāṣā". Like "Govinda Bhashya" is the commentary of Baladeva Vidyabhushana on
Vedanta-sutra. So, "bhāṣā" is said to be a commentary. And generally, "tikha"
is said to be a commentary on a commentary, a subcommentary. So, for example,
surrender unto me. It is like a commentary on Srila Prabhupada's commentary. So,
it wou..., we could call as tikha, subcommentary. Prabhupada's "Bhagavad-Gītā As
It Is" is a bhashya. So, it is a bhashya, or "bhāṣā". It does not only refer to
language. It refers to that which describes. And generally, how do we describe a
thing? With its characteristics. So, here, "kā bhāṣā" refers to what is th...,
how is this "bhāṣā" done of this particular person. What are the characteristics
of a person? And then, "kiṁ prabhāṣeta". That is referring to what is the manner
of speech of that person. And then, after that, "kim āsīta". How does such a
person sit? That refers to how does the person k..., regulate the senses and
keep them under control. So, sitting is a physical activity. But along with that
it refers to regulation, inactivity, self-mastery. So, how does such a person
restrain the senses? And "vrajeta kim" means, it is just not walking along a
fashion ramp. That is being talked about over here. You know, it is not a, the
gate of a person. It is, how a person moves around while being in the world,
filled with temptations. Filled with sense objects. How does such a person
operate? These are the four questions. And these four questions are answered by
Krishna in the next section. So, "kā bhāṣā". What is the characteristics? What
is the defining characteristic of such a person? That is answered in the 55th
verse, immediately, in the next verse. Then, "kiṁ prabhāṣeta". How does such a
person speak? This characteristic of speaking are answered in 56 and 57. And
then, "kim āsīta". How does such a person sit? You know, that is answered in,
fif..., from 58 to 63. How does such a person restrain the senses? And, you
know, how does such a person engage the senses? That is answered in 64 to 71.
"kim vrajeta". So, let us look at this one by one. Now, Prabhupada explains in
the purport. Prabhupada's, basically does not directly translate "bhāṣā" as,
"bhāṣā" as language. He gives us a symptoms or characteristics. And then, he
talks about rich person symptoms. Then, you know, sick person symptoms.
So, similarly, a transcendental symptoms. Let us see what K..., Krishna's answer
is.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        prajahāti yadā kāmān
        sarvān pārtha mano-gatān
        ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ
        sthita-prajñas tadocyate

Now, you know, we will see in this, these series of verses, Krishna uses various
words to describe that transcendentalist. But it is all talking about the same
person. So, here, the word, "sthita", "sthita-prajñas" is used. In a future
verse, "sthita-dhīr munir ucyate" will be used. So, we will look at these
different words. They all refer to the same person. But different attributes of
that preson can be understood by looking also at the describe..., description,
the name that is given by referring to that person. So, "sthita-prajñas". So,
actually, this verse, "sthita-prajñas" comes in this section of the Gita. But
after this, throughout the Gita, Krishna does not use the word "sthita-prajñas".
So, "prajñas" can mean, generally, means intelligence, wisdom, the faculty for
deep thinking. "sthita-prajñas". So, that is, the intelligence is fixed.
"sthita-prajñas". And what is the characteristic of such a person? Two
characteristics. "prajahāti yadā kāmān". "prajahāti" means to give up
completely. "kāmān". All desires. "sarvān pārtha mano-gatān". So, all these
"kāmā". How do they originate? "mano-gatān". And then, they are, or...,
originate from the mind. "ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ". Such a person is satisfied
within, by turning the mind inwards. Now, it is interesting that, normally, we
would think our, all our desire is to be happy. So, if somebody gives up all
desires. If that person gives up all desires. Then, that will also involve
giving up the desire for happiness. So, if we give up all desires, then how can
such a person actually be happy? So, that is the important word over here is
"mano-gatān". The, or, which kind of desires have to given? "mano-gatān".
"sarvān pārtha mano-gatān". "prajahāti yadā kāmān". So, th..., all the "kāmā".
That is originated from the mind. That they are given up. But the "ātma" is
a self-joyful. And when one situates oneself with the spiritual level, then
one experiences joy. So, that means, if we consider our three-level reality.
Three levels of existence. Th..., there is the soul, which is the spiritual
level. That is the mind, which is the subtle level. And we have our senses and
the sense objects, which exist at the gross level. So, normally speaking, the
soul's consciousness is rooted through the mind outwards through the senses to
the external world. And in the contact of senses and sense objects in the
external world, there is sometimes some pleasure. And often, there is pain,
also. So:

        prajahāti yadā kāmān
        sarvān pārtha mano-gatān

That means, the external senses that come. And so, external sense objects and
senses, which come con..., in contact with each other. The desire for that
contact and the pleasure thereof, that desire is rejected. And then, that
desire, there can be varieties of desires. I want to do this. I want to do that.
All those desires are rejected. "mano-gatān". But then, afterwards, "ātmany
evātmanā". So, with the "ātma", now, here, the word "ātma" is used twice.
"ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ". So, the mind, Prabhupada explains, thus purified, when
it is fixed in the self. Then, one gets happiness. "ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ".
"tuṣṭaḥ" means satisfied. This, the, so, the mind can be either looking ex...,
outward. Or the mind can be looking inwards. What do we mean by the mind looking
outward or inwards? As we discussed earlier, the mind is a route of
consciousness. Route. So, the soul is the root, root of consciousness. The mind
is the route of consciousness. So, now, when this consciousness from the soul is
coming outwards. At that time, through the mind, it can either go outwards
towards the external. But if we become introspective. That means we d..., direct
our thoughts inwards. When we direct our thoughts inwards, then we experience
an inner happiness by that. Because we, as souls, are spiritual. And as
spiritual beings, we are joyful, sat-cit-ananda. "ananda" is a characteristic of
the soul. So, the defining characteristic of "sthita-prajñaḥ", Krishna says, is
that such a person rejects external pleasures and rejoices in inner pleasures.
Such a person is "sthita-prajñaḥ". So, Srila Prabhupada explains very simply
what is the difference between a materialist and a spiritualist. He says,
materialist is one who seeks pleasure externally. And spiritualist is one who
seeks pleasure internally. So, you know, Prabhupada explains how the, all this
applies to devotees, also. Now, we may say we go to a temple. We take darshan of
the deities. So, the deities are external to us. The temple is external to us.
So, when we go there. Then, when do we kirtan, we are hearing sound. Which is
coming from the external soul. Some person is singing. Some person is playing
kartal, mrdanga. So, aren't all these also external pleasures? How are they
internal pleasures? Actually, yes. These may seem to be like external pleasures.
But they are external pleasures that take us inwards. See, there are external
things in this world which can take us further outward, outward, outward. So,
because if we are attracted to sense objects of this world. Then, those sense
objects do not have any intrinsic connection with us. So, that is why when we
get attracted to them, we go get further lost. We get further distance to and
alienated from our inner spiritual nature. But Krishna is present within our
heart. But that same Krishna manifests externally through various, you know,
spiritual sense objects. Various divine manifestations. So, deities. The holy
name. The mrdanga. So, all these are, in, you know, different ways and to
different degrees manifestations of Krishna. And when we focus our consciousness
on them, we may, it may seem like we are getting some external pleasure. Or
pleasure from an external source. But actually, the pleasure that comes is the
contact of the soul and Krishna. And the pleasure that comes thereof. So, that
same Krishna who is manifesting externally, say, as the holy name. As the deity.
That same Krishna is present in our heart. And when we contact Krishna
externally, we awaken spiritually. And the more we become awakened spiritually,
the more we can perceive and relish Krishna's presence internally. That is why
the happiness that we get in devotional service, w..., in the initial stages of
our spiritual life, we need external stimula for reminding ourselves of Krishna,
and for connecting with Krishna.

And of course, in the advanced stages, also, we still use the external
manifestations. We serve those external manifestations. We go and take darshan
of the deity. Because we love Krishna. So, it is the, but the important point is
the happiness that a devotee gets is not external. It is internal. Because it
is, ev..., even if there is an external factors involved, those external factors
lead us inwards more and more. So, in this way, a devotee turns from outer
happiness to inner happiness. And this is the defining characteristic for
"sthita-prajñas". So, the most important characteristic is where do we seek
happiness? If we are seeking happiness externally, we are materialist. So,
Krishna is telling Arjuna that no. This is "sthita-pra...", "sthita-prajñas".
Arj..., Krishna wants Arjuna to become a "sthita-prajñas" like this. One who
seeks happiness internally. Now, you know, many people think of internal in a
very simplistic sense. People think that, ok, whatever is inside me is internal.
And whatever is outside me is external. But this is a, is, this is a naive
idea. People say look within and find peace. But when I look inside, I find only
agitation. You know, this desire is there. This anxiety is there. This tension
is there. So, actually, if we think that what is inwards is spiritual. And what
is outward is as material. That is a simplistic understanding where we are still
considering ourselves to be the body. So, when I think myself to be the body.
Then, that which is outside the body is external. And that which is inside the
body is internal. But actually, inside the body, there is the mind. And there is
the soul. So, the mental is not spiritual. What is connected with the mind is
not spiritual. So, when I have to understand what is internal, what is external,
I have to understand with the reference point, not of the body, but with the
reference point of the soul. So, from the soul's point of view, the bodily and
the mental, both are external. That is why the desires that come up in the mind,
they may be inter..., internal to us from the body's point of view. But from the
soul's point of view, they are external. That is why Krishna is telling over here
"sarvān pārtha mano-gatān". When I have to look for happiness, that is not just
internal at the mental level. We have to look for happiness at the spiritual
level. So, "ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ". So, look at the pl..., for happiness, not
just internally. But in the internal at the spiritual level. Not at the mental
level. So, from the Bhagavad Gita's point of view, even the mental is external.
The mental is not internal. Although it may be internal from the body's point of
view. From the soul's point of view, it is external. And so, Krishna is telling,
therefore give up mental desires and turn towards Krishna. And find happiness
thereof. So, this is the first defining characteristic. Now, this is "kā bhāṣā".
The "bhāṣā". The cha..., defining characteristic for transcendentalist is seek
happiness internally, not externally. Then, after that, in the next verses,
Krishna will answer the question of how does a such person s..., speak. Let us
look at that. So:

        duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ
        sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ
        vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ
        sthita-dhīr munir ucyate

"duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ". "udvigna". "udvigna" means agitated or dejected.
"duḥkheṣv". So, when there is misery, one does not become dejected. "sukheṣu
vigata-spṛhaḥ". In happiness, one does not ge..., get more desires. Let me have
more. Let me have more. "vigata-spṛhaḥ". So, Baladeva Vidyabhushana and
Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura, they explain this in practicals. You know, they
say that, you know, if some, if as a renunciate, somebody goes to some..., one
goes to somebody's house. And that person gives a lot of opulent food to eat.
So, one does not become delighted, you know, by that and start soaring. Oh, may
you have a happy a family life. May you have this. May you have that. And if
somebody goes to somebody else's house. And that person just, you, beggar, get
out of here. I will curse you. No. He does not speak like this. He says, he
accepts whatever come.

        duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ
        sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ

So, it is interesting in this verse, you know, it is said that dukha and sukha
will be there. You know. For as long as we are in material existence, we will
get dukha and sukha. But generally, what happens when we get sukha? We desire
more of it. So, for example, you know, if something good happens to us. If
somebody starts praying us for something. Then, our desire becomes, oh, you
know. Speak more. Speak more. Speak more. Speak my glories more and more. We
may not speak it directly. But we feel like that. So, what happens when we g...,
anything gives us happiness? That generates desires. "spṛhaḥ". I want this more.
I want this more. Whereas when some misery comes to us, then we feel. Oh, why is
this happening? Maybe, I should not be doing this. "vigata". We become
"udvigna-manāḥ". But such a person is a, a transcendentalist is not affected
by this. So, now, if this is talking about speech. Where is the reference to
speech over here? Actually, as speech, is determined by our thoughts. So, this,
Krishna will answer the question of speech in the next verse. But, you know,
Krishna tells that, first of all, you know, we are not just talking abou...,
Krishna does not talk a..., about a spiritualist, or a "sthita-prajña",
"sthita-dhīr munir" as doing some just superficial changing of speech. There are
some people who will just decide, you know, I will speak in a very sweet and
polite way. Internally, they feel, you know, I want to beat you to death. And
externally, oh, you are such a nice person. Thank you for your help. Whatever
corrections you have told me, they were very good for me. I will do them. So,
sometimes, you know, there are some people who, who gets so frustrated with
their bosses that they keep some boxing bags in their home. And they punch them.
And they think they are punching the face of my boss. So, in the material life,
there is lot of duplicity. Internally, we feel one way about the person. But
externally, we feel differently. But Krishna is telling. He will talk about how
the person "kiṁ prabhāṣeta" in the next verse. But before He speaks about that,
He say, talks about the mentality of that person. What is that mentality? That
actually, when happiness and distress comes, one is not unduly excited or
agitated by it. So, you know, many times, we may not speak externally. But our
mind is speaking internally. For example, in the morning, the alarm clock ring.
Then, the alarm clock is ring, ring. It is saying wake up. But then, internally,
the mind is saying, you know, go to sleep. So, we are not phy..., hearing it
physically. But we can all hear the mind's voice. So, Krishna is telling that
the, what is, should be, we have to, the, for the transcendentalist, the mind's
voice itself has changed. So:

        duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ
        sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ

Then:

        vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ

So, this "rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ". This sat..., same, this same line, which is here
in 2.56C will again come in 4.10. Krishna tell, tell over there:

        vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā
        man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ
        bahavo jñāna-tapasā
        pūtā mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ

4.10A comes over there. So, there, we will discuss it in much more detail. And
Prabhupada gives a very interesting explanation of what "rāga-bhaya-krodhā"
refer to. Here, Srila Prabhupada explains that a devotee stays fixed in the
spiritual path, in the path of devotional service, irrespective of what happens.
"rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ". So, Srila, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport in
this case. So, first of all, there is "sthita-dhīr munir ucyate". So, Prabhupada
explains what is a "muniḥ". So, first po..., po..., point is, you know, first
three lines, Prabhupada is explaining what is a "muniḥ". A "muniḥ" is that
person who can agitate the mind in various ways for mental speculation without
coming to a factual conclusion. So, there, basically, "muniḥ" is a speculator.
So, there are people who try to infer, you know, ok, this happened. What is the
cause of this? So, there was a f..., there was a fruit on a bi..., a tree. And
then, a bird came and tuck, and set on a branch. And then, the bird flew away.
So, now, at that time, the fruit also fell off. So, now, some observer,
speculator starts thinking, actually, because the bird came and set on the tree,
that is why the fruit fell. Or because the fruit fell, the bird got frightened
and the bird went away. Or, the two are unrelated. Or, the fruit's presence
attracted the bird. But when the fruit fell, the bird got frightened. And the
bird went away. You know. Or, or the bird came. And that is why the branch could
not hold the weight. And then, when the branch was shaking, both happened. The
bird got frightened and flew away. And then, the fruit also fell. So, now what
is the actual reality? You know, we can observe events. And we can try to infer
causes. But it is very difficult to find out what the cause actually is. In
fact, the whole concept of casuality itself is a mental construct. You know,
that means, when I hold a glass over here. And when I drop the glass, tuck. It
falls and breaks. So, then, I generally attribute a cause-effect connection. Ok,
I let the glass loose. That is why the glass fell. And when the glass fell, it
broke. So, why, what is the cause of the breaking of the glass? The cause is,
that the glass is brittle. And when it falls on the floor, it will break. That
is fine. As far as it goes. But within a particular framework, when we can link
the cause and effects, we can do that. But beyond that, in real life, there are
so many multiple factors involved. So, if we want to observe effects and
determine causes, we can go on and add infinite analysis. So, "rushi" is a
person who like that, go..., uh, sorry, munir here, is a person who goes into a
lot of speculation. This may be it. This may be it. This may be it. But, you
know, Prabhupada explains "sthita-dhīr munir", is a person who has gone beyond
such speculation and has come to conclusion. What is the conclusion? Prabhupada
quotes from the "Stotra-ratna" over here. It is a very beautiful verse.

        bhavantam evanucaran nirantarah
        
So:

        bhavantam evanucaran nirantarah

So, He, the Bhagavad, Yāmunācārya. This is a very famous series of verses, 
called Stotra-ratna. So, he says, "bhavantam". Unto you, oh, Lord. "evanucaran
nirantarah". "anucaran". When I started following you. "nirantarah".
Continuously. Then, what happened?

        praśānta-niḥśeṣa-mano-rathāntara

So, "mano-rathā". The mind is like a, I mean, a chariot. Now, which is
constantly moving at high speed. "praśānta-niḥśeṣa". It became calm. It became
peaceful. You know. "kadaham aikantika-nitya-kinkarah". When, oh, Lord, will I
become, will I realise that I am your one-pointed servant? "aikantika",
"kankarah". So, "kinkarah" is a servant. "kinkaroti". What should I do? One who
asks the, like this, constantly. You know, such a person is called a "kinkarah".
"kadaham aikantika-nitya-kinkarah". "aikantika". One-pointed. And "nitya".
Eternal. "karah...". "praharsayisyami sanatha-jivitam". And I will be satisfied
forever that I have got a master. And therefore, I will be satisfied. See, you
know, in this world, we want many things. You know, if I do this. If I do that.
Then, I will become happy. But a devotee understands that if I have a r..., my
relationship with Krishna, that itself is a source of supreme happiness. I do
not need anything else. So, the only thing I need is to understand how wonderful
is Krishna. And how fortunate I am to have a relationship with Him. So:

        kadaham aikantika-nitya-kinkarah
        praharsayisyami sanatha-jivitam

So, "sanatha-jivitam". People in this world are "sanatha". They have no shelter.
I have got a shelter. And I am happy with that shelter. So, that, you know, once
a devotee becomes fixed. Yes, Kri..., Krishna is my be all and end all. Then,
the mind does not wander here and there. So, Prabhupada explains, "sthita-dhīr
munir" refers to such a person. The mind has become fixed on Krishna. So, the
second part of the purport, there are no paragraphs over there. But, but, a
"sthita-dhīr munir". So, they say, this is, called a "muniḥ", fixed in mind. So,
this is talking about "sthita-dhīr munir". The s..., next three sentences, four
sentences. Then, after that, Prabhupada explains how such a person is "duḥkheṣv
anudvigna-manāḥ". So, he is talking about "duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ". How does
it, that happen? Generally, you know, whenever we get any trouble in life, we
assume that we do not deserve it. That is our default assumption. So, because of
that, the question comes up, why is this happening? So, generally, f..., when we
understand things from the karmic perspective, we can objectively see that there
are many things, good also, which we do not deserve and we get it. Some...,
sometimes, so a students may feel very bad. Oh, I have studied so much, but I got
such poor marks. But actually, student will also, everything seriously, will see
that, there are many times, when I did not study so well. But still, whatever I
have studied came in the exams. And I got some mark, good marks, also. So,
actually, this hand of luck, or hand of destiny, whatever you call it, it works
out both ways. Sometimes, we get lucky breaks. And sometimes, we get unlucky
situations. So, you know, this is how destiny, we can, you know, infer the role
of destiny in our life. A devotee understand that this is ultimately because of
my own past karma. And whenever suffering comes, devotee has the attitude which
Brahmaji talks about in his prayers, in the Fourteenth Chapter of the Tenth
Canto that:

        tat te ’nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo
         bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam

This is my own karma. But you have minimised it, oh, Lord. So, when we see that,
ok, my suffering is minimised. Then, a devotee does not get too agitated by
misery. "duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ". Then, after that, the next paragraph
explains "sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ". So, this means, oh, when a devotee ha..., gets
some comfortable situation, that the devotee stays fixed. The thing is that, oh,
Krishna has given me such a comfortable situation, let me serve Krishna more and
more. Does not become attached to that comfortable position. But continues to
serve Krishna. We see this in Srila Prabhupada's life. Srila Prabhupada were
e..., excellent example of "sthita-dhīr munir". You know, he had so many
problems. He started, to start a, he tried to have a business with which he
could support financially his spiritual master's mission. But the business
repeatedly failed. When he started the league of devotees. But there was a
conspiracy against him. And he had to give up the land, the place where he was
having that league of devotees, in Jhansi. Then, he tried to run "Back to
Godhead.". But then, he ran out, which, f..., w..., paper and finances. Then, he
tried to work with his godbrothers. But the godbrothers had very constricted
vision of. And they did not want him to expand "The Harmonist" and the other
magazines that he was publishing. He did not even get basic facilities several
times. Then, he was, you know, living in Vrindavan. And he started publishing
his books. But people were not taking them, much of his books seriously. Then,
he went to America. On the way, he got a heart attack. Finally, he reached
America. But in, in battle, Pennsylvania, he was treated more like a curiosity
object than a spiritual teacher. Nobody was taking him seriously. Then, he went
to the Lower East Side.. And there, his type recor..., tape recorder was stolen.
Typewriter was transacted. Then, even after that, he went and stayed in the
bowery. And there, also, you know, his, you know, own room mate, who seemed to
be the most promising of all the attendance of the programme, he turned violent,
when person attacked Srila Prabhupada. So, in spite of all these situations,
"duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ". Prabhupada kept going, kept going. And later on,
when he gave, got facilities. What did he do? He had beautiful temples all over
the world. But "sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ". Srila Prabhupada did not think. I have
got wonderful temples. Let me just stay comfortable. No. He was constantly
traveling and preaching. And then, "vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ". So, Prabhupada
says that, for the Lord's service, the devotee is always daring. He is always
daring. And he is not influenced by attachment or aversion. So, attachment means
"vīta", "vīta-rāga". "rāga" means, one does not think I want this. I want that.
And only, if I have this, I will do service. No. Whatever the situation, the
devotee is ready to do service for Krishna. And "bhaya". You know, Prabhupada
had practically no fear at all. Otherwise, how could he have got alone to
America? So, what does a, a, how do we become fearless? Actually, fearlessness
comes, not just by the absence of f..., fear, but by the awareness of a presence
that dwarves fear. You know, fearlessness does not come just by absence of fear.
You know, all of us have our fears. And we cannot just wish away those fears.
But fearlessness comes by the awareness of a presence that dwarves fear. When we
unde..., dwarves, when we understand that Krishna is there. And Krishna is the
Supreme Being. And in front of Him, whatever it is that causes misery, that is
tiny. Krishna is huge. And all the problems of the world are tiny. When we
understand that, then we become free from fear. So, Prabhupada was always in the
Consciousness of Krishna. And, you know, when he was in the Lower East Side.
There were often snipe..., shooters. And people with, you know, people with, who
had taken drugs and they had guns. And sometimes, they would shoot around. And
Prabhupada was fearlessly going around over there. Because he knew he was there
it for Krishna. And he was traveling and preaching.

And "vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ". "krodhaḥ" is anger. So, a devotee is free from
anger. Because the devotee understands that Krishna is in control. So, when
Krishna wants, the results will come. Krishna does not want, the results will
not come. So, Prabhupada's lack of anger, we can see, here, the anger refers to
more like frustration. See, when anger, when it is internalised, it becomes
resentment. It becomes, you know, hatred. And it takes, become, it comes up in
ugly ways in the future sometimes. But when that anger is expressed outward, it
comes as a, temporary tantrums. Where that person may shout at others, blast at
others. Now, Srila Prabhupada, no matter how many reversals he faced in his, you
know, obstacles at reversals in his preaching. He kept on going. He never got
frustrated. Now, we may say that, devo..., Prabhupada would get angry,
sometimes. You know, shout at devotees, sometimes. You know, especially those
who were, you know, those who he was training. So, what about that? Actually, a
pure devotee may get angry sometimes. But a pure devotee is never controlled by
anger. So, Prabhupada would sometimes get angry. And for a few moments, he would
be angry. And after that, the cycles of things are going on normally. So, anger
would never take control of him. Now, a devotee may use anger for training, you
know, somebody else. But the devotee does not get controlled by anger at any
time.

So, this is the internal, you know, thought process. And then, based on this
thought process, what happens? The external expression comes out.

        yaḥ sarvatrānabhisnehas
        tat tat prāpya śubhāśubham
        nābhinandati na dveṣṭi
        tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

"yaḥ sarvatrānabhisnehas". So, whatever one gets in this world.
"sarvatrānabhisnehas". Sometimes, we will get good. Sometimes bad. Sometimes
auspicious. Sometimes inauspicious. "nābhinandati na dveṣṭi". Such a person is,
does not praise when good comes. And does not, a, resent when bad comes. Such a
person is "prajñā pratiṣṭhitā". That "prajñā", "sthita", earlier, is
"sthita-prajñas". "prajñā pratiṣṭhitā". Same point has been talked about. You
know. So, in this world, good and bad will always keep coming. So, when the good
and bad come, how can we just become artificially? You know, this is not good.
This is not bad. Is it that the devotee has to become blind? That whatever is
happening, it does not matter. You know, is it that, see, sometimes, if that
person is given anastacia. If that person does not feel anything at all. So,
then, even if that person is cut or massaged, that person does not feel
anything. Now, is it that a devotee has to desensit..., devotee should
desensitize themselves to anything material? So that they do not feel anything
as good or bad. No. It is not like that. Devotees, though desensitize themselves
from the material, they focus on sensitizing themselves to the spiritual. And
when their f..., vision is focused on the spiritual, the material is perceived.
But the material does not dominate their perception. That means, when devotees
are preaching. Now, if you see Prabhupada, when he would preach. You know, he
would be concerned how many people are coming for the programme. But his focus
was not how many people were coming. You know whether he was talking with one
hi..., person in his room. Or whether he was addressing ten thousand people in a
public programme, Prabhupada would be enthusiastic to speak Krishna, always. So,
at the same time, he also wanted the results to come out. So, he was concerned
about how things would, w..., working, or things were emerging, also. But a
devotee is not primarily focused on that. So, whether good or bad comes, the
devotee is fixed. Because devotee considers that my service is fixed in Kr...,
my service for Krishna will always continue. So, Prabhupada explains in the
purport that in this world, there is always some disturbances.

"There is always some upheaval in the material world which may be good or evil.
One who is not agitated by such material upheavals, who is unaffected by good
and evil, is to be understood to be ﬁxed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness."

So, now, generally, we use the word "upheaval" in negative terms. Upheaval means
there is some agitation. Some disruption. So, you know, why, why does Prabhupada
say upheaval may be good, also? How can we have good upheavals? The point is
anything that distracts us from our, you know, focus in life. That is upheaval.
So, often, when we gain successes, at that time, we let our guard down. And we
let our guard down, that is the time when maya can attack us. So, if the good
also distracts us, and, from our focus, then that can become bad. So, one should
not be disturbed by the good, also. On the thirteenth day of battle in
Kurukṣetra, the, actually, the tenth day, Bhīṣma fell. Eleventh day, Droṇa
became the commander. Eleventh and twelfth, you know, Bhīma exhibited f...,
tremendous prowess. And on the twelfth day, Abhimanyu was killed through the
Chakravyuha. Thirteenth day, Arjuna de..., pr..., vowed to take revenge. And
throughout the day, Arjuna was so tirelessly and fearlessly breaking into the
ranks of the Kaurava forces. But as a last ditch effort, Duryodhana got not six,
but eight maharathas to surround, you know, you know, Jayadratha from all sides.
Then, when he was surrounded on all sides, then Arjuna was so close, yet so far.
He was almost like a cloud of arrows was coming. And Arjuna could not move at
all. For he could just barely maintain his position. And the sun was sinking,
you know, rapidly towards the western horizon. And as a, as Arjuna, you know,
became concerned. So, Krishna used the Sudarshana Chakra to cover the sun. And
as soon as the sun got covered. You know, the Pa..., Kauravas erupted inj oy.
And as they erupted in joy, Arjuna became perplexed. And he started lowering his
bows. Krishna urgently told him, Arjuna, keep your bow ready. Now, there is
still time. And then, He told him, use the Brahmāstra. And shoot in such a way
that Jayadratha becomes killed. And Jayadratha has prot..., a, protected by a
boss. So, shoot the arrow in such a way that the head, when it is cut, it will
go and fall in the lap of Vridhakshatra. Vridhakshatra was his father. And he is
doing austerities, saman panchak. So, when Krishna, as per Krishna's
instruction, Arjuna took the bow. And K..., Arjuna did not ask any questions.
And as he was about to shoot the bow, Krishna removed the Sudarshana Chakra. And
He said, there is the sun. And there is Jayadratha's sector. Shoot and shoot.
And as the Kauravas were observing, Kauravas were erupted in joy. And the
Kauravas were cheering Arjuna. He says, Arjuna, what is this? You have lost. And
then, Jayadratha, who had been hiding, trembling like a leaf in a storm. He came
out. He says, Arjun..., he says, Arjuna, sh..., I, I will set a funeral pyre for
you. Now, you can burn in the fire. 41:18
