Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m0Y-WPycyGM
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=B4PmjrnBP4_IariSvrp5t_4b9pZ8MTU0ODQ4NzUxM0AxNTQ4NDAxMTEz&event=video_description&v=m0Y-WPycyGM&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_059_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_71_To_Chapter_03_Text_03_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. So, we are now coming
to the last part of the second chapter. In the second chapter, Krishna talks
about various things. So, let us look at an overview of the second chapter
quickly before we move forward. So, chapter two overview. The, it has five
sections. We are in the last, this fifth section. So, the first section was
Arjuna's further doubts and surrender. The second section was based on the
knowledge that we are not the body. We are the soul. One should fight. So, this
counters Arjuna's argu..., compassion argument. You know, that, fight. And then,
second section, the third section, second section of Krishna's instructions. 31
to 38 is karma-kanda. So, what, that is the first application of atma-jnana.
Fight by doing prescribed duties, you will enjoy. This counters Arjuna's
enjoyment argument. Then 39 to 53, that is the fourth section of the chapter.
That is Nishkama Karma Yoga. So, first appli..., second application of
atma-jnana means that first one understands. Ok, if I am not going to die, then
let me, you know, if I, I will not be finished at death, then let me seek
something higher. So, one s..., thinks, aspires for heaven. But when one truly
understands that I am eternal and heaven is not eternal, then I will not, that
which is eternal, and for that, I have to become detached from material things.
So, fight with detachment. Then, no sinful reaction. So, this counters Arjuna's
enjoyment argument. And that, 54 to 72 is the characteristics of a
sthita-prajna. This based on, you know, Arjuna inquiring what kind of person
will stay detached. So, he wants to know whether such a person will fight or
not. What are the characteristic of such a person? So, we are in that section
right now. So, let us look at 71 and 72. Now, before we look at 71. The, there,
Srila Prabhupada makes a very profound point over here that a:

"person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is happy in the service of the Lord, and he has
no desires to be fulﬁlled."

So, basically, this is paraphrase of the famous Chaitanya Charitamrita verse.

        bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kāmī — sakali ‘aśānta’

And that is what is taught in the previous verse, previous sentence of the
purport. And:

        kṛṣṇa-bhakta — niṣkāma, ataeva ‘śānta’

So, now, Prabhupada says over here:

"he does not even desire liberation from the so-called material bondage."

So, actually, for a devotee, there is no material bondage only. So, even,
material bondage becomes so called bondage. So, very few, you know, if any
acharyas had called material bondage as so called bondage. Yes. Ji..., Rupa
Goswami does say that one who is situated in Krishna Consciousness:

	īhā yasya harer dāsye
	karmaṇā manasā girā
	nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu
	jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate

So, the concept of "jīvan-muktaḥ" is there. "jīvan-muktaḥ". There are two kinds
of mukti. There is videha-mukti. And jīvan-mukti. "videha-mukti" means when we
give up the body. And we become liberated, and go back to the spiritual
world. That is "videha". "videha" means without body. So, when one become
liberated compa..., completely. And jivan-mukti means one is in the body. But
while being in the body, one is not affected by the modes. One is not affected,
shaken up and down. That is jivan-mukti. So, Rupa Goswami quotes from the
scripture saying that, one who is completely absorbed with body, mind and words
in the service of the Lord, "īhā yasya harer dāsye". "ya...", "īhā" means in
this world. "yasya harer dāsye karmaṇā manasā girā". With body, mind and words,
you know, with actions, words and s..., thoughts. "nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu".
Such a person is situated always in service of the Lord. "jīvan-muktaḥ sa
ucyate". Such a person is "jīvan-muktaḥ". So, Prabhupada is talking about a, a,
for such a devotee, thus so called material bondage. Material bondage is not
actually real. It is just a, just a, a parishion. A parishion means, it is a,
there is no actual bondage. The devotee is already liberated. Now, Prahlada
Maharaja also says this when he says that I am not concerned about getting
liberated from material existence. I am simply concerned about how others will
gain your shelter, and others will attain liberation. Why? Because I am
relishing:

        tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ

I am relishing the nectar of your glories. So, now, let us move forward. In the
next verse.

        vihāya kāmān yaḥ sarvān
        pumāṁś carati niḥspṛhaḥ
        nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ
        sa śāntim adhigacchati

So, "vihāya". "vihāya" means to give up. "kāmān". "kāmān" is material desires.
"yaḥ sarvān". So, one who gives up all material de..., yaḥ s..., desires.
"pumāṁś carati". So, the "carati". The whole question was. You know, "kim
vrajeta". This is answer to that question. So, "carati". Such a person moves
around. How does that person move around? "niḥspṛhaḥ". Without any desires.
Hmm. "nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ". "n...", "nirmamo". Without any possessiveness.
"nirahaṅkāraḥ". Without any, you know, you know, "kartaha mitimani" without any
arrogance. Without any possessiveness. "sa śāntim adhigacchati". Such a person
will attain peace. Such a person will attain satisfaction in life. "sa śāntim".
So, now, what are the charac..., what are the requirements of "sa śāntim"? One
gives up material desires. And without material desires, one moves around in the
world. And without possessiveness. Without false ego. So, basically, one
understand that I am a soul. And I am working in this world for the sake of
yoga, not for gaining anything in this world. So, "śāntim adhigacchati". Such a
person will attain happiness. Now, you know, this verse, how is it related with
the previous verse? It is continuing the theme. The previous theme said, was,
said that, actually, just as rivers come into the ocean. But the ocean is not
disturbed. Similarly, desires come into the person, but the person is not
disturbed. Such a person attains peace. Now, this verse contains, so, now, that
ver..., that verse is talking more of a, you know, of the internal consciousness
of a person. But this verse talks about "carati". Ok, with that internal
consciousness, one moves around in the world. But one is not motivated by any
material desires or any material conceptions. So, such a person is happy. So,
actually, as long as we have any desires, especially material desire, that makes
us restless. That makes us take, you know, lose our peace. Now, when we have
spiritual desire, the desire to serve Krishna. Does that take away our peace? We
could say it takes away our peace. But it increases our remembrance of Krishna.
And when our, when our remembrance of Krishna is intensified, actually, that is
the perfection of life. That is what enables us to become truly happy. So, what
we need is remembrance of Krishna at all times. And, you know, you know, you
know, desires that increase our remembrance of Krishna, they are auspicious
desires. So, devotee has spiritual desires. And those desires actually take us
to a platform of supreme peace. That is the peace of knowing that Krishna is
always there with me. And I am always connected with Krishna. So, you know,
there is the peace of the mind. And there is the peace of the heart. Peace of
the mind is the peace of having no anxieties. There is, you know, no worry.
There is no fear. That is peace of the mind. But beyond peace of the mind is
peace of the heart. Peace of the heart is based on love. When we know that we
are in a loving relationship. And that relationship is eternal. And that
relationship is unbreakable. And whatever we are doing is actually to strengthen
and deepen that relationship. Then, you know, every situation that comes up,
that only becomes an opportunity to further that relationship. And in such a
situation, nothing can break one's peace. So, Bha..., K..., Bhagavad Gita talks
about peace of the heart, not just peace of the mind.

So, we will have desires. But because those desires are peripheral, you know,
you now, are not peripheral to our central being. Material desires are
peripheral to our central being. They have nothing to do with us as souls. But
spiritual desires are centered to our spiritual being. And those desires take us
closer to Krishna. They, as I said, deepen and strengthen our relationship with
Krishna. And that is why they bring supreme happiness. So, such a, Krishna says,
such a person is actually peaceful. Who? That person who is detached from
everything material. The Bhagavad Gita is f..., progressing in its own thought
and it will bring Krishna in the center later. Right now, Kr..., Krishna is
focusing on detachment from the negative. Later on, he will start talking about
attachment to the positive. So, it will happen progressively. Right now, he is
talking about detachment from the negative. So, you know, such a, "sa śāntim
adhigacchati". To extent a person is free from material desires, to that extent
the person will be happy. Now, Srila Prabhupada, in the purport, talks about
what is actually desirelessness.

"To become desireless means not to desire anything for sense gratiﬁcation. In
other words, desire for becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious is actually desirelessness."

So, how is it desirelessness? Because that is simply our nature. You know, for a
water to be liquid, it is not actually desire. It is nature. Similarly, for the
soul to serve Krishna, it is not actually desire. It is nature. It is within the
platform of being a servant of Krishna. There can be world..., multiple ways in
which the devotee can aspire to serve Krishna. But overall, that is not a
foreign desire to the nature of the soul. That is its, a part of its intrinsic
fabric, its intrinsic nature. So, Krishna is telling Arjuna, fight with such
detachment. Then, you will not be bound. And then, now, He describes the
concluding verse.

        eṣā brāhmī sthitiḥ pārtha
        naināṁ prāpya vimuhyati
        sthitvāsyām anta-kāle ’pi
        brahma-nirvāṇam ṛcchati

So, "eṣā". "eṣā" is this. "brāhmī sthitiḥ". "brāhmī sthitiḥ" is spiritual
situation. "pārtha". "naināṁ prāpya vimuhyati". Once one has attained this, one
will not become deluded. One will not come under "moha", "muhyati".
"sthitvāsyām". When one is situated, thus "sthitvā". "anta-kāle ’pi". Even at
the moment of death. "brahma-nirvāṇam ṛcchati". So, one will attain
"brahma-nirvāṇam". One will attain supreme liberation. So, "eṣā". "eṣā" means
thus. So, Krishna is, what is this "eṣā" referring to? It is referring to what
was given in the earlier verses. So, 70 and 71 talked about this stage of
"śāntim". And Krishna is saying, if one will, stays in the stage of "śāntim",
"eṣā brāhmī sthitiḥ pārtha". There will be two results. First results is, one
will not be deluded a..., again. And second result, he says, one will become
liberated. So, "A" and "B" are talking about not deluded.

        eṣā brāhmī sthitiḥ pārtha
        naināṁ prāpya vimuhyati

If we attain this stage, then we will not fall again into illusion. And
"sthitvāsyām", if we can be situated like this, at the time of dea...,
"anta-kāle ’pi". Then one will attain liberation. Now, this is the first
reference in the Gita to the significance of "anta-kāle". That we have to, you
know, have some special consciousness at the moment of death. And we have to
strive to cultivate that consciousness. That is, you know, a theme which will be
talked about, you know, quite empathetically in the Eighth Chapter of the
Bhagavad Gita. But this is the prelude. So, as the Chapter is in t..., is in
title, "Contents of the Gītā Summarized". So, the various contents, Karma Yoga,
Jnana Yoga, Bhakti Yoga. Which are the various yogas. They are talked about in
summary. So, similarly, the significance of the moment of death, that is also
talked about. So, it is hinted at. Just we have to remember at the time of
death. And, and, essen..., in the last verse of the Seventh Chapter, Krishna
will refer to this. And immediately, Eighth Chapter, Krishna will ask a
question. Say, the, ask for, so, Eighth Chapter, Arjuna will ask a question.
And then, Krishna will elaborate on moment of death. So, "brāhmī sthitiḥ". These
words have a lot of significance. Normally, the word "brahman" is neutral
gender. So, in English, there are two genders. There is masculine gender. And
there is feminine gender. So, he is masculine. She is feminine. You know, now,
in sanskrit, there is a third gender. Neutral gender. So, you know, this third
gender is used for describing various objects as appropriate in sanskrit
language. So, in the, you know, "Hari-namamrta-vyakarana", you know, Jiva
Goswami gives spiritual names for the various r..., concepts and rules of
grammar. You know, as the name itself suggests, "hari", "nam", "amrit",
"vyakaran". So, the "vyakaran" is grammar. "hari", "nam" is holy names. "amrit".
So, then, the, the, the grammar, that is based on the nectar of the holy names.
So, in the "Hari-namamrta-vyakarana", Jiva Goswami tries to, or, Jiva Goswami
actually sp..., devotionalises the, all the rules of grammar. And he uses the
rules accordingly. So, now, when he does this. He uses the rules accordingly.
So, he g..., gives spiritual names to the genders, also. So, for example,
masculine gender, he calls as Narayan linga. And the feminine gender, he calls
as the Lakshmi linga. So, there, the neutral gender, he calls as Brahma linga.
So, Brahma linga is neutral gender. Because Brahman itself does not, the
conception of Brahman is based on an understanding, the, of the concepts, you
know, which is preliminary. You know, it is not a complete understanding of the
Absolute Truth. So, it is understanding of Brahman, Abso..., of the Absolute
Truth is ordinary potencies. So, the point which I am making over here is,
generally, Brahman is considered to be neutral gender. That is the way it is
normally used in sanskrit. But here, Krishna is using a word "brāhmī sthitiḥ".
So, Brahman is masculine. Brahman is neutral. But "brāhmī" is feminine. So,
"brāhmī sthitiḥ" refers to the feminine gender. So, this can, this can be taken
as a hint towards Radharani. You know, Radharani is the ultimate, you know,
ultimate mediatrix. It is medium. And mediatrix. So, ma..., the feminine of
medium is mediatrix. So, why a media, we say. So, she is the mediatrix. She is
the means by which we attain Krishna. It is by her grace that we attain the
grace of Krishna. So, that Radharani is the, you know, person who gives bhakti
to everyone. So, "brāhmī". Because she is the f..., mas..., she is the feminine
aspect to the Absolute Truth. As a "brāhmī" can be taken to refer to that
Radharani, also. Now, "naināṁ prāpya vimuhyati". So, once we are situated in
that brahman stage, then one will not be deluded. This will be referred to by
Krishna again in 9.13:

        mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha
        daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

You, these two are the references to Radharani in the Bhagavad Gita. Of course,
both are indirect. In, in fact, when Srila Prabhupada in his "Bhagavad-Gītā As It
Is" also refers to Radharani only once. And that is where, that is in the
invocation:

        tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi
        rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari

That is the only place where he refers to Radharani. So, Radharani is very
exalted topic. And Srila Prabhupada, of course, does give us some hints of
Gaudiya Vaishnava, exoteric truths in the Bhagavad Gita. But his primary focus
is on, you know, on giving us systematic understanding of the fundamental
concepts of, you know, spirituality. So, he wanted Bhagavad Gita to be a book
which could be distributed to such a people in general. And for that purpose, he
presented the "Bhagavad-Gītā As It Is". So, now, Prabhupada, in the purport,
mentions about, so there is, is a, so there is a state of Krishna Consciousness
which we attain, then we will not fall back into illusion. "naināṁ prāpya
vimuhyati". So, it is a very advanced stage. But once one attains that stage,
one cannot fall back. And, you know, once when one is situated, thus one will be
liberated. So, Prabhupada's state..., the, focuses on when, now, g..., the
question. When will we attain it? So:

"One can attain Kṛṣṇa consciousness or divine life at once, within a second – or
one may not attain such a state of life even after millions of births. It is
only a matter of understanding and accepting the fact."

So, once we understand and accept the fact, then we can attain spiritual life.
We can attain Krishna Consciousness. You know, and when one is situated thus at
the moment of death. You know, this is the godly way of life, Prabhupada says.
Once we are situated thus, we become liberated. So, Srila Prabhupada, in his
purports, does something extraordinary. So, let us look at what exactly he does.
So, Prabhupada's strategy in the Bhagavad Gita is very deeply thought out. You
know. Prabhupada explains his, he calls his Bhagavad Gita as "Bhagavad-Gītā As
It Is". And in the "Bhagavad-Gītā As It Is", he is giving us systematic
understanding of the various concepts. You know, but his focus is on ensuring
that we get the understanding of the conclusions clearly. So, he focuses on
ensuring that our understanding of the conclusion of bhakti remains, you know,
consistently in the forefront of our consciousness. The Bhagavad Gita talks
about many concepts. And Prabhupada addresses those concepts, also, in his
purports. But the speciality of Prabhupada's presentation was that whatever
aspect of scripture he is presenting, he presents it in connection with the
conclusive message of the scripture. And in this way, he makes sure that what is
most important is not lost from our vision. You know, what is most important
stays with us. And it enables us to move forward in our spiritual life. So,
looking at the second chapter, Krishna has concluded by how one can bec..., stay
"sthita-prajña". And how one can attain liberation. So, now, let us move to the
third chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. I will come back to Srila Prabhupada's
presentation once again a little later.

So, the third chapter has 43 verses. The second chapter was among the longest
chapters. The longest chapter in the Bhagavad Gita is the 18th which has 78
verses. The second longest chapter is this chapter, s..., two, which has 72
verses. And the third chapter is also among the longer chapters. Of course, it
is not as long. There are fif..., so, 55 verses at the end, the Eleventh
Chapter. 47 verses are there in the Sixth chapter. So, there are longer
chapters. But generally, the ve..., chapters which are having more than forty
verses, they are among the longer chapters of the Gita. So, this is among the
longer chapters. And this is called by Srila Prabhupada as "Karma-yoga". And
that is a standard name which most commentators have used for the chapter. Let
us look at the overview. So, the first verse, one to ten, of course, verses one
and two are Arjuna's question. And a..., a..., in response to that, Krishna is
speaking. Karma-yoga is better than jnana-yoga. Now, this chapter's flow has to
be carefully understood. Then, a, from 10 onwards, 10 to 16, if you are not
qualified for jnana-yoga, then practice k..., karma-kanda, so, if not qualified
karma-yoga, then practice karma-kanda. Then, if you are qualified for
jnana-yoga, still practice karma-yoga to set an example. And then, there is a
description of the differences between karma-yoga and karma-kanda, from 25 to
29. And then, from 30 to 35, there is a description how karma-yoga elevates. And
then, th..., 36 to 43, there is, overcome lust, the main obstacle on the path of
karma-yoga. So, l..., now, the flow of this chapter is, is not linear. It is
spiral. What do we mean by spiral? You know, when a spiral is there, it v...,
i..., or object moves like this. And then tuck. It moves like this. So, it moves
circularly. And then it moves forward. So, while moving a forward trajectory, it
is also taking a circular trajectory. So, like that, this chapter is focusing on
the conclusion that Arjuna should practice karma-yoga. But how does the chapter
flow towards that conclusion? There is a proc..., progression. That progression
is based on a certain principle. So, karma-yoga, so, we will look at the s...,
starting question of Arjuna in detail. But basically, there is, in Krishna's,
Arjuna's mind, should I fight or should I not fight? Should I renounce the
world and go to the forest and practice jnana-yoga? Should I stay in the world
and practice karma-yoga? So, when he is talking, these two are the issues for
him. So, at that time, his primary concern is that what should I do? Should
karma-yoga or jnana-yoga? So, Krishna tells Arjuna, for you, karma-yoga is
better than jnana-yoga. That is the first point which he makes. Now, in the
progression if we see, you know, karma-yoga is intermediate. Jnana-yoga is
higher. We will look at the yoga la..., yoga ladder little later. And
karma-kanda is lower. So, Krishna is telling Arjuna for you, karma-yoga is
better than jnana-yoga. So, now, the question may come up, you know, in Arjuna's
mind. What if I am not qualified even for karma-yoga? So, if you are not
qualified for karma-yoga, do karma-kanda. And in karma-kanda, also, involves
performance of duties. And by duties, you will also gradually become purified.
Now, what if Ar..., Krishna says that, what if Arjuna feels that, I am, I am
qualified for jnana-yoga? So, Kr..., Arjuna, you are, Kr..., Arjuna may feel
that, oh, actually, you are misunderstanding my qualifications. You are not
understanding that I have the qualification for practicing jnana-yoga. Then,
Krishna says, ok. So, first point is be here. The second is, if you get, cannot
be here, then be here. And come upwards. That means practice karma-kanda. And
raise towards karma-yoga, gradually. So, the next is, ok, if you cannot, if
somebody says, I am qualified for practicing jn...., jnana-yoga. Then still,
yes, you can be here. But still be here. Why? To set an example for the world.
Then, the question may come up. If I am practicing karma-yoga. Generally, people
practice jnana-yoga for attaining liberation. Will I attain liberation by k...,
practicing karma-yoga? Won't I be bound? Then, Krishna talks about, ok, yes. You
got you should is understand the difference between karma-yoga and karma-kanda.
Karma-kanda keeps one in material existence. But karma-yoga does not keep one in
material existence. So, karma-ka..., karma-y..., if we practice karma-yoga.
Then, we do become liberated. And how, so, there, first, He talks about
philosophically the difference between karma-yoga and karma-kanda. And then, he
describes analytically how karma-yoga elevates. And then, last part is, ok, if
one may want to do one's duty. But still, one will be dragged away. So, what is
it that causes entanglement? Arjuna's first fundamental question was, ok, we all
become entangled. So, how can we avoid entanglement? And that avoidance of
entanglement is talked about in the l..., last section by r..., asking what the
force? Primarily, it is lust. "kāmā" that causes entanglement.  And how one can
be freed from "kāmā".

So, in this way, the flow is spiral. Ok, it starts with the point here. Yes,
practice karma-yoga. Now, there. Then, it goes downward. Ok, if you are not
qualified for karma-yoga, then practice karma-kanda. You know. If you are
overqualified, more than qualified for karma-yoga, you know, qualified for
jnana-yoga, but still, what do you do? You come forward. And, yes, you are
qualified for jnana-yoga. Go to set an example. Practice karma-yoga. So, it is
like that. It is a spiral moving forwards. So, that is the flow of this chapter.
And in this way, it leads to the conclusion that Arjuna should fight. So, let us
begin by looking at Arjuna's question first. So, Ar..., now, at the end of the
second chapter, Krishna basically talked about various things. Most importantly,
what he talked about was "śāntim". So, Krishna talked about peace. And that
peace, ok. So, Krishna talked about peace. And that has confused Arjuna. So,
we will look at Arjuna's confusion. First, let us read his question. Then, we
will look at his confusion. So:

        arjuna uvāca

        jyāyasī cet karmaṇas te
        matā buddhir janārdana
        tat kiṁ karmaṇi ghore māṁ
        niyojayasi keśava

So, "jyāyasī cet karmaṇas te". So, if Arju..., if you think that better than
"karmaṇaḥ". "karmaṇaḥ" is "buddhiḥ". If you think that better than "karmaṇaḥ" is
"buddhiḥ". "tat kiṁ karmaṇi ghore māṁ". Then, why are you engaging me in
"ghore", "karma", "niyojayasi keśava". So, if you think action is better,
knowledge is better than action, then why are you engaging me in this ghastly
action? Ghastly action is war.

        tat kiṁ karmaṇi ghore māṁ
        niyojayasi keśava

        vyāmiśreṇeva vākyena
        buddhiṁ mohayasīva me
        tad ekaṁ vada niścitya
        yena śreyo ’ham āpnuyām

So, "vyāmiśreṇeva". "miśreṇa" is mixed. "vyāmiśre", m..., k..., very deeply
mixed, seriously mixed. "eva vākye". So, actually, the world is not mixed. But I
am thinking them to be mixed. "eva". Like.

        vyāmiśreṇeva vākyena
        buddhiṁ mohayasīva me

So, those, you know, those mixture, miss, actually, the, sorry, "eva". The, the
"vākye", definitely "miśre". And, the, so, there is, in the first line, there is
"eva". And in second line, there is "īva". So, "buddhiṁ mohayasīva me". So, my
"buddhiṁ" has become as if deluded. "mohayasīva me". So, therefore, what should
you do? "tad ekaṁ vada niścitya". Therefore, tell me one thing for certain what
I should do. "ekaṁ vada". Tell me one thing which I should do. "yena śreyo ’ham
āpnuyām". By which, I will attain auspiciousness. By which, by which, I will
attain, attain "śreyaḥ". "tad ekaṁ vada niścitya". Tell me one thing for
certain what I should do. So, you know, now, "mohayasīva" is used. Because
Krishna is, Arjuna indicates that y..., yes, you are, your intention is not put
me into "moha". But somehow, I have gone into "moha". So, it is A..., you know,
"moha". "mohayasīva". "īva" is like. So, what exactly is Arjuna's question over
here? How has he gone into illusion? Let us look at it here. So, basically,
Arjuna sees two options here. There is inactivity. That involves renouncing.
That is what he is referring to as "buddhiḥ". So:

        jyāyasī cet karmaṇas te
        matā buddhir janārdana

So, he is thinking, if I do renounce, then, you know, that is the action of
"buddhir". And if I have to act, that I will have to fight. And he is thinking
of fighting is vikarma. So, why should I perform vikarma? So, he is th..., that
is his question. So, if you consider:

        jyāyasī cet karmaṇas te
        matā buddhir janārdana

So, if you are thinking that "buddhiḥ" is better than "karma". Then, why are you
asking me to do engage, engage in "ghore karma"? So, basically, Krishna, Arjuna
is seeing ony two options. One is action. The other is inaction. Or renuniation.
So, actually, it involves fighting. Which he feels will cause him karmic
bondage. And inaction, you know, renunciation, he thinks that will not cause him
bondage. Now, if we see, you know, Krishna has referred to mul..., multiple
things. But especially, in the last section. In the "sthita-prajña" section,
Krishna does not refer to fighting at all. In fact, Krishna does not refer to
fighting again after the 38 verse. 38 verse is fight, involves fight. But after
that, f..., how fight? Fight with equanimity. But from 39 to 72, there is no
direct exhortation to fight. So, what was the early instruction that was given?
That has not been cancelled. But that has not been reemphasized. On, but, but,
still, there have been other concepts which had been talked about. Which seem to
run contradictory to that instruction to fight. And what are those? For example,
Krishna has talked about "śāntim". Now, "śāntim" means peace. And peace means no
fighting. And Krishna has referred to "śāntim" just in the conclusion of the
Bhagavad Gita, second chapter, twice. In 70 and 71. In 70 and 71, He says, "sa
śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī". That was 70D. And 71D was "sa śāntim adhigacchati".
So, now, Kr..., Krishna is talking about peace of the heart. When the heart is
in harmony with our spiritual nature, then we get a deep, unflappable peace.
Whereas you know K..., Arjuna is thinking of peace in terms of what is happening
on the battlefield. Just peace means no fighting. So, that is, also adds to the
confusion of Arjuna. Because Krishna has used words which seemed to generally be
correlated with not fighting. With, so, peace is opposite of fighting. Opposite
of violence. Opposite of warfare. And Krishna has also repeatedly used the word
"buddhiḥ". Now, generally speaking, it is understood that those who had
developed their jnana, those who developed their "buddhir". You know, so, there
are subtle differences between word like jnana, buddhir, vivek. But in general
sense, they all refer to higher knowledge, higher intelligence. So, Krishna has
used the word ""prajñas. "sthita-prajñas tadocyate". "sthita-dhīr munir ucyate".
And "buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate". So, Krishna has used these words of, "budd...",
about related with "buddhiḥ". And generally, it is understood that those whose
jnana awakens, then jnana is normally associated "vairāgya" in the Vedic
culture. So, those who acquire jnana, they develop "vairāgya". Why? Because when
acqui..., one studies scripture, and acquires jnana, one understands this world
is temporarily and entangling. Let me get out of this world. So, that is what
generally people do. When they acquire jnana, they develop "vairāgya". So, now,
because Krishna has used so many terms related with jnana, "buddhiḥ", "prajña",
you know, like that. And "sthita-dhīr". "sthita". "sthita-dhīr munir".
"sthita-prajña". "prajñā pratiṣṭhitā". "buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate". So, Kr..., 
Arjuna is thinking that will correlate with renunciation. Therefore, "buddhiḥ"
i..., correlates with not fighting. So, he is thinking, Krishna, you have said
it is better to have, act in "buddhiḥ". For example, he said:

        vyavasāyātmikā buddhir
        ekeha kuru-nandana

So, in 41, He has said that, you know, those who have this "buddhiḥ", they are
one-pointed. One-pointed. And then, he has contrasted them with those who are
"avipaścitaḥ". Those are who attached to material things. So, he is thinking
that if the "buddhir" is superior. Then, why should I fight? So, Krishna ba...,
Arjuna basically sees two options. Either fighting or not fighting. Action or
inaction. But actually, in the previous chapter, Krishna has talked at multiple
levels. Krishna has talked at four distinct levels. So, let us look at these
four levels. And, so, Krishna has spoken at four different levels. So, Jnana
yoga is renounced inactivity. No fighting. Then, there is Nishkama Karma Yoga.
That is renounced activity. Fighting for liberation. Then, Karma-Kanda. That is
fruitive activity. That is fighting for attaining heaven. And then, there is
vikarma. There is sinful activity. That is giving up fighting. So, He has talked
about these four different options. And among these four different options,
which is the option that, you know, you know, Krishna has recommended? Actually,
Krishna has recommended second option to Arjuna. So, now, among these if we see,
the f..., the first is only, the first is involving inactivity. Jnana Yoga. All
involve activity. But. All the other three involve activity. But there is a
difference in the consciousness and motivation underlying that activity. So, one
is performing Nishkama Karma Yoga. At that time, one is understanding I am not
the body. I am the soul. And I should strive for liberation. That is what
Krishna has talked about from 38 to fif..., to 72. That is the level which
Krishna wants Arjuna to act at. And be..., prior to that, from 31 to 37, 38, He
has talked about fruitive activity. Work to attain heaven. And vikarma means
acting sinfully. Acting against one's dharma. So, h..., now, here, Krishna has
talked about vikarma in a different way. Krishna has said that, actually, giving
up your duty, giving up fighting will lead to bad karma. If you see, you know,
you know:

        tataḥ sva-dharmaṁ kīrtiṁ ca
        hitvā pāpam avāpsyasi

So, in 2.33, he has said that if you:

        atha cet tvam imaṁ dharmyaṁ
        saṅgrāmaṁ na kariṣyasi
        tataḥ sva-dharmaṁ kīrtiṁ ca
        hitvā pāpam avāpsyasi

If you do not fight, then you will lose your dharma. You will lose your, you do
not attain punya. You will be abandoning your dharma. And actually, you will get
"pāpa". So, now, the definition, conception of vikarma for Arjuna and Krishna
are different. Arjuna's conception is if I fight against my relatives, that will
incur bad karma. But Krishna is telling, no, if you, you do not do your duty as
a ksatriya, that will incur bad karma. So, now, after explaining this, you know,
ano..., another point is, let us look at this. Why this misconception about what
is vikarma arising? So, Kr..., Arjuna is misunderstanding the word that Krishna
uses in 2.49. In 2.49, Krishna says, "dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma":

        dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma
        buddhi-yogād dhanañ-jaya

So, there, He used the word "buddhi". And He says, "buddhi" is superior to
"avaraṁ karma". "avaraṁ karma" is inauspicious work. Inauspicious work. "dūreṇa
hy avaraṁ karma". You know, so, the, aus..., give up, keep aside auspi...,
inauspicious work. And act in "buddhi". So, when Krishna is using "avaraṁ
karma". If we look at the context, Krishna is calling karma-kanda "avaraṁ
karma". So, Krishna is saying, karma-kanda as compared to Nishkama Karma Yoga,
is "avaraṁ karma". Whereas Arjuna is thinking that fighting against his
relatives is condemn, i..., is condemned when compared to jnana. So, he con...,
Arjuna equates the buddhi with jnana. And he considers that. What is "avaraṁ
karma"? Fighting against my relatives. And killing my relatives. That is
inauspicious. So, basically, Arjuna feels that fighting will be inauspicious.
Therefore, I should not fight. So, when he thinks thus, ok, he asks this
question. And then, Krishna will answer.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        loke ’smin dvi-vidhā niṣṭhā
        purā proktā mayānagha
        jñāna-yogena sāṅkhyānāṁ
        karma-yogena yoginām

So, "loke ’smin". In this world. "loke ’smin". "asmin" is in this world.
"dvi-vidhā". "dvi-vidhā" means two kinds of. "niṣṭhā". There are two kinds of
faith. "purā proktā". In the, in the earlier, in the pa..., past. "purā" is
earlier. "proktā". I have spoken this. "mayā". "anagha". Oh, Arjuna, you are
sinless. And I have spoken this to you. Jn..., what are these two?

        jñāna-yogena sāṅkhyānāṁ
        karma-yogena yoginām

So, "jñāna-yogena sāṅkhyānāṁ". So, what are these two levels? I have talked
about jnana-yoga. And I have talked about karma-yoga. So, where has Krishna
talked about these two levels? He has talked about them throughout the Bhagavad
Gita. But there is one transitional verse. Where He mentions that. And now, I am
talking about this. In 2.39.

        eṣā te ’bhihitā sāṅkhye
        buddhir yoge tv imāṁ śṛṇu
        buddhyā yukto yayā pārtha
        karma-bandhaṁ prahāsyasi

So, in 2.39, He says, "eṣā". This is "brāhmī sthitiḥ". This is the s..., sorry.
"eṣā te ’bhihitā sāṅkhye". Actually, b..., both these lines start with the
"eṣā". 2.39 and seven point, 2.72. But "eṣā te", you know, "’bhihitā sāṅkhye".
So, till now, I have explained this in terms of "sāṅkhye". "buddhir yoge tv imāṁ
śṛṇu". Now, I will explain in terms of "buddhir yoge". Please hear it. "buddhyā
yukto yayā pārtha". When one enga..., acts in thus with "buddhiḥ", then,
"karma-bandhaṁ prahāsyasi". One will become free from "karma-bandham'. That is
what Krishna is talking about here. That become free from "karma-bandham". How
will one become free from "karma-bandham"? That he has described in the process
of karma-yoga. So, what are these two levels? There is karma-yoga level. And
there is jnana-yoga-level. So, I have talked about these two levels. And
actually, what determines which level one will be at? That depends on one's
consciousness. That is one's adhikar. So, if a person has the adequate level of
realisation and detachment. Then, that person can practice jnana-yoga. And the
person who has the, you know, the level of detachment and realisation
appropriate for karma-yoga can practice karma-yoga. Now, here, I would like to
explain one point. This will be a very important point for understanding Srila
Prabhupada's approach to the Gita. You know, he, some people asked that
Prabhupada is everywhere translating in terms of bhakti, only. Everywhere,
Prabhupada is translating everything as bhakti. So, for example, this is one of
the most, you know, graphic ways in which we can say that Prabhupada seems to
translate everything as bhakti. So, Krishna is clearly using "karma-yogena
yoginām". And Prabhupada's translates it as others by devotional service. So,
now, karma-yoga is not devotional service. Is it? Then, how can Prabhupada
translate karma-yoga as devotional service? Actually, as I said, Prabhupada, you
know, was asked once by a mayavadi. You know, Swamiji, you, you know, there is,
there are many verses in the Bhagavad Gita where there is no Krishna. And you
are putting Krishna over there. So, why do you do that? Prabhupada said that you
know, even, you know, in the, in the, you, mayavadis, actually, when Krishna is
there in the Bhagavad Gita, also, you remove Krishna from there. So, we will see
this in 9.34.

        man-manā bhava mad-bhakto
        mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru
        mām evaiṣyasi yuktvaivam
        ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ

So, Krishna uses "mām" six times. And there is a, by well-known mayavadi
translator, who says that, actually, we do not have to surrender to Krishna. We
have to surrender to unborn within Krishna. So, Prabhupada says that even when
there is Krishna explicitly in the Bhagavad Gita, you remove Him from there. So,
to counter the pernicious effects of that, the misleading effects of that,
Prabhupada says, I put Krishna, where He is not there, also, in the Bhagavad
Gita. So, now, that is, Prabhupada is presenting us Bhagavad Gita according to
the, you know, c..., its conclusive understanding, acco..., and according to
contextual requirement. So, I will explain these two points. Conclusive
understanding and contextual requirement. See, the conclusive understanding of
the Bhagavad Gita is that ultimately one should practice bhakti-yoga. We will
discuss in more detail how that is a conclusive understanding. But here, there
is two simple points to understand. I..., the Bhagavad Gita has its own flow.
But it concludes in 18.76..., 18.66. What is that?

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

So, there is a very categorical statement. You know, that Krishna is telling
Arjuna all that you have heard of, heard from anywhere else about what dharma
is, you know, f..., you forget all that. In fact, all that you have heard from
me earlier till now, also, you forget it. Just "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". Just
surrender unto me. You just do this one thing. Krishna is telling Arjuna.
Surrender unto me. "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". So, Krishna is giving this as the
emphatic unambiguous insistent conclusion of the Gita. That surrender unto me.
And surrender essentially is an act of bhakti. "saranagati" is a part of bhakti.
And actually, this verse is preceded by "man", "man-manā bhava mad-bhakto". That
is also clearly bhakti verse. So, the conclusion of the Bhagavad Gita is bhakti.
And not only is the conclusion of the Bhagavad Gita bhakti from its own flow. But
we see what the Arjuna do. You know. Arjuna lived as a devotee of Krishna. If we
look at Arjuna's life as we know it from the Mahabharata, often the Bhagavatam.
We see Arjuna lived as a devotee. So, Arjuna is a devotee. So, in that sense,
Arjuna did not go and practice jnana-yoga. Arjuna abounded, did not go and think
of some impersonal and born within Krishna to meditate on. Kri..., Arjuna
followed the instructions of Krishna. So, now, when we talk about the Bhagavad
Gita, its conclusion, that is bhakti-yoga. So, and that is a, f..., devotion
to Krishna as a Supreme Absolute Truth. So, the Bhagavad Gita gives a, so, this
is the conclusive understanding. What Srila Prabhupada is doing is, he is giving
us the conclusive understanding throughout. Now, why is he giving the conclusive
understanding throughout? Because of the contextual requirement. What is the
contextual requirement? You know, Prabhupada says in lecture, of that, one
contextual requirement, I believe, is mayavadis have removed Krishna where
Krishna is present, also. Another contextual requirement is that, actually,
people do not read so much. Prabhupada says that, you know, now, in Kali-yuga,
people have no interest in an..., anything. Very little interest to read
anything spiritual. So, when they have very little interest to read anything
spiritual. They will just take some book. And read it for a few minutes. They,
even they get some book. They will look at this. Ok, what are, I paid some money
for this book. What is this rascal saying? Let me see. Prabhupada, in the next,
the mentality, the psychology of a materialist. When he says, ok, I have given
some donation. Let me see what this book says. Prabhupada s..., Prabhupada says,
my intention is if any purport they open, any page of my book, they open. They
should get our essential message. So, what Srila Prabhupada does is, that, what
Krishna gives in the end of the Gita, Prabhupada gives throughout the Gita. So,
you know, actually, Prabhupada is not, you know, countering or contradicting
Krishna's words. Prabhupada is fulfilling Krishna's mission. Krishna's mission
is ultimately to get people to practice bhakti. So, that is the ultimate req...,
mission of Krishna as we can see from "sarva-dharmān parityajya". As we will
study the Bhagavad Gita, we will see that there is a very systematic flow by
which Krishna is establishing the supremacy of bhakti. But before Krishna comes
to that conclusion. Krishna goes through various intricate flows of thought. And
in Kali-yuga, people do not have the patience to go through all these intricate
flows of thought. So, Prabhupada makes sure that they get the crystal clear
conclusive understanding throughout the Gita. Now, if, we will see in this
chapter itself as well as elsewhere, karma-yoga ultimately culminates in bhakti.
So, in this chapter, seven, 3.30, will, Krishna will say:

        mayi sarvāṇi karmāṇi
        sannyasyādhyātma-cetasā

That offer all the fruits of your work to Me. And Krishna will also say, you
know, in the 18th chapter, "sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya". By all your work,
worship me. So, He thus say that karma-yoga ultimately culminates in bhakti. So,
if we look at the flow of the Gita, translating karma-yoga as bhakti-yoga is not
a contradiction. It is a fulfillment of Krishna's, you know, eventual
conclusion. And so, why, why is Prabhupada doing this? Because he wants to make
sure that people get the message clearly. Some people say that, you know, there
are academic scholars, who says, Bhaktivedanta Swami is a bhakti fanatic. You
know, everywhere, he just put, bhakti, bhakti, bhakti, Krishna, Krishna,
Krishna. But it is not like that. Prabhupada is aware of what is happening in
the Bhagavad Gita. We have to understand how Srila Prabhupada is aware. Let us
l..., move backward. And let us look at the second chapter of the Gita. If we
just look at the, you know, last verse in the second chapter of the Gita, we
will see something very interesting. Yeah. In the last verse, here, Srila
Prabhupada is saying that:

"Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has summarized this Second Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gītā as being the contents for the whole text."

So:

"In the Bhagavad-gītā, the subject matters are karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga and
bhakti-yoga."

And especially:

"In the Second Chapter"

This is important for our context, you know:

"karma-yoga and jñāna-yoga have been clearly discussed, and a glimpse of
bhakti-yoga has also been given, as the contents for the complete text."

So, now, if we look at what Srila Prabhupada has done. Srila Prabhupada has not
just given us a glimpse. In the second chapter, itself, Prabhupada has quoted
Ambarīṣa Mahārāja's, you know, engagement in devotional service.

        sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor

So, that is not just a glimpse of devotional service. Prabhupada has given us a,
quite a detailed explanation of devotional service. But Prabhupada was aware
that in this chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, actually, Krishna has given a
glimpse. Where is that glimpse? That is in 2.61. "yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ". So,
2.61B, Krishna gives that glimpse of bhakti. So, Prabhupada is aware that
Krishna has given a glimpse. But Prabhupada, in his purports, is giving us, not
a glimpse, but it is giving us a much d..., much more detailed picture. Why?
Because he wants us to not miss the conclusion of the Gita. To ensure that we
get the conclusion. And we stay with the conclusion. So, Prabhupada wants us to
stay focused in that way. And that is why, it is not that Prabhupada is
simplistically translating anything and everything as just bhakti. No. There is
a deep level of thought involved in. And Prabhupada is aware of what is
happening in the flow of the Gita. And if you read Prabhupada's purports
carefully, we will also see him talking about the flow, providing hints. But
along with that, Prabhupada focuses on giving us the conclusion. See, there are
a lot of technicalities in the Bhagavad Gita. And Srila Prabhupada, you know,
wanted to, when he was asked, you know, which book would you like to comment on
in future? So, Prabhupada said, Bhagavad Gita. The devotees said, but
Prabhupada, you have already written a commentary on the Bhagavad Gita.
Prabhupada said no. There are so many acharyas who have commented on the Bhagavad
Gita. And we can present Bhagavad Gita from the other acharyas' comment...,
based on their, their, the acharyas' commentary, understanding, also. So, the
point is that, actually, Prabhupada wanted the Bhagavad Gita to be commented on
further. So, the point is that the Bhagavad Gita's flow is so deep. And its
technicalities are quite fasci..., intricate and fascinating. So, Prabhupada
wanted, would have gone that, into that, also, in a future commentary. Now, that
does not mean that what Prabhupada's "Bhagavad-Gītā A...", "As It Is" is
inadequate or incomplete. You know, as far as taking us to the perfection of
Krishna Consciousness is concerned, Prabhupada's "Bhagavad-Gītā As It Is" is
perfect and complete. But as far as going to the depth of the wisdom of the
Gita, there is no limit. You know, every, e..., in every day, we can relish
newer and newer meanings. And if we speak on those meanings, the meanings can be
expanding. And we can relish it more and more. So, the conclusive understanding
of the Gita, Prabhupada has given "Bhagavad-Gītā As It Is". At the same time,
the depth in which we can keep going in the Gita, there is no end to that depth.
We can always going, keep going deeper and deeper. So, this is how we
understand. When we see the Bhagavad Gita, we will look at Srila Prabhupada's
purports. And we will see how Prabhupada uses a devotional understanding that we
can apply. Along with that, we will also look at the inner flow of the Bhagavad
Gita. So, the chapter overviews that I am giving, they are focusing on the inner
flow of the Gita. And we will discuss the inner flow, also. And we are
discussing along with that, the, you know, the, you know, purports, in which
Srila Prabhupada gives us a, you know, practical, con..., and devotional
understanding of how the essential meaning of those verses can be applied in our
life. Let us move on now to K..., a, our, Krishna answer. So, here, Krishna
says I have given you two levels of knowledge. And now, karma-yoga and
jnana-yoga. So, Prabhupada writes in the purport. This is a very well-known
quote of Srila Prabhupada. 

"Religion without philosophy is sentiment, or sometimes fanaticism, while
philosophy without religion is mental speculation."

So, Religion, you know, without philosophy is sentiment. We will discuss about
this in more detail in our, our next class. But here, I would like to emphasize
one more point with respect to Prabhupada's presentation of the Gita. You know.
Srila Prabhupada, you know, already wanted this Bhagavad Gita out as a book for
distribution, you know, in general. And he wanted that to be like the, you know,
f..., fundamental book which the devotees would use in their distribution. So,
if they are going to use that as the fundamental book, then it has to be a, for
wieldy size. Now, "As It Is", Prabhupada's Bhagavad-Gītā is big. You know. It is
several hundred, seven hundred, eight hundred pages. Very big. Depending on the
kind of printing that one does. And if one goes in technicalities, it will
become much bigger. So, Prabhupada keeps us hammering the fundamentals.
Hammering the basics again and again. And by routing us in the basics, he makes
sure that we do not get caught up in technicalities. So, make sure the
conclusion is clear. We see this same point in the jnani brahman, in the Tenth
Canto of the Srimad Bhagavatam, in the pastime of the jnani brahmanas. So, 23rd,
24th Chapters. They talk about, 23rd Chapter basically talks about this in Tenth
Canto. So, you know, the brahmanas got caught in the technicalities. Oh, we have
to do this yajna. We have to offer this. We have to chant this mantra. And the
Yajna Ishvara, Lord Krishna sent His own representatives. The Yajna Eshvara
asked for the yajna bhu..., yajna auti. That is, he asked for some food. But
they neglected him. Whereas the, the jnanic brahman patmis, what happened to
them? They immediately came. Yes, Krishna has asked for food. Immediately, they
left everything and came to Krishna. So, that is the, a, imp..., example of not
getting caught in technicalities, but keeping in one's, you know, cont...,
consciousness, keeping one's c..., you know, a, sights, vision clearly fixed on
the ultimate goal. And along with that, Krishna also talks about in the next
verse. So, a, a, so, a, actually, there is the conclusion, which Krishna Himself
gives in the Bhagavad Gita. Not in the next verse. But in the 18th Chapter, He
gives the conclusion. And, we see this again demonstrated in the pastimes of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when he was in South India,
outside the Srirangam Temple, he saw the brahmana. Who was apparently
illiterate. And he could not even treat, pronounce the Bhagavad Gita verses
properly. And because he was not able to pronounce the Bhagavad Gita verses
properly, people were teasing him. You know, there were other brahmanas who were
more learned. They were teasing him. And yet, when he was reciting the Bhagavad
Gita, he was not only, you know, not aware of their, their jeers. But actualy,
he had his own tears. So, what was happening? How did he have jee..., tears like
that? You know, so, Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked him. So, he said, what is it? He
says, I am just, what part of the Bhagavad Gita is giving you so much nectar?
So, he said, actually, I am just, I cannot read so well. My spiritual has told
me to study the Bhagavad Gita. So, I am studying the Bhagavad Gita. And as I
have studied the Bhagavad Gita, actually, as I read s..., various verses, I am
following instruction of spiritual master. And I am meditating on instruction.
And trying to meditate on Krishna, the speaker of the Gita. And I think of how
that Supreme Lord, who is the object of worship for all living beings. That Lord
has become the servant of His devotees, become the charioteer. And He is obeying
the order of His devotees.

        senayor ubhayor madhye
        
Like that. Take my chariot in-between the two war..., armies. So, such is the
love of the Lord for His devotees. So, I am amazed by the extent, by the
magnitude of the love of the Lord for His devotees. And th..., thin..., thinking
about that love is bringing tears in my eyes. So, Śrī Chaitanya Mahāprabhu heard
this, he embraced that brahmana. And he said, you know, you have attained
perfection in your life. You have attained perfection. Why? Because you have
understood the essence. The essence is devotion. Essence is to appreciate
Krishna's love for us. And to, you know, rel..., to have similar love for
Krishna invoked in our hearts by that. So, you have understood how Krishna loves
His devotees. And He is inviting all of us to become devotees. And we also
in..., feel inspired to get devotion. So, it is this devotional attitude that is
the conclusion of the Gita. And that is what Srila Prabhupada gives us. So,
thank you very much. We will continue in our next class. Hare Krishna.
