Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oT7DyZUy4OA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=oT7DyZUy4OA&redir_token=FyNxG-msNgXwzJ1BXEc6FV2FDwp8MTU0ODQ4NzY3N0AxNTQ4NDAxMjc3&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_064_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_27_to_32_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome to our Bhagavad Gita study, the part of the Bhakti Shastri
course. Today, we are discussing the third chapter. And we are going into the
section, the fourth section, which discusses about how karma-yoga is different
from karma-kanda. Karma-kanda causes bondage. Karma-yoga does not cause bondage.
So, 3.25 and 26 talked about the contrast between the "vidvāṁ" and "asaktāḥ".
Those who are enlightened and detached as contrasted with those who are ignorant
and attached. "avidvāṁ" and "saktāḥ". So, now, what is the difference between
these two? That will be talked in the next three verses. So, the 3.27, which we
will discuss today is a famous verse. Prabhupada would quote this quite
frequently.

        prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni
        guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ
        ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā
        kartāham iti manyate

So, "prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni". "kriyamāṇāni" means being done. "kriya" is action.
So, "kriyamāṇāni" is being done. So, that which is done by "prakṛteḥ".

        prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni
        guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

So, the "guṇaiḥ"s of "prakṛteḥ". They do the actions. "ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā". The
conditioned soul is "vimūḍhā", is deluded by "ahaṅkāra". "ahaṅkāra" is ego.
"kartā", "aham". Thinks that I am the doer. "iti manyate". One who thinks. Now,
what does this verse actually mean? You know, if it says that everything is done
by the three modes, then what is, what is the reason or rationale for the
Bhagavad Gita telling Arjuna do this, do not do this? Act in this way. Do not
act in this way. What would be the logic for all this if the Bhagavad Gita were
actually telling this their, message that everything is done by the three modes?
So, actually, the scriptures, you know, give philosophy within a context. And
the context has to be understood. So, the important point in this is, here, that
the modes are the doer. And the soul, who thinks that I am the doer is a, is
deluded, is "vimūḍhā". The important point is to understand that the soul is not
the only doer. The oul is..., soul is definitely a doer. But the soul is not the
only doer. The soul is one of the doers. So, let us consider this now. You know,
the soul is one of the doers. What does it mean? It essentially means that the
soul is, you know, initiating the action. Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa used the
example in Vedanta Sutra that a woodcutter cuts trees. So, in his
Govinda-bhāṣya, explains that when a woodcutter cuts the tree. Who is actually
cutting the three? It is not the woodcutter. It is the axe. So, without the axe,
if the woodcutter goes and starts hitting with the hands. The woodcutter will
not be able to cut the tree. So, for cutting a tree, the tool, that is the axe,
is essential. So, the cutter of the tree is actually the axe. But at the same
time, the axe will not move on its own. The axe has the capacity to cut. But the
axe does not have the consciousness by which to decide whether to cut or to not
cut. So, the axe moves because there is a conscious being who desires to cut a
tree. So, therefore, now, among these two that the woodcutter decides, desiring
and deciding to cut the tree. And the acts being used to cut the tree. Which are
important? Which is important? Both are important. You know, it depends on the
context. So, similarly, when we talk about b..., b..., our actions in this
world. So, for example, right now, I am speaking. So, how am I speaking? It is
through the body. The voice boxes producing some sound. So, there is basically
the organ of speech which is enabling me to speak. So, now, without this organ
of speech, I will not be able to speak. At the same time, even if that organ of
speech is present, if I do not have the desire to speak, I will not, or...,
speak. No sound will come out. So, the organ of speech is like the tool for
speaking. And the soul is the person. Soul is like the woodcutter. So, both of
them have to come together and speak. Now, this is with respect to normal
actions. Which we do. When Krishna is talking about here, He says that,
actually, our actions, the way we are inclined to act. And the way we, the, act,
it is largely determined by the three modes. So, somebody walks very
passionately, in a very driven way to achieve something. So, somebody decides
that I want to climb up Mount Everest. And then, works very hard. Trains.
Develops a lot of muscle and stamina. And then, starts the climb. And there is a
lot of courage despite the danger and, you know, a, possible disaster.

And sl..., keeps persevering, persevering, perse..., finally climbed up Mount
Everest. So, who actually did the climbing? It was the person, the soul or was
it body? It is the body that did the climbing. The body is the tool. And the
body is governed by the laws of material nature. The body being governed by the
laws of material nature. You know. The soul has a particular s..., kind of
desires which also are governed by material nature. Not governed entirely. But
generally, for the soul, the gamut of choice of desires is determined by
material nature. What does it mean? Suppose, a student gets an exam. The
competitive exam. Get the, what is the capital of India? Moscow, Washington,
London. Three option. Say. The, no fourth option. These, you know, the, now,
these are the capital, what should I do? You know, that is all options. You have
to take only one of them. What will you do then? So, actually, here, whichever
answer this is, the student chooses. It is wrong. Because all the answers are
wrong. So, like that, what happens to the conditioned soul is that when the soul
is disconnected from Krishna, the soul gets caught within material nature. And
what material nature? Ok, What do you want to do? How do you want to act? In
ignorance. In passion. In goodness. So, all three are wrong actions for this
world. Because the soul by nature is spiritual. And being spiritual, the soul's
natural actions are to love and serve Krishna. But if the soul does not know
anything about spiritual knowledge, the soul is not connected with Krishna, then
the only options that are there for the soul are the options that are provided
by material nature. And all these options are based on the platform of
ignorance. The platform of forgetfulness of Krishna. As a platform of ignorance
of one's spiritual identity. So, there is variety. But how this world wants to
act? Goodness. Passions. Ignorance. But ultimately, there is no real variety.
Because the soul just does not know about God. You know, now, that is actually
the predicament for the souls in the non-human species. They just have to act
the way material nature wishes them to act. And in, you know, human body, a...,
a..., also, the material nature keeps pushing us to act in particular ways. We
cannot entirely resist or reject the pulls and pushes of material nature. We
have to act in responsible ways. That means we unl..., if we do not resi..., we,
if we do not strongly fight against the pushes of material nature, we will be
impelled to act in particular ways. So, that means, a ksatriya will be impelled
to fight. A ksatriya will be impelled to manage to the na..., to the manage, to
administer. That is the nature. And the nature cannot be given up. A vaisya will
be money-minded. A vaisya will have a particular inclination by which the vaisya
will think about, ok, this, this, this, this. That is all. That is how the mind
will be. And that is how the actions will turn out to be. So, here, the point
which Krishna is making to Arjuna through the context of this verse is that you
cannot entirely resist or reject your material nature. But act according to your
nature. But within the previ..., within the, a, limits of dharma. So, a vasya is
money-minded. But then the vaisya is told, yes, earn money, but by dharmic
means. A ksatriya, in the 18th chapter, we will see, has a quality called as
"īśvara-bhāvaś". Now, "īśvara-bhāvaś" is, you know, the, now, literally
speaking, if we translate, the mood of God. That is what "īśvara-bhāvaś" would
mean. "bhāvaḥ" is mood or emotion. "īśvara" is controller. The ultimate
controller is Krishna. So, "īśvara-bhāvaś". And Krishna talks about this
quality, not in a negative sense, but in a positive sense. What do we mean by
positive sense? Krishna talks about the quality in a, in the sense that it is a
desirable quality. "īśvara-bhāvaś" is a laudable quality in ksatriyas. So, he
says, you know, i..., dāna..., n..., "yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam". So, just as in
the same breath that He talks about, other good qualities, "yuddhe cāpy
apalāyanam", for example, you know, the ks..., ksa..., ksatriyas never flee from
a battle. "yu...", "pa...", "apa...", "palāyanam" means to fly out, to run away.
"apalāyanam" means to not, never run away. And "yuddhe". In a battlefield, even
if they are faced against very difficult lords, ksatriyas will not run away. So,
this is a quality that indicates the heroism of ksatriyas, the courage of
ksatriyas. So, in that same list of qualities, He talks about "īśvara-bhāvaś",
also. So, "īśvara-bhāvaś" is not a negative quality in a ksatriya. It is just a
fact of nature. The ksatriya will have that nature. You know, ksatriya will have
an inclination to delegate, to organise, to manage, to administer. So, rather
than trying to reject, you know, resist or suppress that nature, one, the, it
is, one is encouraged to, you dovetail that nature in Krishna's service. So, if
we see, the previous verse was talking "joṣayet sarva-karmāṇi". "joṣayet" means
to dovetail. So, Krishna is continuing that theme over here. And the essential
message that He is giving through this verse is that if you think that you are
the fighter of ksatriya, as a ksatriya, or you are the renounc..., renouncer as
a jnana-yogi. In both cases, actually, you have to understand that you are
impelled by your mind. And your mind is making you act in particular ways. So,
rather than entirely trying to reject the mind, try to get the mind's pushings
within the prec..., within the limits of dharma. And dovetail yourself in
devotional service.

So, the point which Krishna is making to Arjuna is that, you know, if you are
thinking right now, I will renounce the world. And I will go to the forest. It
is simply the modes impelling you to do this. But this impell..., you know, this
impulse of the mode, is not in pin..., harmony with your nature. And because it
is not in harmony with your normal nature, there will be disruption. So,
understand what is your nature and act accordingly. Why act accordingly? Not
just we s..., completely surrender to our nature. But rather, we dovetail our
nature in devotional service. When we dovetail our nature in devotional service,
you know, or at least within the precincts of dharma. Devotional service is
bhakti-yoga. You know, will, now, bhakti-yoga might be karma-yoga, also. Which
is what Arjuna is talking about over here. But even by that, you will become
purified gradually. So, the emphasis of this verse is recognise that your body
has certain inclinations. Your mind has certain inclinations. You cannot resist
or reject them, you know, completely. So, therefore, dovetail them. That is the,
that is what we will see from the next verse. So:

        tattva-vit tu mahā-bāho
        guṇa-karma-vibhāgayoḥ
        guṇā guṇeṣu vartanta
        iti matvā na sajjate

"tattva-vit tu mahā-bāho". "tattva-vit" is one who is a knower. "tattva-vit".
So, Krishna has used the word "tattva-darśibhiḥ" in, earlier in 2.16.

        nāsato vidyate bhāvo
        nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ
        ubhayor api dṛṣṭo ’ntas
        tv anayos tattva-darśibhiḥ

"tattva-darśibhiḥ". So, similar, "tattva-darśibhiḥ" is seer of truth. Here,
"tattva-vit" is knower of truth. "tattva-vit tu mahā-bāho". Oh, Arjuna, Oh,
mighty-armed one. "guṇa-karma-vibhāgayoḥ". "guṇa-karma-vibhāgayoḥ". That the
difference between work and devo..., Prabhupada translates that.
"guṇa-karma-vibhāgayoḥ". Prabhupada translates that as work in devotion and work
for fruitive results. "guṇā guṇeṣu vartanta". So, that person understands that,
actually, one, I am acting. Essentially, what is happening? "guṇā guṇeṣu
vartanta". The modes are acting in relationship with each other.

        guṇā guṇeṣu vartanta
        iti matvā na sajjate

Knowing this, such a person does not become attached. "na sajjate". So, here,
what is Krishna saying? That "tattva-vit". That person who is the knower of the
Absolute Truth. Such a person understand that when I am acting, when, as a
ksa..., brahmana. I am studying. I am teaching shastra. I might become proud. I
know so much knowledge. I know far more than other people. And see how nicely I
give classes. So, if I become like that, I am misidentifying with my
psychophysical nature. And that sort of mentality will cause me bondage. But if
I understand "guṇā guṇeṣu vartanta". "guṇā guṇeṣu vartanta". That means that, 
actually, the modes are, the senses are en..., senses and the modes are
interacting with each other, each other. And basically, in the material field,
action is being performed according to my nature. So, then, I will not become
bound. Because I will understand that, ok, this is my nature. This is how I
should be acting. "guṇā guṇeṣu vartanta". So, in this way, we will be able act
and move forward in our life if we take things systematically. "guṇā guṇeṣu".
So, how do we do "guṇā guṇeṣu vartanta"? You know, this does not, Krishna
is not telling over here, because the modes are acting, therefore you should
now..., what should you do? Immediate that you surrender to the modes. Not
that you completely try to resist the modes. These are not possible. But what
the "tattva-vit tu"? "tattva-vit" does. "tattva-vit tu" is that, actually, if I
do not get attached, then I will not become bound. You know, "iti matvā na
sajjate". "na sajjate" means, the person says that I, oh, I will not become
bound by this. So, all this may seem a little bit abstract and philosophical for
us. Because to familiarise ourselves with the concept of the three modes itself
takes some time. But essentially, what this means is that a conditioned soul,
c..., when the conditioned soul becomes a sadhaka and starts practicing
spiritual life, at that time, the soul understands that I am a..., I am trapped
in a machine. This body is basically like a machine. And as a machine, it has
certain pushings, certain pullings, by default. Just like in a computer,
sometimes, when we choose certain options, they become default options. When
they become default options by, as soon as we turn on the machine, those
settings get activated. And the default option turns on. So, like that, based on
the way we have acted in the past, the body ha..., and the mind, both of them,
have developed certain tendencies. So, although the computer's default settings
can be changed. But default setting getting activated happens automatically. And
changing of the default settings does not happen automatically. That requires
conscious involvement and effort. Similarly, the body has certain default
settings. And those t..., according those default settings, the soul acts. So,
when the soul acts, what does it mean soul acts according to those default
settings? The soul is transcendental. But when the soul is within the body. And
the soul is acting in the material realm, the soul will act according to the
default settings of the body. So, when the soul acts according to default
settings of the body, at that time, you know, the soul actually moves, step by
step, forward in spiritual life. That means, you know, by acting our default
settings, but keeping that within the limit of dharma.

So, you know, I am a, I have the nature of a shudra. Rather than resenting it.
And trying to imagine, oh, I would like to be a brahmana. No, if I am a shudra,
no problem. It is not that shudras are outlaws. It is not that shudras cannot
practice, our, now, cannot practice dharma. They have their dharma. By
practicing the dharma, you know, of a shudra, one will become elevated. So,
here, Krishna is saying that recognise that the modes are the actua..., the
doers. And, you know do not let the modes ca..., g..., take you on a ride which
is outside the, which takes you outside the precincts of dharma. At the same
time, do not completely resist the modes, also. Neither is possible. Regulate
it. Here, Bhagavad Gita offers us a middle way. "iti matvā na sajjate". Now,
Prabhupada's purports focuses on the point of "tattva-vit". Who is a
"tattva-vit"? Prabhupada quo..., go..., correlates this with the Sri..., Srimad
Bhagavatam verse:

        vadanti tat tattva-vidas
        tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam
        brahmeti paramātmeti
        bhagavān iti śabdyate

"vadanti tat tattva-vidas". So, "tattva-vit" was there over here. And
"tattva-vidas" was over there. Same point, verse, almost. So, now, Krishna will
continue the same point and He will explain this further.

        prakṛter guṇa-sammūḍhāḥ
        sajjante guṇa-karmasu
        tān akṛtsna-vido mandān
        kṛtsna-vin na vicālayet

"prakṛter guṇa-sammūḍhāḥ". "guṇa-sammūḍhāḥ" means. "sammūḍhāḥ". "mūḍhāḥ" is
deluded. "sammūḍhāḥ" is completely deluded. "samyak rupena mudha". It is
completely deluded. So, you know, f..., earlier, Krishna has said "vimūḍhātmā".
Krishna is continuing the same theme, you know, thread of thought over here.
Let us take some "mūḍhāḥ". So, one who is deluded by "prakṛter guṇa". By the
three modes of material nature. You know. "sajjante guṇa-karmasu". Such a person
becomes attached to the "guṇa-karma". So, here, say, we have to remember that
the word "guṇa", here, does not refer to qualities. It refers to modes. If you
see, "guṇa-karma" has qualities and activities. We will get confused. It does
not make s..., much sense over here. "guṇa-karma" here means activities which
are within the prec..., within the, you know, influence of the thr..., which
are im..., impelled. Which are motivated. Which are actuated by the three modes.
So, "tān akṛtsna-vido mandān". So, you know, gu..., who does like this? Who
becomes attached? "akṛtsna-vido". One who does not know properly. A..., and
"mandān". "mandān" means lazy. Hmm. "kṛtsna-vin na vicālayet". "na vicālayet"
means does not disturb. So, here, it is another point which Prabhu..., another
second time, Prabhupada is repeating. Or rather, Krishna is repeating what He
has talked about earlier. "na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed". He had said at the start
of this section. So, now, He is again repeating "na vicālayet". "na vicālayet"
means do not disturb. So, why do not disturb? Because by such disturbance, one
goes under a, one disrupts people's gradual advancement. See, the Vedic
scriptures give two methods for advancement. One is the gradual method. And the
other is the rapid method. So, the gradual method involves dovetailing people's
propensities for the sake of slow progression. So, karma-kanda involves what?
People, people want material enjoyment. So, they are given material enjoyment.
How? Through the means of, you know, dharma, artha, kama, and moksha. So, people
go through dharma, and artha, artha kama. And that itself, the cycle may go on
for many lifetimes. And after that, they will gradually seek moksha. So, this
is a gradual way for elevation. Now, the important point is dharma, artha, kama
is that social order is maintained while people are also provided sense
gratification. How can it, people provided sense gratification? Because there is
arrangement for artha and kama. People, you know, for most people, material
pleasure is a necessity. And for devotees, also, only when we are very
spiritually advanced can we r..., survive only on spiritual happiness. So, and
then, in the sadhaka stage, you know, we have sweet, we have nice music. We have
nice prasad. We have loving devotee association. And are we getting material
pleasure? Or are we getting spiritual pleasure over here? You know, actually, it
should be spiritual happiness. But it not, is not always spiritual happiness.
When kirtans are going on. Are we relishing spiritual happiness at that time?
You know, if it were purely spiritual, then we could have just the same tune
being sung every day month after month, year after year. And we would not need
to, say, change tunes. But still, we c..., differentiate. Oh, this devotee sings
nicely. This devotee does not sing so nicely. When there is prasad, see, oh,
what is there for prasad today? Oh, I decide. Not decide. If we were actually
tasting Krishna through the prasad, then whatever be the prasad, we would be
s..., we would be having the same level of enthusiasm. You know. But we do not.

We have, so, this is not necessarily bad. There is variety in the spiritual
realm, also. And it is not that to prove that I am devoted to prasad, I have to
take the same food every day. You know. I have transcended the faculty of taste.
That is not the mood of bhakti. We do not want just to transcend. We want to
spiritualise. So, the point which we, we ma..., made is that, you know, right
now, in the sadhaka stage, we want to give up all material happiness. But
because we are living at the material level of consciousness, at the material
level of reality, right now. So, therefore, you know, the spiritual happiness
becomes manifest to us through material means. So, when, you know, in the, when
we hear kirtans. Or we see, participate in, you know, feasts. So, at that time,
the material aspects also play a role in our being attracted or not being
attracted. This is not necessarily bad. This is just a, a, arrangement by which
we can gradually be elevated. Slowly, steadily and ultimately, we come to the
spiritual level, where the material level just does not matter for us. But for
most sadhakas, you know, for most people, who are not necessarily sadhakas, or
spiritual rea..., truth, they are basically, you know, dharmic people. They are
a, religious people. And they want to stay within the precincts of dharma. Now,
when I say dharma, it is like a big circle. Within dharma, there is apara
dharma. And then, there is para dharma. So, within the circle of dharma, dharma,
artha, kama, moksha also comes. And in this, as this circle of dharma becomes
s..., c..., s..., smaller and smaller. It takes us closer and closer to the
ultimate goal that is Krishna. So, in the system of dharma, artha, kama, moksha,
Krishna may not be the goal of people. Their goal is artha and kama, primarily.
Although they acknowledge Krishna. And they want to also worship Krishna. But
they do not want to purely devote themselves to Krishna. But when people come
to:

        dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo ’tra paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ satāṁ

The Bhagavatam talks about "param dha...", "para dharmaḥ". And there, at the,
the, at that place, dharma, artha, kama, mosha is pushed aside. So, at that
level of reality, you know, the focus becomes not dharma, artha, you know, kama.
But it becomes, you know, prema. It becomes love of Krishna. So, that is the
level where people are ready to settle, you know, fi..., become fixed on, you
know, the ultimate truth. So, now, what Krishna is saying over here is that do
not try to rush people to the higher level of renunciation. So, there is dharma,
artha, kama. And there is moksha. So, when people are not ready for moksha. If
we, if we push them to moksha prematurely, that will create problems for them.
They will not be able to prac..., they will not be able to do that. So,
"kṛtsna-vin na vicālayet". Krishna says, do not disturb these people. What will
happen? Earlier, in this chapter, He has talked about "mithyācāraḥ sa ucyate". A
person is, you know, pushed to renounce the world. And when the person renounces
the world, you know, does not have to capacity to renounce the world. And the
person becomes hypocritic, at that time. That is undesirable. Now, w..., we, we
again, this chapter may raise this issue again and again that we also have, you
know, you know, devotees in the renounced order. So, in the early days of our
movement, it was thought as if that, if you want to be a serious devotee, you
have to be renunciate. And if somebody does not renunciate, that means that
person is not a serious devotee. But this is a  misconception. You know. You
know. One's seriousness is not determined by one's ashram. One's seriousness is
determined by, by one's comm..., conviction, one's commitment. And that is what
is important. At the end of the, you know, our life, Krishna is not going to see
which ashram we lived in. Krishna will see how much ashrai we had taken. You
know, how mu..., not which a..., both the a..., whichever ashram we are in, the
ashram is a facility by which we can take ashraya of Krishna. So, whichever
ashram we stay in, what is important is how much ashraya of Krishna we take. So,
if somebody is in the renounced order, that person becomes proud. See, I am a
renunciate, and does not take ashraya of Krishna, then that will not make much
further spiritual advancement. If somebody is in the grihasta ashram, and does not
take ashraya of Krishna, thinks that, you know, see. I am such an influential
person in the world. I am giving charity to the temple. It is because of me that
all the renunciates are being maintained. One starts becoming proud like that.
Then, one is not taking ashraya of Krishna. One, there, also, will not make
spiritual advancement. So, this, our spiritual advancement is not determined by
where we are situated. You know. It is determined by how we are situated. How
means, how we, our consciousness is situated. So, here, Krishna is telling
that different people have different natures. So, where, depending on their
convictions, depending on their, you know, level, right now, they have to be
situated accordingly. If we try to push them first, it will not work. So, again,
we have to remember with respect to Krishna Conscious situation, Krishna is not
talking here about bhakti-yoga at all. He is talking about a comparison between
karma-yoga and jnana-yoga. So, essentially, He is telling that people who are
not qualified to give up their karma. That means, you know, there are three
levels. There is karma-yoga. There is karma-kanda. And there is jnana-yoga. So,
Krishna is telling here, you know, now, He is repeatedly, His point is do not
give up. Do..., do not go for jnana-yoga. Why? Although even if jnana-yoga is
higher, people are not capable of doing it. So, do not do it. And do not
instruct people to do it. Let them act according to that level.

So, now, let them act in the world. How should they act? Krishna is telling,
Arjuna, you act in karma-yoga. People may be acting early in karma-kanda. But
you act in karma-yoga. For what purpose? By this, you will become elevated. By
this, gradually, you will become, you know, because you set a good example, you
will, you know, beha..., contributing in the social order. And also, because you
are acting with detachment, you will become elevated. So, let us look at this
verse again. "prakṛter guṇa-sammūḍhāḥ". So, one who is deluded by the modes of
material nature.

        prakṛter guṇa-sammūḍhāḥ
        sajjante guṇa-karmasu

So, say, detached people, how do they act? When they act, they become attached.
The "guṇa", when they do "gu...", "guṇa-karma", they become attached. Previous
verse was, says "na sajjate". Do not become attached. But here, it says, they
will become attached. But even if they are becoming attached, "na vicālayet". Do
not disturb them. Because through that attachment, gradually, they will develop
realisation. They will develop detachment. But if they are, do not do,
prematurely renounce. They will disrupt their conscious..., they will disrupt
their spiritual life, entirely. They will disrupt society, also. "kṛtsna-vin na
vicālayet". So, Prabhupada writes that:

"Such bewildered persons may be engaged in such primary moral principles of life
as nonviolence and similar materially benevolent work."

Now, here, Prabhupada makes a very significant statement that Kr...:

"Lord Kṛṣṇa advises us not to disturb them and simply waste valuable time. But
the devotees of the Lord are more kind than the Lord because they understand the
purpose of the Lord. Consequently they undertake all kinds of risks, even to the
point of approaching ignorant men to try to engage them in the acts of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, which are absolutely necessary for the human being."

So, here, you know, Krishna, Pra..., a, Prabhupada is saying as if the devotees
are contradicting Krishna's will. Actually, they are not contradicting. They are
fulfilling Krishna's will. See, ultimately, within this progression, dharma,
artha, kama, moksha, Krishna ultimately wants all souls to come back to the
spiritual world. And to be with him, and to be forever happy with him. That is
what Krishna ultimately wants. But when He wants this ultimately,
transitionally, there is a progression. You know, the souls cannot suddenly, you
know, suddenly give up things. There is a progressive treatment that is
happening. You know. For example, if a parent has a child in a hospital. So, at
that time, the parents wants the chi..., parent wants the child to come back
home from the hospital. But that does not mean that if the child is in the
middle of a treatment. Which is going to take, as the, as a complex and a,
se..., complex disease, which requires several months of treatment, the, th...,
you know, for a parent cannot feel that, oh, current say that, oh, I want my
child home. So, let him just leave everything and come home. That sort of coming
home will not be of much use. The, first, the child is in the hospital. The
child has to be treated, get cured and then come back home. So, there is a
process of gradual treatment. That is dharma, artha, kama, and moksha. Which
may, takes:

        bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

And there is a rapid treatment which involves a practice of bhakti-yoga. So,
now, bhakti-yoga is what Srila Prabhupada is talking about over here. That the
devotees think that even if people get a little disturbed. Let them practice
spiritual life. Let them take the fast track treatment. So, imagine that there
is a hospital where there is a slow course of treatment. And there is a fast
course of treatment. Now, there are, now, the, naturally, if there are two kinds
of treatments, we may say, everyone want fast course of treatment. But maybe,
the fast course of treatment involves more sacrifices. You know, you have to,
so, practice a very severe diet. And have s..., you know, very strict exercise,
regiment. And involves so much sacrifice that people say I cannot do this. So,
let me take the slow track treatment. I can get cured in one month or I can get
cur..., cured in one year. But I cannot do this higher, hi..., h..., fast track
treatment. So, let me take one, take the one year treatment. So, like that,
there is a slow track treatment. And there is a fast track treatment. So,
dharma, artha, kama, moksha is the slow track. And bhakti is the fast track. So,
Prabhupada says that let a devotee practice the fast, devotees want people to
take up the fast track treatment. That is why the Lord, you know, the Lord's
purpose is fulfilled by the devotees. By devotees going and telling people.
Please do this. Do this. So, now, after this, Krishna says that, ultimately, the
karma-yoga also has to be offered to Him. He is the object of karma-yoga,
ultimately.

        mayi sarvāṇi karmāṇi
        sannyasyādhyātma-cetasā
        nirāśīr nirmamo bhūtvā
        yudhyasva vigata-jvaraḥ

So, "mayi sarvāṇi karmāṇi". Unto Me, all "karmā"s. "sannyasyā". Give up the
fruits of all work to Me. "ādhyātma-cetasā". "ādhyātma-cetasā" means with
spiritual consciousness. "nirāśīr nirmamo bhūtvā". Without any desire and
without any possessiveness. "yudhyasva vigata-jvaraḥ". Fight without lethargy.
So, actually, this is one of the very important verses. And Prabhupada says,
this, this, a..., s..., al..., almost like military discipline, just like a,
mi..., in a military world, there is a point, military discipline means, you
know, military, when a person is suppo..., su..., do not do something, just do
it. You know, however one feels, you know, the, ea..., early in the morning, the
cadets are told to wake up, and go for archery. There, the discipline is so
strict that they are not allowed to disobey. This is what you are told to do,
just do it. Do not ask any questions. Why is that? Because the military is a
very serious service. You know, when the soldiers are on the war field, at that
time, they have to obey the orders. And by obeying the orders itself, they will
be able to, it is a matter of life for death. For them, as well as for their
colleagues. So, they have very strict training. Now, practicing spiritual life
is not just a matter of life for death. It is a matter of eternal life versus
repeated birth and death. It is also a very serious matter. Because it is such a
serious matter, it has to be accorded, you know, the duge amount of gravity in
terms of commitment and training. So, this verse talks about that. So, let us
look at this. So, this verse actually. There are four lines in it. And each of
these lines talks about something which will take one upwards. So,
"vigata-jvaraḥ". "yudhyasva vigata-jvaraḥ". So, "yudhyasva" is like the primary
verb in it. What should I do? Arjuna. Fight. And fight how? "vigata-jvaraḥ".
"vigata-jvaraḥ" means to give up lethargy. So, this is talking about giving up
the mode of ignorance. "nirāśīr nirmamo bhūtvā". So, to have "asā". And to have
"mamata". To have desires. And to have attachments for positions. That is the
mode of passion. So, the L..., a, the deal entry point 30D says, give up
ignorance. 3.30C says, give up passion. "sannyasyādhyātma-cetasā". This refers
to when one, a, when one comes to spiritual consciousness, that co..., that is
actually, coming not just to goodness, but even going beyond goodness. Because
in goodness, one still has attachment to worldly things. So, "sannyasya" and
"ādhyātma-cetasā", they are actually at the peak of goodness. And "mayi sarvāṇi
karmāṇi" is transcendental. So, a, it is not just, you know, a devotional. It is
transcendental. What is the difference between, you know, devotional and
transcendental? Actually, devotional means somebody can be, when, the, thing
will, think, mode of material nature. And su..., at the same time, do devotional
activities. So, all of us have to do devotional activities. But are all of us
transcendental? No. We are not yet transcendental. We are struggling to
transcend. And sometimes, we are pulled down. Sometimes, we are able to rise up.
So, so, that means, see, there is, there is ignorance, passion, goodness. Then,
there is transcendence. And in transcendence, also, actually, there is
spiritual. And there is devotional. In transcendence, there is spiritual and
devotional. What is the difference between spiritual and devotional? Spiritual
would mean, in general, anything to do with the soul. So, even Brahmavada, even
impersonalism can be spiritual. But devotional means that is which is centered
on Krishna. Now, devotional in that sense of perfection is the highest level.
That means, within the spiritual realm, also, if we have, a, you know, there is
spiritual. And there is devotional. So, devotional is the highest. But the
wonderful aspect of devotional is that, devotional f..., can extend from the
highest down to the lowest. So, the devo..., so, path of bhakti is a path that
stretches up to the summit. But then, it goes down to the valley, also, to the
bo..., lowest level. That means that a person in tama-guna can also practice
bhakti-yoga. And, of course, a person if practices bhakti-yoga steadily, will
not stay in tama-guna forever. That person is staying on, in bhakti, in
tama-guna forever, that means the person is not rea..., seriously practicing
bhakti. That person is not letting the potency of bhakti, you know, bring about
an inner transformation. See, that inner transformation has to be brought out,
then the person has to practice bhakti, seriously. And th..., then, the person
will no longer stay in the three modes. So, the point is, bhakti can be
practiced from any mode. So, it is like a big, big ladder. You know, it is a,
you can imagine ladder which extends down, down, down to the lowest level. The
lowest level of goodne..., ignorance. And it is a ladder that goes up, up, up,
and not just to goodness, but beyond goodness, to transcendence. And within
transcendence, also, not just spiritual. But also, pure devotional. So, that is,
that is the process of bhakti-yoga. So, Krishna is saying, "mayi sarvāṇi
karmāṇi". Offer all your work to me. So, this is the first time again, Krishna
has talked about a, offering something to himself. In 2.61, He had said, offer
you..., control your senses. And offer the controlled senses to me.

        tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya
        yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

So, here, He is saying, m...:

        mayi sarvāṇi karmāṇi
        sannyasyādhyātma-cetasā

There, it was, you know, control the senses. And fix the mind on me. Here, it
was, it is, with, without lethargy. With detach..., without detachments, without
desires. With renounced consciousness. Without renou..., with renounced
spiritual consciousness. Do your work. "yudhyasva". Fight. And offer the fruits
of your work to me. So, this is, Prabhupada's purport is a classic purport here.
Let us look at it.

"This verse clearly indicates the purpose of the Bhagavad-gītā."

Very significant, the purpose of the Bhagavad Gita is indicated in this verse.
What is that purpose? It is to offer everything to Krishna. So, Prabhupada uses
the word, "as if in military discipline" here. Now, here, Prabhupada also makes
an interesting point.

"The living entity cannot be happy independent of the cooperation of the Supreme
Lord, because the eternal constitutional position of the living entity is to
become subordinate to the desires of the Lord."

So, it is our nature to be connected with Krishna. To love Krishna. And to gain
happiness thereof. Just as a fish cannot be outsi..., happy outside water, we
cannot be happy separated from Krishna. You know, just as a living being cannot
say, the Padya only has a beautiful verse which says that "My dear Lord, just as
the land, without water, turns to desert. Just as a living being cannot live
without foo..., food. So, that person, sick person needs medicine. Just as a
person with third, desert w..., needs water. Just as a person in a famine needs
food. Just as the flowers need sunlight for blossoming.". So, it gives various
examples from nature. And finally, it says that similarly, oh, Lord, I need you.
So, the point of this verse is that, actually, you, we need you, my dear Lord.
Please reveal yourself to us. Please reveal yourself to us. So, that is our, an
ul..., that is our nature. We cannot live without Krishna. Now, Prabhupada says
that:

"if there is any reluctance to execute such a stern order, which is without
consideration of so-called kinsmen in the bodily relationship, that reluctance
should be thrown off; in this way one may become vigata-jvara, or without
feverish mentality or lethargy."

So, the word "jvaraḥ" has one more meaning. That is fever. "jvaraḥ". So,
"jvaraḥ" means fever or lethargy. So, now, fever can make us do two things. When
we are feverish, you know, we just feel, you know, I got fever. I cannot do
anything. We just want to lie down, and cuddle in a bed and pull a blanket over
us. And then, go to sleep. So, we feel like that. Or feverishness can also lead
hyperactivity at time. You know, that is not so much like a physical fever. But
it is a mental fever. For example, when people use the word mania. Mania means,
say, some cricket world cup comes up. Or soccer world cup comes up. Then, people
become maniac. Everywhere, people will, say, you tear..., you, people would wear
t-shirts of the particular, of their favorite stars. And there are everywhere
holdings and they are all s..., talking about it. And there is, this, almost,
people are gripped by a mania over there. So, how does this, you know, g...,
gripping by the mania happens? It happens because they are, a, a, they are
having that fever over there. So, the modes subject people to their influence.
And the modes do not, so, norm, the modes are also subtle. It is not that
somebody will come. Just like police will come and arrest a person. So, you are
under arrest. We handcuff you. Then, the person, if somebody comes like that,
then, the person will try to run away. A per..., try to avoid, evade arrest. So,
when the modes come. The modes are not interested in saying. Now, I am mode of
ignorance coming. Surrender to me. Modes will not come like that. Now, I am mode
of passion coming. Hmm. Obey me. The modes w..., come wearing attractive masks.
So, the w..., world cup is coming. Enjoy. You know. Yeah. Enjoy. Enjoy. Enjoy.
But what do they do in the name of enjoyment? They become puppets of the mode of
passion. Puppets of the mode of ignorance. And it is amazing how, you know, you
know, we just wa..., after some time, when the ma..., maniac gets over, people
just completely forget it. Or we see fashions. You know. When the, a particular
fashion grips a partic..., f..., grips people, then everybody may have a
hairstyle of a particular kind. Or everybody may wear shoes of a particular
kind. And then suddenly, after some time, that whole maniac goes off. So, you
know, now, f..., even from the material point of view, you k..., if we observe
it in a detached, we will see, what is this happening? It is just so foolish.
But that is how it works. "jvaraḥ". "jvaraḥ" is, means feverishness. People
become, we could be feverish about doing certain things. So, this feverishness
is a result of the modes. You know, we have to be able to see these modes acting
in nature, in society. You know. If you, say, according to s..., a, surveys, you
know, how do people spend their lives? You know. They have, major part of their
life goes in work. They go to o..., office. And they work. And when they come,
leave that workplace, after that, their activ..., their time goes in mainly two
activities. Watch and shop. They come ho..., home. And they are with their
family. But they are not watching their family. They are watching TV. So, they
are, the whole family is united. United in illusion. You know, all of them are
adoring, taking darshan of the illusions that are displayed on the television.
And they become dulled and lulled. You know, they become physically lulled.
Physically lulled means, physically, they become, hmm, inactive. And mentally,
they become dulled. Dulled and lulled. So, what happens when such a thing
happens? See, actually, on the television, all the enjoyment is second-hand.
Second-hand means that, actually, you, say, there is a hero. And hero, you know,
dancing and kissing. And everybody is watching one TV. If I was there, it would
be so nice over there. So, it is all second-hand enjoyment. Other people are
enjoying. And we think that, oh, I am enjoying. So, that is why generally when
people watch, you know, some TV, or watch some movies, in a movie theater, they
want something to eat. They have some potato chips or something like that. Why?
Because everything is illusion. Something must be real. Something has to be
real. You know. I have to get something. Everything else, I have have been
imagining, and trying to get. So, they keep eating it. So, people sometimes eat
potato chips. And then, they become like potatoes. You know, obesity is a big
problem. And one of the mo..., biggest causes of obesity is unconscious eating.
Unconscious eating is, so, is normally, fa..., conscious of what we are eating.
Then, the body itself sends signals. No. This is enough. This is enough. And
then, we can stop. But when we are not conscious of what we are eating. If we
are doing some other activities, which are, very excitese us a lot. Then, our
consciousness goes in another direction. And then, we are not aware of how much
we are eating. And that is the time, when we tend to overeat. And especially, if
something tastes good, also. And if it has a lot of fat contained in it. Then,
it can just, person can bloat up. Like an overblown balloon. And then, some
diseases come. And then, that person's health becomes burst. You know, terribly
sometimes.

So, the point is, we are talking about here, it is the modes which are acting.
So, when people, when they come. They watch TV. And what happens when they watch
TV? The television is not run by compassionate people who want to do social
work. No. It is done by, run by passionate people who are out to earn money. So,
there are all kinds of advertisements. Purchase this. Take this. Watch this. So,
basically, what does the TV tell here? Basically, the television tells us, hey,
your watch is wrong. That is old-fashioned watch. Take this new watch. Your
cellhpone is old. Throw it away. Take this new cellphone. Your computer, it is
old. Take this one. You, basically, what it tells us is. Take this. Take this.
Take this. All the commercial, if they tell us that. And when they tell us that,
essentially, what it means is, if you do not have it, you are a, you are a
gonad. You are old-fashioned person. What is the use? So then, wha..., what
happens when people watch television? Then, they go and shop. Take this. Take
this. Take this. Take this. So, actually, there is a whole addiction called as
shopaholism. Just like there are shopaholics. You know, there are, just like,
there are alcoholics, there are shopaholics. Alcoholics are people who just
cannot stop drinking. Even when their drinking, you know, causes harm, even ruin
to their health, to their families, to their relationships, to their
intelligence, to their integrity. Still, they cannot stop. So, same as with
shopaholics. Just have to shop. Take this. Take this. Take this. One more thing.
One more thing. One more thing. One more thing. And especially, when there is,
now, with credit card coming up, people do not realise how I am spending many
times. I have spent so much. I have purchased so many things. So, shop till
you drop. So, it is like that. People just keep shopping, shopping. And they
drop physically. Or they drop financially. And sometimes, even after that, they
somehow want to keep. So, it is, it is a, it can become an addiction. So, why
does it happen? Because from everywhere around, messages are coming. Take this.
Take this. Take this. Take this. So, actually, people have to be very careful.
So, here, w..., as devotees, we may see these as trends. Ok, it, a, they were,
a, we are, the c..., society is becoming modern. Or, or it had become
progressive or all that. But essentially, what is happening is the mode of
passion is taking a stronger grip on people's minds. So, people come from their
workplace. They have done work over there. Then, they think, I want to relax.
And they sit in front of the TV and watch. So, when they watch, they get so many
ideas. Oh. I can get this. I can get this. I can get this. So, the whole
business of advertising is the best advertisers are those who can make us feel
that we will not be able to live without the things which are being advertised.
Although, we can very easily live without them. To, what we do not need, they
make us feel that we need it as much as if we cannot live without it. The
result, advertisement of influences. Take this. Take this. Take this. Then,
people go and shop. So, these are three primary activities. Work, watch, shop.
People go work. And work. Work. Work. And then, they come back ho..., I want to
relax. And they watch. You know, and they, after the watching television, they
feel, sh, what to do? I want to, hmm, I have to get all these things. So, shop.
And now, normally, when you shop, then what happens? At that time, you know,
sh..., money, a, shopping does not happen free. So, one has to pur..., get more,
earn more money. Then, work more. When they work more, then what happens? They
feel, I am so tired. I want to watch more TV to relax. They watch more TV, then
they get more ad..., see more advertisements. They get more ideas. And they shop
more. And in this way, they just get trapped. The. Work. Watch. Shop. WWS. It
is the world wide stupidity. That is encompassing everyone. And this is actually
an example of how the mode of passion can captivate a person. So, here, why,
why did I give a, such an elaborate example? It is a slight detour from our
discussion. But I am simply trying to illustrate the point that "kartāham iti
manyate". That, when there is a feverishness, "jvaraḥ". So, Krishna is telling
Arjuna, "yudhyasva vigata-jvaraḥ". "yudhyasva" represents the activity, the
prescribed duty. So, all of us have to live in the world. And while living in
the world, we have to do prescribed duties. But how do we do the prescribed
duties? "yudhyasva vigata-jvaraḥ". While living in the world, we can be overcome
by the frenzy, by the mania, by the feverishness. That is present in the world.
So, we have to stay away from that. "vigata-jvaraḥ". "yudhyasva vigata-jvaraḥ".
This kind of feverishness which can give people senseless and bankrupt a times.
So, "vigata-jvaraḥ". Nice to stay away from that. And how will that happen?
"nirāśīr nirmamo bhūtvā". Want to av..., avoid the, you know, feverishness.
"nirāśīr nirmamo bhūtvā". One should not have too many desires, should not have
too much possessive mentality. Ultimately, I have come in this world. I came
with nothing. I will go with nothing. The only thing that will go with me is,
shou..., my connection with Krishna. So, why should I bother to acquire this,
and that, and that? All the things. What is the use of that?

So, Socrates was a famous Greek thinker. And one time, he, he was see..., now,
he was known to be very simple and in, you know, many ways austere. So, one
time, people found that he were gone to the marketplace. And was standing in
the marketplace looking at the various wares that are being sold for a long
time. So, one of his friends, and went, and needled him. He said, Oh, Socrates,
you also been bitten by the shopping bug? You also, you know, started shopping.
He says, you know, you also dreaming about shopping? He says, no. Socrates was
grave. He said, I am looking at all the unnecessities that people are shopping.
So, what do you need all these things for? These are all unnecessities. So,
"vigata-jvaraḥ". This is the kind of feverishness that we have to stay free
from. Then, now, Krishna will talk in the next verses about faith.

        ye me matam idaṁ nityam
        anutiṣṭhanti mānavāḥ
        śraddhāvanto ’nasūyanto
        mucyante te ’pi karmabhiḥ

So, "ye me matam". These are my words. "idaṁ nityam". These are eternal work.
Oh, Arjuna, do not think that these are just words which I have spoken to you to
make you fight. This is eternal r..., truth about how the modes are. And how we
become entangled. And how we have to stay free from those modes. "anutiṣṭhanti
mānavāḥ". So, those people who act according to the, those "mānavāḥ"s. Who act
according those "mān...",  modes, this, faitful. "śraddhāvanto ’nasūyanto".
Those who act with faith and who act without envy. What happens to them?
"mucyante te ’pi karmabhiḥ". They will become liberated from the bondage of
karma. "mucyante". "mucyante" means, they will be liberated. So, Krishna is
telling here that by faith, by faithful adherence to my instructions, you know,
those who do this, follow this, they will become liberated. Now, Prabhupada's
purport here is quite significant. You know, Prabhupada says that, it is
eternally true. Krishna's words are true. "mā...". He says:

"an ordinary man with ﬁrm faith in the eternal injunctions of the Lord, even
though unable to execute such orders, becomes liberated from the bondage of the
law of karma."

So, it is significant. Prabhupada here is saying, even though unable to execute
such orders. So, even though if I am not able to execute the orders, how will I
become liberated? So then, Prabhupada clarifies that.

"In the beginning of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one may not fully discharge the
injunctions of the Lord, but because one is not resentful of this principle and
works sincerely without consideration of defeat and hopelessness, he will surely
be promoted to the stage of pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness."

So, Prabhupada is saying that, we should not be resentful. And we work
sincerely without consideration of defeat and hopelessness. That means, say, for
example, it is so that, you know, we have to become pure devotees of Krishna. 

        anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

Give up all material desires. We could say, oh, that is not possible for me. I
cannot do it. Ok. Even if you are not able to do it, that is ok. We should not
resent the principle. We may not be able to practice the principle. But we
should not resent the principle. See, resentment creates a wall between us and
Krishna. What? Why is Krishna? Why is it like this? Why I am the ser..., am I
the servant? Why is Krishna the enjoyer? Actually, the word ser..., word servant
may create a negative connotation in our mind. Prabhupada writes the service to
the Lord is the most in..., most congenial form of intimacy? The relationship of
servant and the master in the transcendental realm is very sweat. It is based on
love. So, once we understand, Krishna loves me. And love means service. So,
with, with this understanding, when we engage, at that time, there is no
difficulty in the sense that even if I am not able to practice certain thing, I
am not resenting the principle. See, there are pure devotees. And there are
potential pure devotees. Pure devotees mean those who have no material desires.
Potential pure devotees means those who accepted the principle of pure devotion,
even if they are not able to practice this principle right now. They are moving
forward. And they will come to that principle. They will come to that practice,
gradually. Gradually, they will to, come to that level of practice. So, if we do
not have any resentment. You know, I want to chant attentively. But I am not
able to concentrate. So, what should I do? Just throw in the bead bag. Forget
this chanting. No. That is resentment. That is frustration. Without
hopelessness, Prabhupada says. Without, you know, defeat or hopelessness. So,
even if I am not able to practice. Just let me continue. Let me continue. So, if
I keep continuing like this, gradually, purification will happen. Krishna is
pleased, not just by our action, but also by our intention. So, if He sees that
we are trying to sincerely serve. Even if we are not able to serve, then Krishna
sees our intention. And He is pleased by that intention. And then, He grants us
purification. And when there is purification, then there is elevation. And when
there is elevation, then there is satisfaction. Why satisfaction? Because we are
connecting with Krishna. So, therefore, we try, even if we are not able to do
the actions of devotional service properly. The regulative principles, we are
not able to follow them properly. Chanting, we are not able to do attentively.
But we have the intention. And with the intention, we, Krishna, you are the
enjoyer. I am the servant. I want to serve you. We, we have the intention. And
with that intention, we keep serving. When we keep serving in that way, then
gradually, there is purification. There is elevation. And then, there is
satisfa..., higher satisfaction which will come. And once the higher
satisfaction comes, then the:

        prasāde sarva-duḥkhānāṁ
        hānir asyopajāyate

As we discussed earlier in 2.65. Then, we will be ea..., you know, a, following
these principles, it will become easy. So, we, "śraddhāvanto", with faith we
act. Faith. Is this a principles? Even if I cannot follow them, I accept them as
true. And I will try to follow them to the best of my capacity. When I follow
them to the best of ca..., my capacity, gradually, I will become elevated. So,
now, this is a two-set verse, which there is a contrast. So, in this verse,
Krishna says what happens to those who are faithful. And the next verse, that is
32, Krishna will say what happens to those who are faithless.

        ye tv etad abhyasūyanto
        nānutiṣṭhanti me matam
        sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān
        viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

So, "ye tv etad abhyasūyanto". "abhyasūyanto" is envious. So, "na",
"anutisthanti". The previous verse was "tiṣṭhanti". "tiṣṭhanti " means to
follow. Those who do not follow my instructions. "abhyasūyanto". Because of
envy, those who do not follow my instructions. "sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān".
They, all their knowledge becomes deluded. "viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ". "cetasaḥ"
is consciousness. "acetasaḥ" is misdirected consciousness. Prabhupada translates
without Krishna Consciousness. And therefore, all their endeavors become ruined.
So, here what Krishna is essentially telling is that if we reject the
princip..., resent and reject the principle that, that, ultimately everything is
meant to be offered to Krishna. And we try to withdraw into our own shell of
isolation and, you know, self-centered enjoyment, then whatever knowledge we
acquire, whatever other endeavors we do, they will all be lost. Why they will be
lost? Because the soul without Krishna cannot be happy. You know, there were
athei..., there were many atheist philosophers. You know, for many of the
biggest atheist philosophers of the last century. You know, they, towards the
end of their life, they went mad. Some of them committed suicide. There is one
philosopher who had his wh..., own philosophy. He said, actually, there is no
God. There is no soul. This life is all that we have. And this life is filled
with suffering. That was his philosophy. And therefore, what a gloomy world
view. What a gloomy world view. There is no God. There is no soul. There is no
eternal life. There is only this life. And this life is filled with suffering.
Therefore, his idea was, the o..., he wrote a famous essay, infamous essay, we
could say. He says, the only philosophical question is, life is, whether to
commit suicide tomorrow or today. Life is meaningless. Life is filled with
suffering. Whether to commit suicide tomorrow or today. So, what a gloomy
picture of life. And this is not, it is gloomy. And it is untrue, also. So, this
is what:

        sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān
        viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

Whether rejects Krishna, such a perfection will not achieve ultimate
perfection. That person will stay in the bondage of material existence. So, in
this way, Krishna exhorts Arjuna to continue doing karma-yoga. And gradually
rise to bhakti-yoga.

Thank you very much. Srimad Bhagavad Gita ki jaya. Sri...
