Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AzSK1pcrX5o
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_079_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_05_Text_25_to_29_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=7V85TEqqgcHBdXKv0reDcYWQH798MTU0ODQ4ODE1NUAxNTQ4NDAxNzU1&event=video_description&v=AzSK1pcrX5o

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are now in
the last part of the Fifth Chapter. We have discussed till 5.24. So, in this
last section, Krishna is telling that how a yogi can attain liberation by fixing
the mind on Supreme Lord. And this sec..., a, crux of this discussion is the
redirection of our pleasure-seeking propensity from matter to spirit. From
outwards to inwards. So, you know, 5.20 said that, a person who is equipoised
amidst pleasure and pain stays, you know, comes to the spiritual platform. 5.21
says, for that, one should be detached from external pleasures. And then, one
can attain unlimited spiritual happiness. 5.22 said that, how, you know, what is
the basis for detaching oneself from external pleasures. Understanding that they
are wombs of misery. They are temporary. And they will end in misery. Then, 5.23
said that, yes, still, the desires may come. But one should tolerate them. And
then, 5.24 said that, we turn inwards. And delight inwards. Then, we will attain
the, you know, brahman platform. So, 5.20 and 24 are like a, a, this parts of a
cycle. So, f..., what, what, 5.20 talks about "brahma-vid brahmaṇi sthitaḥ".
That is what 5.24 also returns to. That such a person attains "brahma-nirvanam".
So, now, Krishna will continue that. And talk for, about attaining
"brahma-nirvanam". Attaining the spiritual platofrm. Let us look at the verse. 

        labhante brahma-nirvāṇam
        ṛṣayaḥ kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ
        chinna-dvaidhā yatātmānaḥ
        sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ

So, "labhante" means, one attains. "brahma-nirvāṇam" is the spiritual platform.
It is consist, yesterday. Who attains it? "labhante" is to attain, gain.
"ṛṣayaḥ". "ṛṣayaḥ" is, now the word "ṛṣi" is used that we have Narada "ṛṣi". Or
Vyasa "ṛṣi". We use the word "ṛṣi", muni. Each of them have their specific
meanings. But generally, the word "ṛṣi" means one who turns inwards. That is a
context of the previous verse, also. The previous verse said that "ṛṣayaḥ".
Those who have turned inwards. "yo ’ntaḥ-sukho ’ntar-ārāmas". So, the previous
verse was talking about turning inwards. So, when this word is used in that
con.., you know, context. It will continue to mean that. You know, turn, one who
turns inwards. Prabhupada writes, those who are active within. What happens to
such people? "kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ". So, "kalmaṣāḥ", m..., is, a, a, contaminations of
the heart. These will be destroyed. Now, Krishna has talked, used the same word
in 5.17. In, you know, the D part. "jñāna-nirdhūta-kalmaṣāḥ". "jñāna-nirdhūta".
So, by knowledge, the person has become freed from all contaminations.

        tad-buddhayas tad-ātmānas
        tan-niṣṭhās tat-parāyaṇāḥ
        gacchanty apunar-āvṛttiṁ
        jñāna-nirdhūta-kalmaṣāḥ

So, "jñāna-nirdhūta". One who had become free from all sins by, you know, by a
c..., all contaminations, by the power of jnana that is acquired by investing
one's mind. One's intelligence. One's faith. And one's em..., aspiration. So,
now, here, Krishna is saying the same point that the person who attains
"brahma-nirvāṇam" has to be "ṛṣayaḥ kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ". And for becoming "ṛṣayaḥ
kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ", "chinna-dvaidhā". "dvaidhā" is duality. "dva". "dva".
"dvandva". "dvaidhā". They are all related words. Which basically means duality.
That this is good. This is bad. "chinna-dvaidhā". One cuts through that. And the
person is "yatātmānaḥ". "yatātmānaḥ" means "yata-ātmānaḥ". So, one who is en...,
Prabhupada translates that as one who is engaged in self-realisation.
"yatātmānaḥ". "yata" can mean controlled. Renounced. So, one who is controlled
at the level of the soul. One who is, you know, focused on realising the soul.
"sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ". This is significant point. "sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ"
means such a person is engaged in the well-being of all. Now, what is the
connection of this with the overall, you know, a, theme of the verse? You know,
many people feel that those who pursue spiritual realisation, they are very
self-centered. You know, they do not bother about the world. They are simply
concerned about their own purification. Their own liberation. And they do not
care for others. Krishna says that is not the case. He says that those who are
striving for, those who, who are the people who will attain self-realisation?
Those who are "sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ". Those who are engaged in the welfare of
all living beings. Now, Krishna will talk, use the same describer,
"sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ", once again in the twelfth Chapter. When He is
describing the impersonalists. So, He says, you know, in 12.3, 4, and 5. He
talks about impersonalists. And then, He, there, He says, then:

        ye tv akṣaram anirdeśyam
        avyaktaṁ paryupāsate
        sarvatra-gam acintyaṁ ca
        kūṭa-stham acalaṁ dhruvam

        sanniyamyendriya-grāmaṁ
        sarvatra sama-buddhayaḥ
        te prāpnuvanti mām eva
        sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ

So, there, also, He uses the word "sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ". So, He says, those
impersonalists have to be engaged in the well-being of all. And they have to
contemplate on the all-pervading qualitiless, formless activity lays Brahman.
And eventually, they will also attain Me, Krishna says. But next verse is, He
says, very difficult process. "kleśo ’dhika-taras teṣām". 12.5. So, is it that
the impersonalists alone are well-wishers of all living beings? No. The point
is, even the impersonalists alo..., ve..., have to be well-wishers, have to be
benefitted for all living beings. What about, what to speak of devotees? Krishna
will talk about devotees in the same chapter, later, in 12.13. When He says, the
devotees are the well-wishing friends of all living beings. The:

        adveṣṭā sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        maitraḥ karuṇa eva ca

So, there, He will explain that My devotees are non-envious towards all living,
not only they are non-envious, they are "maitraḥ karuṇa". They are actually the
well-wishing friends of all living beings. "maitraḥ karuṇa eva ca". So, why are
these the friends? Because they see that all living beings are the parts of
Krishna. These are the children of Krishna. And we are all one family. So, how
can our beloved Lord be happy if those, if His other parts and parcels are
suffering? So, we have to do what we can to help them, also, to come back home.
The impersonalists, on the other hand, their compassion is not so personal based.
Because their, their ultimate reality is not personal. So, then, when their you
know, co..., emotions here will also not be personal. So, they,
"sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ", for them, is more that they should not discriminate
among various living beings. That means whoever be the living beings, they
should be able to have an attitude of compassion towards them. They should have
an attitude of, you know, you know, they should not discriminate. Oh, this
person is, I like this person. I do not like this person. They should have
samya. They should have equal vision towards everyone. And an equal, equally,
they should be having a benefit, benevolent attitude towards everyone. So, the
point is both kinds of spiritualists, whether they are personalists or
impersonalists, they are expected to engage in the welfare of all living beings.
Now, you know, what, what is the welfare that they ca..., should engage in? You
know, that is indicated by the qualifications that these people should have in
this verse. They are:

        ṛṣayaḥ kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ
        chinna-dvaidhā yatātmānaḥ

They are "kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ". They are freed from impurities. See, unless people
are freed from impurities, they cannot engage truly in the welfare of everyone.
Why? Because, you know, you know, when they want to engage in the welfare o...,
cro..., do welfare for everyone, they should know how to do welfare. You know,
if, now, so, at one level, doing welfare seems very simple. Oh, person is
starving. Give some food. The person does not have clothes. Give some clothes.
Yes, these are noble. These are compassionate. But the problems, a, playing
society are not so simple. Why are those people, why are those people hungry? Or
you know, bereaved? That is because there is a whole social cu..., you know,
economic complex that is governed by greed and exploitation? On one side, among
they have, s..., and that is fueled by the wantonness of everyone including the
have nots. Even the have nots do not have self-restraint. Many times, when we
give pleasure, some money. They use it for smoking instead of eating. So,
instead of taking food, they smoke or drink. So, we have discussed this
elaborately in our manava seva, madhava seva topic. The point is that helping,
also, requires some level of understanding of what is real help. So, the greed
and wantonness. Wantonness means the, you know, unrestricted, unregulated
indulgence in pleasures. Even self-defeating, self-destructive pleasures. That
is wantonness. And that, that has to be curbed. So, how is that to be dealt
with? That is to be dealt with by the practice of, you know, the, by the
attainment of higher spiritual happiness. Unless a person experiences higher
spiritual happiness, that person cannot give up lower happiness. When the person
does not give up lower happiness. Then, the person cannot, you know, actually do
good to others. Because the exploitative mentality will come up sooner or later.
And even if there is no exploitative men..., mentality. Even when there is,
actually, compassionate mentality. Still, the w..., a..., if we do not know. You
know, you know, a person may want to help a sick person. But if that person does
not know how to treat the sick person, how much help can be done. So, people are
sick because of lust, anger, greed, envy, pride, and illusion. And those who are
free from these contaminations, those who know how to pra..., treat others, they
can offer the best help. So, "ṛṣayaḥ kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ". Those "ṛṣi"s, those who
are internally active. And "kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ". Those who are free from
contaminations, they are the people who can help others. So, that is the, in a
sense, the qualification for helping others. Otherwise, we certainly, that does
not mean that everybody else is banned from helping others. Everybody, you know,
ha..., those who are, you know, concerned enough, noble enough, compassionate
enough to want to help others. They will naturally do what they can to help
others. And that, you know, that tendency of bei..., you know, being concerned
about others with some level of selflessness is to be appreciated. At the same
time, their help is not going to be complete. It is not going to be holistic. It
is not going to be sustainable. Because as long as we only help at the level of
the body, we cannot really help. The anarthas are present. Anarthas are
misleading, and degrading, and hurting people. Because they, you know, are
directing people's consciousness away from spiritual reality. Where l..., real
lasting happiness exists. So, people have to be rea..., help, people have to be
guided to redirect their consciousness to higher spiritual reality. You know.
When their con..., consciousness gets redirected over there. Then, they will
be, become freed from their infatuation with worldly things. And then, they will
be able to do good to others. And they will be able to receive good from others.
"sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ". That is why "ṛṣayaḥ kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ". It is important
point that we, we, capable of, you know, you know, be, the, be pure. Then, they
can help. That is Prabhupada writes.

"A person engaged only in ministering to the physical welfare of human society
cannot factually help anyone."

Just as a person who does not know how to treat a patient, cannot really help.
Maybe, some encouragement can be given. But as far as the relieving the disease
is concerned, is not, is not be help. So:

"The real cause of one’s difﬁculties in the hard struggle for life may be found
in one’s forgetfulness of his relationship with the Supreme Lord."

So, it is this forgetfulness that needs to be removed. And that is what the
"ṛṣi" does. So, now, Krishna talks about how such a person will eventually
attain liberation.

        kāma-krodha-vimuktānāṁ
        yatīnāṁ yata-cetasām
        abhito brahma-nirvāṇaṁ
        vartate viditātmanām

So, Krishna is repeatedly using the word "brahma-nirvāṇaṁ" over here. So,
spiritual liberation. So, "kā...". So, what are the re..., what is required for
that? "kāma-krodha-vimuktānāṁ". One is freed from "kāma" and "krodha".
"vimuktānāṁ". "muktā" is liberated. "vimuktā" is thoroughly liberated. So,
"kāma-krodha", where are these coming from? These two? Actually, we discussed
earlier how m..., m..., "kāma" and "krodha" are what Krishna talks about as the
c..., as the inner enemies. In 3.37. You know, when Arjuna asked in 3.36. What
is it that impells us to do wrong things? You know, then, Krishna replies, "kāma
eṣa krodha eṣa". So, "kāma" and "krodha" were coupled together at that time. Of
course, before that, also, you know, in 2.62-63, Krishna talked about how "kāma"
when frustrated leads to "krodha".

        dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ
        saṅgas teṣūpajāyate
        saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ
        kāmāt krodho ’bhijāyate

So, there, also, Krishna has talked about how, you know, they are connected. So,
when desire, when we have desire, desire becomes strong. It becomes lust. When
lust is obstructed or frustrated, then it becomes, a..., a..., anger, wrath. So,
now, Krishna has referred to these again in 5.23. In 5.23, you know, 5.22 was
that, you know, understand that sense pleasure leads to misery. "duḥkha-yonaya
eva te". Therefore, "na teṣu ramate budhaḥ". Do not engage in the sense
grat..., gratification. But now, in 5.24, He said, the, a, a, it means five
poi..., that was 5.22. So, 5.23 said that, therefore, tolerate. So, what was a,
what one has told it?

        śaknotīhaiva yaḥ soḍhuṁ
        prāk śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt
        kāma-krodhodbhavaṁ vegaṁ
        sa yuktaḥ sa sukhī naraḥ

So, again, "kāma" and "krodha" were coupled together. So, this coupling of
"kāma" and "krodha" is important. Because many people, they give, they, you
know, are able to control "kāma". But then, they cannot control "krodha". The
Bhagavatam says that, sometimes, the, you know, jnanis, they cross over the
ocean of lust. But then, they, you know, fall and drown in the puddle of
"krodha". So, now, nobody will drown in a puddle. Puddle is supposed to be very
small. But actually, you know, the point is that, th..., when one controls
"kāma". If the "kāma" is not purified. It is just, you know, it is just
suppressed. That means there is a constant battle of wills going on. You know. I
want it. No. I will not do it. I want it. No, I won't do it. So, there is a
battle going on. You know. That battle creates an inner hardness. And inner
m..., we could say hardness and harshness. And then, because that is also
self-centered. I will do it. I will not do it. I will do it. I will not do it.
The, so, the bhaktas are focusing on Krishna. I will, I want to love Krishna. I
want to serve Krishna. I want to please Krishna. Therefore, I will do what will
please Him. And therefore, I will not do this. So, the focus for the devotee is
not on I. The focus is on Krishna. And that is why the inn..., that desire to
please Krishna crowds out. The desire to enjoy or the desire to renounce. So, if
the, as devotees, we are motivated by the de..., by the desire to renounce and
not the desire to serve. Then, you know, what is likely to happen is that we
will be, you know, m..., having a volcano-like eruption of some time or the
other. Because what will happen is, when we deny our own desires o..., our
material desires, of course. When we deny our material desires. You know, I am
givin..., wake up this. I am giving up this. I am, you know, I am controlling
myself so much. And still, so many things are going wrong. Still, this is
happening. That is happening. That is happening. And it is, it is some time
or the other, all that anger will boom. Explode like a volcano. A..., and that,
the coming, other, l..., hot love are coming out. You know, it can break our
relationships. It can wreak our bhakti, also. So, we see, this is in the
Bhagavatam. That we see in the, you know, in the Vedic scriptures in general.
The Bhagavatam contains references to it. We have Viśvāmitra Muni. You know.
When he was doing meditation. First, he was tempted by "kāma". And when he was
tempted by "kāma". He, He, so, Menaka came and seduced him. And then, he fell
prey to her. Then, he again did austerity. At that time, he was determined. Now,
I will not fall prey again. So, then, when Rambha came along, what happened? You
know, he, by he saw her coming. You know, first time, when Menaka came, he was
so captivated by her that if I got who he was and what he was doing. And he has
just, you know, become attracted to her. And started, you know, living with her.
And united with her. But when Rambha came, he understood what she was doing. And
he understood that she has been sent by Indra. And she has, she is plotting, you
know, his fall. So, when she came that way, he felt a rush of rat coming over
him. And he cursed it. So, now, what happened? When he did that, through that,
also. He lost his power.

So, ultimately, we want to direct our emotions towards Krishna. So, "kāma" and
"krodha", both direct our emotions away from Krishna. So, there, you know, both
in that sense can be obstacles. So, now, "krodha", anger is called as kāmānujā.
Anuja means younger borther. Like Lakshmana is called as Rāmānujā. And in
the Sri Sampradaya, like the Rāmānujācārya c..., is considered some kind of
manifestation of "Lakshmana". So, Rāmānujā. The younger brother of Rama. So,
similarly, krodha is called as kāmānujā. That means where "kāma" comes, sooner
or later, "krodha" will come. "krodha" will come. "ānujā" is a, is birth. "jā"
is to take birth. "ānu" is, you know, inferior, lower, and later. So, one who is
born later. After "kāma". So, in general, when one has to become ad...,
spiritually advanced, one has to become free "kāma" and "krodha".
"kāma-krodha-vimuktānāṁ". If one is free only from "kāma". Of course, that is
also a challenge. But if one is only free from "kāma", but not from "krodha".
That means, actually, the desire is not really getting redirected towards
Krishna. The desire is simply getting redirected in the same material arena.
That means what we want to do is, say, this is the material level of reality.
This is spiritual level of reality. So, we want to take our desire. And move it
from here and move it over here. So, from the material level to the spiritual
level. But when we do not redirect our desire towards the spiritual level, then
the desire simply shifts from one material object to another material object.
You know, there are some people who want to give up alcohol addiction. And they
are told that, you know, if you want to d..., eat something. Or drink something.
Taste something which feels good to you. You take chocolates. This is called
substitution therapy. But then, those people become addicted to chocolates. Now,
chocolates may not be as harmful as, you know, alcohol. But i..., that is really
no solution. It is just going from one material urge to another material urge.
It may be a, it may be a lesser of the two evils. But still, it does an evil.
So, as devotees, we do not want this kind of substitution of one material thing
with another material thing. We want purification. Purification means
replacement of the material with the spiritual. And this re..., this is not
actually a replacement. It is a rever..., it is a reversion. Reversion means we
re..., revert back to what we were originally. All of us are souls. And as
souls, we are meant to delight at the spiritual level of reality. So, we simply
revert back to the spiritual level of reality by the practice of spiritual
life. By purifying ourselves through sadhana-bhati. So,
"kāma-krodha-vimuktānāṁ". So, we become free from "kāma" and "krodha" by the
practice of sadhana-bhakti. And then, "yatīnāṁ yata-cetasām". "yata-cetasām"
means the "yatī" is controlled over the mind. So, Prabhupada translates here as
the mind. So, "mukt...", "cetasām" as the mind. "cetasām" can mean
consciousness. It can be the mind, also. So, here, Krishna is telling that if we
have to control "kāma" and "krodha". Now, "kāma" and "krodha", primarily
internal. E..., we, yo..., we, if we want to control them, it is not enough to
do that externally. We have to do it internally. So, I may say that I will not
indulge in lust. Or I will not vent out my anger. But that will not purify me.
Certainly, that, it is good to at least control oneself at a physical level. But
beyond that, we have to remove the anarthas even from the mental level. Because
as long as they are at the mental level, they will be prodding us. Pushing us.
Goading us. Punching us. Pinching us. In various ways, they will be tormenting
us to act devotee, act without the physical level, also. Therefore:

        kāma-krodha-vimuktānāṁ
        yatīnāṁ yata-cetasām

"yata-cetasām" is one is controlling the mind. And that is why it is so
important for us to remember Krishna. When we remember Krishna, then we redirect
our heart's desires from the material to the spiritual. Then, "abhito
brahma-nirvāṇaṁ". "abhito" means, you know, "abh...", assured in the near
future. In the near future. So, this again, another, another time, in the
Bhagavad Gita where Krishna is talking about soon. Not after very far. In the
Fourth Chapter, He has talked about this, hmm, in 4.39. He has, says:

        jñānaṁ labdhvā parāṁ śāntim
        acireṇādhigacchati

So, there, "acireṇā". "acireṇā" means not after a long time. Soon. So, a...,
c..., similarly, "abhito". Prabhu..., tran..., Prabhupada translates "abhitaḥ"
as in the near future. "abhito brahma-nirvāṇaṁ". In the spiritual realm, one
will attain liberation. Now, we have to un..., we may wonder why is Krishna
not referring to "mam" so much over here? He does refer to it. But not so much.
Because t..., right now, He is not talking about bhakti-yoga, directly. He is
building the Bhagavad Gita's thought flow towards bhakti-yoga. Now, of course,
all these verses, their principles can be applied even in the path of
bhakti-yoga. But these are generic spiritual principles. That means
understanding that, you know, we should not pursue outer pleasures. And we
should pursue inner pleasures. These are generic principles which apply to
karma-yogis, jnana-yogis, and bhakti-yogis. The means by which, you know, one
will try sense control. That will be different. So, we are talking about, you
know, controlling the senses from the bhakti perspective. You know. Fixing the
mind on Krishna. The jnanis will talk about it from a different way. They will
talk about naiti. Naiti. The karma-yogis will talk about it from a different
way. But these are generic spiritual principles that are being talked about. So,
Prabhupada's, you know, Prabhupada t..., says, goes so far to say that,
actually, what to speak of impersonalists and mayavadis, even those who are
outside the Vedic fold, like the sunnyavadis. The buddhists. And the jains. You
know, Prabhupada does not talk so much about the jains. But buddhists, he says.
Even the sunnyavadis. They all three agree that entanglement in material
desires is the cause of suffering. And one has to give up that entanglement. The
method of giving entanglement, you know, will be based on one's conception of
the positive spirit of the goal. So, when the goal is a positive spiritual
reality. When the goal is a loving and lovable person whom we can serve. Even
with our senses in this world. Then, the process of, you know, becoming free
from our material desires becomes easier. But still, it is for us to become
free. So:

        abhito brahma-nirvāṇaṁ
        vartate viditātmanām

So, "viditātmanām". Those who are trans..., you know, "vartate" means, the, it
is, that will be there soon for them. "viditātmanām". Those who are
self-realised. "ātmanām". Those who have actually turned to the level of atma.
So, now, Prabhupada ta..., you know, talks about this beautiful verse of how one
can become "yata-cetasām". So, he says, this is Bhāgavatam, 4.22.39:

        yat-pāda-paṅkaja-palāśa-vilāsa-bhaktyā
        karmāśayaṁ grathitam udgrathayanti santaḥ
        tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo ’pi ruddha-
        sroto-gaṇās tam araṇaṁ bhaja vāsudevam

So, this is actually "Pṛthu Mahārāja". You know, this is in "Pṛthu Mahārāja"'s
section. And it is describing over here how that that Absolute Truth. You know,
"bhaja vāsudevam". Worship that Absolute Truth. So that, the conclusion of
the whole verse is "bhaja vāsudevam". Worship Lord Vasudeva. And what is the
rational? Why should one worship Lor..., Lord Vasudeva? That is described prior
to that. That Absolute Truth, that Vasudeva, s..., "yat-pāda-paṅkaja-palāśa".
So, th..., the lotus feet of the Lord, "yat-pāda-paṅkaja-palāśa-vilāsa-bhaktyā".
So, "vilāsa" means to delight. One should delight in the lotus feet of the Lord.
That how? "bhaktyā". That means the devotee chants. Dances, Sings. You know,
worships the deity. Hears the pastimes. And devotee is to delight in that.
Sometimes, some devotees think that renunciation means we should not feel
happiness. No. Actually, sometimes, we should, if we, i..., chant and dance. You
see that we should not chant and dance for our pleasure? Well, it should not be
that we should be chanting and dancing only for our pleasure. But it is not that
we are not meant to feel pleasure. That means that we should chant and dance in
a graceful way. Not in a sensuous way. You know. Not in obn..., certainly not in
obnoxious way. You know, but, you know, when p..., when the early days of the
movement. When the devotees were in Lower East Side. At that time, the hippies
would come. And some of them would dance. And when they would dance, then they
would dance in very sensuous ways exposing their body. And moving their hands.
And legs in a way whi..., would, which is, which would almost actually
provocative. So, once, one la..., one young girl was doing like that. And they
told, Pra..., devotees told Prabhupada. And Prabhupada told the mataji is, go
and to talk with that girl. And to get her to dress beautifully. And then, dress
properly. And then, she came. And then, she changed, participated in the kirtan.
Now, she, she had no, you know, mal intentions over there. It was just that, you
know, know, she was, first, hold, she had taken drugs. And then, she was hearing
the chanting. She just went off, flipped off, was not aware of what she was
doing. So, that, that kind of dancing, Prabhupada would not encourage. But it,
certainly, when we dance and sing. When we hear Krishna Katha, if we f...,
experience happiness, you know, that is good. That is where we need to
experience happiness. But the test of our devotion is that, even when we do not
experience happiness, we continue doing the activity. Some days, when I chant, I
feel that it is, you know, it is so, so tiresome. It is so boring. But still, I
continue. Why do I continue on? Because I know that this is the way I will
experience happiness. This is the way I will make spiritual advancement.
Therefore, this is what I will do. So, "vilāsa-bhaktyā". But devotee should
delight in the practice of bhakti. When that happens, "karmāśayaṁ grathitam
udgrathayanti santaḥ". "karmāśayaṁ". The forces of karma, the, the f..., the
desire for fruitive activities, the, the residual impressions in the mind which
impell us towards, you know, fruitive activities. "grathitam". They are deeply
bound. But "udgrathayanti". They become uprooted. "santaḥ". The saintly people.
They uproot them like that. And the wha..., how, this, there is no other way to
do it. What is the other way? "tadvan na rikta-matayo". "na rikta-matayo". You
know, those who try to empty therein, "matayo" means consciousness.
"rikta-matayo". Those who try to empty their mind. Do not think of that. Do not
think of that. Do not think of that. Do not think of that. Those who try to do
that. "na rikta-matayo". You know. "yatayo ’pi ruddha-". They, even if they
endeavor to empty the mind. They cannot do it. Because "sroto-gaṇās tam araṇaṁ
bhaja vāsudevam". "sroto-gaṇās". "sroto" refers here to waves. So, you know, if
somebody is in the coast. And that person decides, you know, I am going to make
the coast to dry. How is it possible? You know, we may dry the coast by throwing
the water back into the ocean. But if we start, for some time, some waves will
come. And again the coast will become wet. Again, we dry it up. Again, the coast
will come. Again, the waves will come. And it will make us wet. So, what is,
how is it possible? Actually, if we try to empty the mind, what is going to
happen is, you know, waves are going to come. Waves of sensual desires will
come. Either from the outside world. When we p..., when we pursue sense objects.
Or from the inside world. That means from our own memory. When our past mem...,
past recollections of, you know, sensual d..., indulgences, are, become our,
aroused for some reason or the other. So, they are like waves.

So, the waves can, you know, they will keep coming. And they will keep flooding
our consciousness. So, the o..., the only thing to do is, so, if we try to empty
our mind. No, I will not think of this. I will not think of this. No, but that
is what, thoughts will come up. Because impressions are there. The sense objects
are there, externally. And the images are there, internally. So, therefore, the
solution is not to make the mind empty. But to make the mind full. Instead o...,
make the mind full with Krishna. So, if I have a glass of water. And I do not
want water in the, you know, if I have a glass. Now, by default, the glass will
be filled with air. Now, if I do not want it to be filled with air. What do I
have to do? Ai..., air, go away. It is not going to work. I want, even if I
turn that, box, glass, upside down. Still, it will be filled with air. Then what
do I do? Then, I get some vacuum machine. You know, a..., a..., pull it out. And
make a vacuum inside the glass. But how long can I keep the vacuum? You know, as
soon as I, you know, a, the, give a little exposure to that. That vacuum will
get filled. And air will come inside. So, you know, it is practically impossible
to make the glass empty into a total vacuum. "rikt...", like that, it is, you
know, impossible to make our mind empty. "rikta-matayo" is impossible. So, what
is to be done? I should fill the glass with water. C..., if I fill the glass
with water, when it is, it f..., once it is filled, then there is no s..., room
for the air to come inside. So, like that, if I do not want sensual desires to
come in my mind, you know, rather than trying to pull out the sensual desires, I
fill my mind with devotional desires. With devotional impressions. With
devotional thoughts. Fill my mind with Krishna. Then, there will be no room
left. So, Prabhupada had once gone for a, you know, Delhi Pandal programme.
Thousands of people had come for the programme as he was returning back. Several
phi..., disci..., living, there was such Swarupa Maharaja. And all those were
there. And when Prabhupada would, would enter, all the people would offer him
obeisances. When he would leave, people would offer obeisances. People were
rushing to touch his feet. So, Prabhupada asked the disciples. You know, why
they are all offering respects to me? You know. You know. Disciples did not
reply anything. That is because I am free from sex desire. Because I am free
from lust. And then, the devotees were stunned to hear this. When Prabhupada
said, not that I have no lust. You know. Prabhupada realised that this is such a
level that, you know, that disciples can, it is far, far away for disciples. Not
that I have no lust. But Prabhupada said, I have no time for lust. I have no
time for lust. So, that is what each of us can aspire for. You know, no lust
will make a long time. But no time for lust is possible for us. If we busy
ourselves in devotional service to Krishna, there are so many fulfilling
activities that we can do. And we start engaging in those activities. Then, this
constant craving that is there, it just go in the background. And it will stay
in background. And eventually, it will go out of the ground, only. So, it will
just go g..., it will go out, gradually. It may take a long time. But we can
keep it in the background. There is no need to let it come in the foreground.
So, if we keep thinking about it, sometimes, thinking too much that I will not
do it makes us do it. Because even I am, I will not do it. I will not do it. I
will not do it. What am I, am I thinking about it? I am not thinking about
Krishna. So, when I am thinking about something, even negative way, that I
should not do it. But what is happening? My thoughts are going towards that. And
that contemplation may kindle my desires, even against my will. Hmm. Just by, by
the force of the mind's obstinacy.

So, therefore, "yat-pāda-paṅkaja-palāśa-vilāsa-bhaktyā". We have to delight in
Krishna Consciousness. When we delight in Krishna Consciousness, then whatever
is being talked about over here, in this section, that we will be able to apply.
And then, Prabhupada quotes another verse over here. He says that, you know, so,
now, in the previous verse, Pra..., Prabhupada had said that how one should
delight in bhakti. And now, what will happen by delighting in bhakti? Delighting
in meditation on Supreme Lord? That is gi..., that is example over here. So:

        darśana-dhyāna-saṁsparśair
        matsya-kūrma-vihaṅgamāḥ
        svāny apatyāni puṣṇanti
        tathāham api padma-ja

"By vision, by meditation and by touch only do the ﬁsh, the tortoise and the
birds maintain their offspring."

So, this is the Vedic understanding. Now, we know that, the birds, they sit on
their hea..., you know, sit on their hands. On their eggs. And by, they keep it
warm and comfortable. And gradually, they, by sitting on the eggs, the birds
hatch the eggs. And the, a, bird lets come out ordinary. So, the birds nourish
their o..., offsprings just by touch. Similarly, it is said that the, you know,
fish look upon their offspring. And the tortoise do meditation. Now, actually,
looking and meditation is something which is, you know, not really observable.
How can science know whom someone is meditating on? And there may be specific
kinds of fish and tortoise which do this. So, even if, say, a, today's
scientific evidence does not support this idea. It does not mean in principle it
is impossible. There are certain kinds of living beings which may be capable of
doing these things. So, just like, when we say, a swan is able to separate milk
from water. Now, is it that all the an..., all the birds that are called swans
today are able to do that? Not necessarily. Just like we have lotuses. You know,
not all lotuses are as fragrant as they are talked about in the Vedic
scriptures. Why? Because there are different kinds of lotuses. There can be
different kinds of swans. There are different kinds of fish. There are different
kinds of tortoises, also. So, here, Krishna is talking about a special kind of
fish, tortoise. You know, and, you know, you know, so, the point is, the inf...,
when the..., these kind of examples are given, you know, the important is not on
the factuality of the specific example. It is on the, you know, on the principle
that is being taught through that example. So, because a factuality is dependent
on our relative perception. And what will ma..., not con..., what may consider,
counterfactual today, maybe just because of our limited perception. And, you
know, how much can we actually observe? So, th..., we should not focus too m...,
whenever such an examples come up, we should look at the principle. The
principle is what? Principle is, something is growing. So that the offspring is
growing because of the benevolent men..., you know, benevolent care of the m...,
m..., of the parent. So, similarly, here, the Lord is telling that similarly, do
I also. So, g..., here, what is the point? That just as we are meditating on the
Lord, the Lord is also meditating on us. The Lord is actually, you know, always
there with us in our heart. And He is always thinking of our welfare. But when
we do not think of Him, we do not allow Him to act much for our welfare. Because
like a doctor wants to treat a patient. But the patient does not want to be
treated. Then, doctor really cannot do much. The doctor needs the patient's
cooperation. So, when we start thinking of Krishna, we start cooperating. And
then, Krishna is able to help us more and more. So, we have to understand that
when we are practicing spiritual life, it is not that we alone are struggling to
fix the mind on Krishna. Actually, the, Krishna is also striving to help us fix
our mind on Him. And He is helping us to move closer to Him that way. So, this
is Prabhupada's explanation of how "brahma-nirvāṇaṁ" takes place.
"brahma-nirvāṇaṁ" means, "brahma" is Krishna. And "nirvāṇaṁ" means liberation
from material existence. So, we fix the mind on Krishna. Now, you know, here,
Krishna, in the next two verses will give a brief explanation of how one can
attain liberation by the practice of, you know, ashtanga-yoga.

So, now, you know, let us try to understand the chapter overview first. To
understand where, what is happening. In Arjuna's mind, there were two options.
Karma-yoga and jnana-yoga. Actually, in his mind, there were only two options,
the action and inact..., renunciation. So, Krishna has told him about how there
can be action in renunciation. The two do not have to be, you know, two do not
have to be opposite. The two can be integrated. They do not have to be
fragmanted. So, when Krishna explains that how it can be fragmented, how it can
be integrated. Then, the question comes up, is it that action alone will
ultimately lead to liberation? So, karma-yoga alone, can it lead to liberation?
Yes, it can. You know, karma-yoga, so that means, when a person is practicing
karma-yoga, eventually, the person can renounce the world. And go to the forest.
So, just like, a person when, that person is a grihasta. That person lives on
the world. And acts as a brahm..., as a, acts in karma-yoga. But later on, when
the person takes vanaprastha and sannyasa, that person at that time may not be
acting in karma-yoga. That time, the person may take up jnana-yoga. That person
may take to ashtanga-yoga. That person may take one, you know, full-time
bhakti-yoga, also. So, that can vary. So then, Krishna is, you know, the way
Krishna has spoken. Krishna has, say...:

        karmaṇaiva hi saṁsiddhim

He says, by work alone, one can attain liberation. That means one can stay on a
liberated stage even while practicing one's work. But eventually, as the
varnashrama progression is there, one will renounce the world. So, when one
renounces the world, how, what should one do at that time? Do, to complete the
process towards liberation? Then, Krishna is telling over here, instead of
jnana-yoga, Krishna has already told, that is, you know, "yoga-yukto", you know,
"ayogataḥ", "duḥkham āptum ayogataḥ". Krishna has said that, actually, one is not
practicing karma, one will get "duḥkham". So, Krishna says, if one wants to
practice libera..., gain liberation, then one can practice ashtanga-yoga. So, we
will describe ashtanga-yoga in two verses over here. And this will be elaborated
in the Sixth Chapter. The Sixth Chapter is among the longest chapters of the
Gita. 47 Cha..., verses. And there, He will talk about the principle of how to
renounce the world through ashtanga-yoga. And then, in the, now, last verse of
this chapter, 29th verse, Krishna will talk about bhakti-yoga. And when He talks
about bhakti-yoga, that will be elaborated in the next section of Bhagavad Gita.
That is Chapters Seven to Twelwe. So, this is the progression. So, at, in the
first Five Chapters, Krishna has established that for Arjuna, action is better
than renunciation, karma-yoga is better than jnana-yoga. And when he does
karma-yoga, eventually, when wants to renounce the world, at that time, he can
either practice ashtanga-yoga. Or he can practice bhakti-yoga. And bhakti-yoga
can be continuously practiced. One does not have to change the process. So that
He will talk about elaborately in the later Chapters, Seven to Twelwe. So, now,
let us look at the brief glimpse of jnana-yoga, that of ashtanga-yoga, that
Krishna gives over here.

        sparśān kṛtvā bahir bāhyāṁś
        cakṣuś caivāntare bhruvoḥ
        prāṇāpānau samau kṛtvā
        nāsābhyantara-cāriṇau

        yatendriya-mano-buddhir
        munir mokṣa-parāyaṇaḥ
        vigatecchā-bhaya-krodho
        yaḥ sadā mukta eva saḥ

So, now, first, Krishna says that "bahir bāhyāṁś". Keep outside. What should one
keep outside? "sparśān kṛtvā". So, "sparśān" refers to sense objects, such as
sound. So, "sparśān kṛtvā". So, "sparśān", here, Krishna, now, now, when we, we
may say "sparśān" refers to touch. Yes. But "sparśān" refers, in general, to the
contact of the senses with the sense objects. Krishna has used that, in a, you
know, there is a verse, "sparśān", a general sense. In, you know, in 5.22:

        ye hi saṁsparśa-jā bhogā

So, same point. Kri..., same usage Krishna is, conveys. "sparśān kṛtvā bahir
bāhyāṁś". So, keep external sense objects external. Do not focus on them. And,
"cakṣuś caivāntare bhruvoḥ". So, what should one do with the eyes? The eyes
"āntare bhruvoḥ". Fix the eyes in the middle of the two eyebrows. Krishna is
talking about, here, practicing, you know, the process of ashtanga-yoga, yoga,
yoga asanas. Where one is doing pratyahara. Shutting out the sense objects. And
then, "prāṇāpānau samau kṛtvā". So, regulate the breath. "nāsābhyantara-cāriṇau
". So, these, you know, first, fou..., verse, f..., 27, to, talks about the
physical control that one should do. At the physical level, what one also should
do, regulate the breath, you know, turn away from the sense objects. Fix the
eyes on the, in-between the two eyebrows. Then, in the next line, He will talk
about what we should do internally. "yatendriya-mano-buddhir". So, bring the
senses, the mind and intelligence under control. "yaten". "munir
mokṣa-parāyaṇaḥ". And that person should be "mokṣa-parāyaṇaḥ". Focused on
attaining liberation. Understanding that nothing in this material world that can
make me happy. I want to go beyond this material, "mokṣa-parāyaṇaḥ". So, "munir
mokṣa-parāyaṇaḥ". And then, after that, "vigatecchā-bhaya-krodho". Such a person
becomes free from "icchā", "bhaya", and "krodhaḥ". Now, Krishna has talked about
"icchā" and "krodhaḥ" earlier. So, where is "bhaya" coming in now? So, Kri...,
"icchā" can mean, say, equated with "kāma". So, "kāma-krodha-vimuktānāṁ",
Krishna had talked about in previous ver..., 5.26. And we discussed their
coupling, you know, you know, elaborately. Now, where is "bhaya" coming from?
Actually, you know, "bhaya" is a component, which Krish..., these three, Krishna
talks about regularly. He has talked about it in "vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā", twice.
Once in 4.10. You know, when He is talking about how the three obstacles to
taking surrender to Him:

        vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā
        man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ


He has talked about in 4.10. And then, before that talk, He has talked about it
in the Second Chapter, also. In 2.56. When He has said that, you know:

        vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ
        sthita-dhīr munir ucyate

        duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ
        sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ

So, these three are together. "rāga". "bhaya". And "krodhaḥ". So, "rāga" refers
to attachment. Oh, I want to enjoy this world. But "krodhaḥ" refers to, why
cannot I enjoy this world? Who can stop me? I will get over those obstacles.
Maya is, I do not know what is there in the spiritual realm. I do not want to
explore this. You know, let me stay where I am. So, these are all obstacles. So,
"vigatecchā-bhaya-krodho". So, one should not have desire for this world. One
should not be frustrated with this world in a penta..., p..., resentful angry
sense. You know, if somebody renounces out of hatred for this world, that r...,
that aversion will also keep one's thought fixed on the world. You know, we
should, even when we, somebody wants to renounce, that renunciation should be
because of, not because of frustration for the world. It should be because of
attraction for the other world. If it is based only on frustration to this
world, then that cannot be sustained. To be sustained, it has to be based on
attraction to the ex-world. So, that is why one has to become free from
"krodhaḥ", also. You know, and then, "vigatecchā-bhaya-krodho". And "bhaya" is,
oh, I do not know. Is there a relationships? And there coming complexities in
the relationship, also. I do not want to get into this business. Let me just
stay out of this whole thing. Let me some merge into some void. Or something
like that. "vigatecchā-bhaya-krodho". All these misconceptions, you know, when
one is free from, then Krishna does not say such a person will become liberated.
Krishna makes an even g..., you know, you know, so, surprising, a, declaration.
He says, "yaḥ sadā mukta eva saḥ". "yaḥ sadā". Such a person is always
liberated. Or "yaḥ sadā", one who is in this stage, he is always, already
liberated. "yaḥ sadā mukta eva saḥ". So, Krishna is telling about once one goes
into the prana..., a, pratyahara stage, we will discuss about this stage in next
chapter. But once one shuts out the external sense objects, and fixes the mind
inwards. Then, after that, if one is free from the anarthas, then one is as good
as liberated here itself. And then, Prabhupada talks about keeping the eyes open.
And not closing the eyes. Because one will just f..., fall asleep. And then, it,
Prabhupada says, this will be thoroughly explained in the next chapter. H...,
and then, he, you know, you know, so, Prabhupada also makes it clear that
Krishna Consciousness is better than ashtanga-yoga. So, let us look at the last
chapter of, last verse of the chapter. Which is an oft-quoted verse again.

        bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ
        sarva-loka-maheśvaram
        suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati

"śāntim ṛcchati". Such a person will attain peace. Who will attain peace? The
person who understand that, Krishna, "bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ". He is the
enjoyer of all sacrifices and austerities. He is "sarva-loka-maheśvaram" means
the proprietor of everything. And "suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ". He is the
well-wisher of all living beings. Such a person will attain liberation. So, now,
a, so, so, it is, person, sorry, such a person will attain peace. Now, Prabhupada
had made templates of the peace formula using this. And he would distribute that.
You know, these are, this is the peace formula. What is the peace formula? To
accept Krishna as the proprietor, as the enjoyer, and as the well-wisher. So,
now, we may, we may wonder what has this got to do with anything? How can
accepting Krishna as the enjoyer, how, you know, people think generally, if we
have to gain peace. Then, we have to do some negotiations. Ok, that, this to,
contrary is fighting. So, then, I have to, peace confronts has to be there. And
some m..., medical, mea..., subtle, meant, has to be there. And the grievances
have to be addre..., redressed. So, this is important. No doubt. At a material
level. But at the material level, you know, peace will always be elusive. It
will always be unstable. Because there will be always people who are
exploitative. So, real peace will have to go, grow from wins..., within the
hearts of people. When people are internally peaceful. Then, they can radiate
peace outwards. And how can people become internally peaceful? When they can
become internally satisfied. As long as people are determined on, dependent on
external satisfaction, till that time, they cannot have, they cannot have peace
if their external situations are disrupted. And those external situations are
bound to be disrupted. Because the externals are unstable. So, here, Krishna is
talking about inner peace a..., as the only sustainable building block for outer
peace. So, now, let us first look at what this verse means when Krishna is
saying these three components. Then, we will discuss of, about, then we will
discuss about how Krishna can liberate us from, how this understanding can
liberate us from material existence. So, actually speaking, "shanti mrichhati".
So, what we have to do is, you know, before we can have peace with, in the
world, we have to make peace with God. What does it mean we have to make peace
with God? We may say, who is fighting with God? You know, God is not involved in
the fighting. Now, people may say that, I am not fighting with God. Who is
fighting with God? But actually, we are. You know, when we want to enjoy
separate from Krishna, in a sense, we are waging war against Krishna. We want to
enjoy separate from Him. And that is unfortunate. So, we may not consciously be
hostile towards Krishna. But subconsciously, we are, in a way. Trying to usurp
His position. He is the Supreme Enjoyer. And we are meant to be, you know,
co-enjoyers with Him. We are not meant to be independent enjoyers. When we try
to be independent enjoyers, we become l..., our l..., enjoyment becomes limited
by the finitude. By the limitedness of our capacity to enjoy. Whereas when we
connect with Krishna, then wh..., our enjoyment becomes unlimited. Because He is
unlimited. His capacity to enjoy is unlimited. And our capacity, our enjoyment
becomes connected with His enjoyment. So, therefore, we have to make peace with
God. So, this verse is, a, called for making peace with God.

And when we make peace with God, what happens exactly? Then, peace comes within
the heart. And when peace comes within the heart, then, we can have peace in the
outer world. So, you know, you know, actually speaking, whenever things,
whenever we make some plan. I want to do like this. And when it does not work
out. Then, we feel so much resentment. Why didn't it work out? Why didn't it
work out? So, that resentment can go in three directions. You know, either it
can go towards others. Why? Why? Why? Why did they come in my way? Why did that
person do like that? Because of that person, only. And then, when it goes
outwards. Then, what happens is, we become hateful. We become vengeful. And we
may or may not hurt that person. But that hatefulness, that vengefulness.
Vengeful means revengeful. So, that vengefulness hurts o..., us, definitely. Or
that resentment can go inwards. And we start blaming ourselves, only. You know,
I am useless. I bungle up everything. I can never do anything well. I am
useless. And people develop inferiority complex. People develop s..., you know,
depression. People develop suicide allergies, also. So that resentment can go
outwards. It can go inwards. Or it can go upwards. Upwards means, why does God
do things like this? You know, why does God do like that? Why does God do like
that? You know. Why? Why? Why? So, in all, now, when we, that resentment become
like a wall between us and God. And when God wants to help, we cannot accept His
help. Because if we are resenting somebody, how can we take the help of that
person? So, that resentment becomes a wall between us and God. And we cannot
take His help. So, that is why when we want help. What do we have to do? When we
all need help in this world. This world sends such obstacles and reversals in
our path that we all need help. So, that help comes through knowledge and faith.
So, we understand that Krishna is always my well-wisher. And whatever He is
doing is ultimately for my good. So, I may not understand immediately. Just as a
patient may not understand, how a surgeon's knife is doing good. The surgeon's
knife seems to be doing pain, only. Causing pain, only. Same way, we may not
understand immediately. But over a period of time, we will understand. So, we
have to be patient. We have to be faithful. So, that is "suhṛdaṁ
sarva-bhūtānāṁ". So, when we find, we want to be the "bhoktā". And we find
that we are not able to be the "bhoktā". When, we won't have, we make certain
plans and think I will enjoy this plan. We are not able to enjoy that plan.
Then, we want to, m..., you know, we want to have this, oh, you know, for
enjoyment, we want, need things. We want to enjoy. Then, I need property. I need
money. I need possessions. So, sometimes, our positions are taken away. Or the
position that we want, we do not get them. Then, that resentment comes up. But
when we understand that, actually, "suhṛdaṁ". Krishna is the well-wisher of all
living beings. When we understand that Krishna is the well-wisher of all living
beings. Then, He is my well-wisher, also. He is the others' well-wisher, also.
So, then, that resentment comes down. That resentment starts breaking down. Ok.
Whatever Krishna had planned is for my good. Let me see how it, let me how best
I can continue on acting in this world. So, when we have that attitude of trying
to act in the best possible way. Then, we become purified by that. And when we
become purified of the resentment by that. Then, more and more the way becomes
clear. And the peace becomes deeper and deeper. So, whichever way our resentment
may go, we have to understand that resentment is never positive emotion.
Therefore, we should send resentment on retirement. Nothing doing. I am not
going to be resentful. Just, this happened, this happened. What has happened has
happened. What cannot be changed cannot be changed. What has gone wrong has gone
wrong. But the present is still there with me. And I can change the present. So,
let me do what I can in the best way possible now. And for that, Krishna is
there to guide me. Krishna is there to help me. He is there to empower me. So,
that way, we move forward in our spiritual life. So, this faith, "suhṛdaṁ
sarva-bhūtānāṁ" can free us from enormous mental resentment. You know, when we
accept in principle Krishna is my well-wisher. Even if I do not understand how,
right now, Krishna is my well-wisher. That accepting that fact, one, once we
know that. And this is not just on, not just something which we have to accept
on faith. Actually, if we live, if we choose to act accordingly, we will find
out in our own lives, you know, things which seem to be terribly wrong, over a
period of time will see how they actually work for our good. How they made
things better for us. "suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ". He is the well-wisher of all
living beings. Hmm. So, then, when we understand that He is the well-wisher of
all living beings, then we will not become unduly possessive. You know, I want
this. I want that. I want that. And when people are possessive, then they,
because people like s..., actually, possessive, that is why conflicts come up.
You know, there are, you know, there is, most of the wars take place over
wealth. Over property. Over power. And that involves, all of it involves
possessiveness. So, people want to be possessive. Hitler wanted to be the
emperor of the whole world. At least, of Europe. And later on, he wanted to
conquer Russia and Asia, also. So, his idea was that he had that possessive
mentality. So, he wanted to, he was thinking that I want to be
"sarva-loka-maheśvaram". I want to be the "īśvaram", the con..., "maheśvaram",
the controller of all people, all living beings. So, all, sorry, all places.
"sarva-loka-maheśvaram". So, that was in a tiny way, that was his desire. And
that is what the desires of those who want to, you know, wage wars, and
conquer, generally is. So, therefore, when we understand that Krishna is my
well-wisher. And all that I need for my happiness is serve Him. I do not need to
usurp Krishna's position. And try to become "sarva-loka-maheśvaram". And I do
not have to become a "bhoktā" independently. If I just become a, you know,
sevak, then that will give me enjoyment in its own way. That will give me
satisfaction. Far deeper satisfaction then what I can get as a "bhoktā". When we
understand this, then we will become peaceful. "śāntim ṛcchati". So, the
"śāntim", here, Krishna is talking about is not necessarily the "śāntim" that
comes from absence of war in the outer world. War in the outer world will
con..., continue. But the war in the inner world is largely fueled by resentment
towards things and people. And ultimate towards God. So, that resentment can be
sent to retirement by the knowledge that Krishna is the well-wisher. And I just
need to serve Krishna. Then, that will "śāntim ṛcchati".

Now, this verse is actually a conclusion of the other verses in the sense that
this verse is talking about, hmm, the unity, how Krishna is the ultimate goal of
various paths. So, "bhoktāraṁ yajña". So, when Krishna is saying that, I am the
"bhoktā" for the "yajña"s. So, the "yajña"s are performed by those people who
are practicing karma-yoga. And those who are practicing karma-kanda. We
discussed this about "yajña" in, elaborately in Third Chapter. So that, they, they
do "yajña". So f..., that means, Krishna is telling, revealing over here that I
am the goal of all those people who practice karma-yoga and karma-kanda. And
"bhoktāraṁ", "tapasāṁ". "tapasāṁ" is, s..., "tapasāṁ" is generally performed by
the jnanis. They do some austerities to try to become detached from this world.
So, Krishna is saying, I am the goal of the u..., yo..., jnana-yogis, also.
Now, "sarva-loka-maheśvaram". So, some of the worshippers, some of the wo...,
demigod worshippers, they aspire to go to the planets of the demigods. Because
they think that they will, that will, there, those are the w..., they are
worshipable deities. And they want to be with them. And they think that will
make us happy. You know, Krishna will talk about "yānti deva-vratā devān". He
talks about that in 10, 9.25. So, here, He is saying that, actually, even the
lokas of the devatas are my lokas, only. They are secondary proprietors. I am
the ultimate proprietor. Therefore, the implication is, come by act to Me. And
then, "suhṛdaṁ sarv...". "suhṛdaṁ". "suhṛdaṁ" refers to tha..., it is the goal
of ashtanga-yoga. The ashtanga-yogi is, they want to turn inwards and meditate
on the Absolute Truth. They want to:

        dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yogino

"dhyānāvasthita". They want to become situated in "dhyāna". And they want to
turn inwards. And fix their consciousness on the Supreme Lord. "tad...",
"tad-gatena manasā paśyanti", they want to perceive inwards, the Supersoul. So,
K..., it is telling that that, whom, they, that Lord, whom they want to
perceive in the heart, I am that Lord. I am the "suhṛdaṁ". So, "suhṛdaṁ" can
mean well-wisher. It can also mean one who is situated in the heart. So, the
"nachad", the well-wisher is situated in the heart. But Krishna is also talking
about the fact that He is factually situated in the heart. He is present as a
Supersoul in the heart. So, that is, what is being pointed to over here. And in
that way, we can see that this verse also refers to the, Him being the goal of
the ashtanga-yogs. And then, "sarva-bhūtānāṁ". That means that ultimately, He is
the goal of all living beings. 

        mama vartmānuvartante
        manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

Krishna is telling in 4.11 that all people are on my path. That point is being
reiterated over here. He is the goal of all living beings. In this way, in this
verse, Krishna is, in a succinct way, in an indicate way, telling that He is the
goal of all paths. And Prabhupada's purport over here, it is a long and classic
purport. And, so Prabhupada says, the bare facts of life. What bare facts means,
they are not ad..., adorned facts. Then, then, there is no varnishing. There is
no decoration. Just simply facts. What are these facts?

"The Lord is the master of material nature, and the conditioned souls are under
the stringent rules of material nature. Unless one understands these bare facts,
it is not possible to achieve peace in the world either individually or
collectively. This is the sense of Kṛṣṇa consciousness: Lord Kṛṣṇa is the
supreme predominator, and all living entities, including the great demigods, are
His subordinates."

So, sense of Krishna Consciousness means, you know, overall, Krishna
Consciousness is not just activities. I chant Hare Krishna. I, you know, study
the Bhagavad Gita. I associate with devotees. These are all important. But the
sense of Krishna Consciousness is, Krishna is the master. And I am His servant.
That is the sense which we should have. And with that sense, we will, actually,
enable us to move forward in spiritual life. And then, Prabhupada says, you
know, now, this is a very, you know, interesting statement.

"Kṛṣṇa consciousness, however, brings one into spiritual life even while one is
within the jurisdiction of matter, for it is an arousing of spiritual existence
by practice in the material world."

So, by practice in the material world. Hmm. So, that means, you know, normally,
within the path of jnana-yoga, there are two distinct steps. First is, one is
practicing, you know, you know, one is acting in the world. Then, one
disconnects oneself from the world. So that we can become connected with the
spiritual reality. But in the path of bhakti-yoga, one may stay in the world.
But one invokes the spiritual reality by, you know, devotional intention. So,
this arousing of spiritual existence even while we are in the material world.
And that what makes it so exciting. That we do not have to give up the material
world entirely for the sake of a..., attaining the spiritual world. We can be in
this world. But we can act in a regulated way. And in a devotional way.
Dovetailed way. Hmm. And then, Prabhupada writes, there are various paths. He
says that:

"There is a gradual process of elevation in the practice of"

The eight, now, he s..., talks about eight stages.

"But these only preface perfection by devotional service, which alone can award
peace to the human being. It is the highest perfection of life."

So, ultimately, after the ashtanga-yoga process, one comes to samadhi. And in
samadhi, one becomes Krishna Conscious. Because at that time, one becomes
conscious of Krishna. And that is what is the ultimate goal. So, if somebody
starts practicing Krishna Consciousness in alternative way without going through
the other processes, the whole processes of ashtanga-yoga, then that person can,
more easily achieve the same perfection. So, these only preface. So, these come
before. And the real thing is Krishna Consciousness. So, in this way, Krishna,
in this chapter, has talked about three things. First is, the first section,
verses one to six, He has said that, you know, karma-yoga and jnana-yoga will
lead to the same result. But karma-yoga is easier. Then, in the remaining
chapter, He has explained, how karma-yoga will lead to liberation. So, first,
verses seven to, you know, sixteen, he has stated that by knowing atma. And
understanding one seems to be atma, one can stay free from bondage. And from
seventeen to twenty-nine, by fixing the mind on the Paramatma, one can attain
liberation. So, in this way, Krishna has told that Arjuna, you should practice
karma-yoga. Have no doubts. That by acting in the world, you can attain
liberation. So, now, Krishna is, in the next chapter, will describe how when
one i..., when one eventually has to renounce, what should one do, when
ren..., renoun..., at, at that time. That we will discuss in our next class. 

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
