Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XMy05Xu4h2k
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_050_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_13_to_17_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=XMy05Xu4h2k&event=video_description&redir_token=h8oeU1P6bzT4QDN6UIsToK-UFz58MTU0ODQ4NzIxMUAxNTQ4NDAwODEx

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. So, welcome back to our Bhakti Sastri course on the Bhagavad Gita.
We are continuing with the second chapter. And we discussed til verse 2.12. And
"na tv evāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ" was of discussed. We will start with 2.13. So, the
Bhagavad Gita's second chapter, which is called by Srila Prabhupada as "Contents
of the Gītā Summarized", is basically a call by Krishna to Arjuna to fight. So,
in the first section, Arjuna's fifth reason and e..., eventual refusal to
surrender is talked about from 2.1 to 10. And then, from 2.11 onwards, Krishna
starts speaking. So, 2.11 onwards to 2.30 is Sankhya. The soul is
indestructible, therefore fight. This is a counter to Arjuna's objection that if
I fight, then my relatives will be killed. I do not want them to die. So,
Krishna tells do not live in the ignorant bodily conception. Raise to the
enlightened spiritual conception. And know that, the performance of dharma never
causes harm to anyone. It brings ultimate good to everyone. And for bringing out
that ultimate good, if it involves some surgical cleansing, then that is what
needs to be done. So, that vision of what actually dharma is, based on
atma-jnana, is talked about in this section. So, we discussed 2.12 re...,
refutes impersonalism. It establishes the eternality of the individuality of the
soul. And now, 2.13. Let us start from there. So, we have:

        dehino ’smin yathā dehe
        kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā
        tathā dehāntara-prāptir
        dhīras tatra na muhyati

So, "dehino". Inside this "deha". "asmin". There is "yathā dehe". So, you know,
"dehino ’smin yathā dehe". Just as inside the body, there is the owner of the
body. So, and what is the nature of that owner? That, although the body changes,
the owner remains unchanging. "kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā". So, "kau...". So,
boyhood, youth and old age. These are the stages through which the body will go.
But the "dehi". A person who is situated inside the body will remain unchanging.
And similarly, "tathā dehāntara-prāptir". Similarly, when the person dies, at
that time, the person get another body. "dhīras tatra na muhyati". A wise
person, a so..., "na muhyati", is not bewildered. Now, Srila Prabhupada
translates "dhīras" as sober person. So, the word sober is often used in the
context of alcohol. You know, sober person is a person who is affected by, he is
not affected by alcohol. Who is this, not addicted to alcohol, or he had, or that
person has given up the addiction to alcohol. That is a sober person. So,
"dhīras tatra na muhyati". So, the bodily conception is like an intoxication.
And becoming free from that intoxication is an important goal of life. And that
goal of life is promoted by the practice of devotional service. So, that is what
is being talked about over here. That we should practice devotional service. And
by that, we will become freed from the bodily conception. Of course, when we
talk, saying here, it, the Bhagavad Gita does not give all of its messages at
once. It will build the message gradually. So, here, you know, devotional
service is not immediately mentioned. But it is mentioned indirectly that one
should become a "dhīra". When he says that, oh, oh, such, such things will not
trouble an intelligent person. The indirect meaning is if somebody is being
troubled by this, that means, that person needs to become intelligent. And then,
that trouble will not be there anymore. So, similarly, Krishna is giving
instruction here indirectly by demonstrating an example. Ok, this is how people
work. This is how people act. And if we act in this way, then we will not be
bewildered.

        dhīras tatra na muhyati

So, now, what is the point being made over here? We all, when we see a, a
relative or a friend after a long time, especially if a child we see, after a
long time. Hey, you have grown up so much. You were so small. I could pick you
up on a l..., on my palm. But now, you will not fit in my lap, also. Some
relatives may say after ten, if they meet a child after ten years or something
like that. So, what has happened? So, you were like that. And you are like this.
That is what we see. So, you were so small. And you have become so big now. So,
what has happened? That means there is unchanging dimension to that person that
is addressed by I or you. And there is a changing dimension. Which is addressed
by you were like this. And w..., you are like this. So, that means, all of us
have an unchanging dimension, unchanging aspect, unchanging feature to our
being. And we have a changing feature. So, what is this changing and unchanging?
Generally speaking, when we remember a dark complexion person may do some
plastic surgery or something like that, or may..., by that, may become fear...,
fair. Or a fat person may do bariatric surgery and become thin. A small-nosed
person may do a big-noise, may, surgery, and become big-nosed. Whatever.
Different people can do different things like this. But no matter, what they do,
still, they remain the same person. So, now, certainly, something has changed.
Something is the same. This is, now, somebody may say, no, no, I have changed
completely. I am not the same person. But then, even if somebody says, I am not
the same person. The "I", the reference to "I" is the same. So, there is,
some..., some..., somebody uses the same. So, for example, if I say that, ok, I
am living now. And I have not changed. So, the child was there. Now, I am a
young person, middle-aged person. So, I was a child earlier. So, whatever, it
is, is it this person the same or different? Somebody says, no, it is different.
Actually, child has gone gone. And I am the same. Most of us will not say like
that. Now, we can see that there is, definitely changed at a biological level.
Even science acknowledges that. There are different frames of reference that we
can take to look at the change of the bodily level. You know, if we look at the
level of organs. Although, my heart seems to be the same. My arm seem to be the
same. But the cells that make the heart and beyond, a, so, or the cells that
make the arm, they keep changing. So, if a thing is nothing more than its
components, then, the essential point is that if all the components have
changed, is the thing the same? Or is the thing different? So, we would say that
the thing has changed and thing is still the same. So, sometimes, you know, if,
if we have a laptop. And then, we change the motherboard. We change the hard
disk. We change the touchpad. We tange..., change the keyboard. Of course, most
people will not do such an overhauling. They will say better take a new laptop,
only. But when we change small, small, s..., parts like that. And then, we will
say, oh, this laptop is now as good as new. Because the hard disk is new. Or
because the RAM has been extended. Or whatever. So, at such times, what are we
exactly saying? Now, there, there is something that is n..., old and is
continuing. But there is something that is new. On the other hand, if I just
leave old laptop and take a new laptop. Then, entirely new laptop, that is
there. So, in the first case, there is, there is a gradual change. That means,
you know, say, if I have a laptop, first I change the, maybe, I change the
touchpad. Then, I change the motherboard. Then, I change the hard disk. Then, I
may change the monitor. So, there are progressive changes over there. But they
are one, one, one at a time. But if I just take a new laptop, that is a rapid
change.

So, Krishna is talking similarly about two kinds of reincarnation over here. The
word "incar", "carna" is related with flesh, like sexual, or especially lusty
pleasure, lusty illicit sex is called as carnal indulgences. So, ca..., or it
is also carnivorous. That is flesh eating. So, incarnation literally means to
come in flesh. Reincarnation means to come again in flesh. So, reincarnation
means that to again get a material body. So, reincarnation, generally, we used
that word in the sense of when a person dies, and then comes back now in another
body. That is what we refer to, generally, as reincarnation. But if we consider
that the fact that the body is constantly changing, constantly changing,
changing, changing. Then, we can also equally say that there is internal
reincarnation in the sense that the body is gradually changing. Just like the
parts of a computer may be changed. One at a time, one at a time. Similarly,
there can be internal reincarnation that can also happen. So, that is the
difference between in..., internal and external. What is the difference? One is
gradual, subtle, and often nearly invisible. Just happening slowly, slowly,
slowly. And the other is sudden, gras..., drastic and visible. Ok, that person
was here. That person has gone there. So, Krishna is saying that do not get so
worked up by the change. That, yes, whatever change is happening within this
life, that same change will happen in the next life. So, if a child grows up. Or
if an adult becomes a senior citizen. All that it means is there is a change.
But there is something that is continuous, also. So, the continuity that
persists despite the change, what causes that continuity? Now, in the case of a
computer, I was using a different contina..., computer. Now, I am using a
different computer, say. So, then the case, "I" and the user are the same. Now,
similarly, if I am going to use a computer, which I, has got certain parts
changed. Then, some part of the computer is same. Some part of the computer has
changed. But the user is still the same. So, same way with the body. If, that
the body has changed partially, subtly, or completely, and dras..., rapidly. It
does not make much difference. The fact is the user remains the same. So, "dehi"
is the person who is occupying the body. So, naturally, with the previous was,
that, oh, none of these kings will die. Nor will you die. Never was there a time
when these kings did not exist. I did not exist. You did not exist. All of us
are going to exist in the future, also. So, this immediately raises the
question. How is that possible? Actually, either those, some of those kings,
some of those kings are definitely going to die on the battlefield. So, how can
everybody stay alive? So, Krishna is answering that, there is, there is
something within the body that will stay alive. The body is, will change. And do
not get so worked up by the changes. Because such changes are seen everywhere,
even in this life. So, just as we do not get unduly worked up by the changes
from komara to yovana, and yovana to jara. Similarly, do not get too worked up
about the change from jara to the next body.

        tathā dehāntara-prāptir

So, after mentioning in the previous verse that there is an individual, you
know, that all of us are individuals eternally. He explains what does all of us
refer to. He says, it refers to the "dehi". And then, now, Arjuna gets a
question over here. Yes, that is fine. It, even if I accept this. But still, you
know, I am concerned. I am concerned that my relatives, you know, they will no
longer be there with me. We will die. And I will be the cause of their death.
So, what will happen after that? So, then He says that yes. What will happen is
that, you will have to learn tolerance. That is the next verse. 

        mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya
        śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ
        āgamāpāyino ’nityās
        tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata

So, "mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya". So, "mātrā-sparśās", the contact to the senses
with the sense objects. "tu kaunteya". So, again, K..., Krishna is referring to
Arjuna by, by forms of address, which are connected with his body. "kaunteya"
and "bhārata". So, it is paradoxical that just in the previous three verses,
repeatedly, the bodily conception has been condemned. So, first was, Arjuna, you
are speaking learned words. But you are, actually, your emotions are showing
that you are uneducated. Then, the next verse says that we are all eternal. And
this v..., 13 verse said that there is the so..., something within the body, the
"dehi", that is eternal. And that will be occupied by another body. So, then,
why is it that, here, Krishna is referring to Arjuna by names which are
connected with the body? "kaunteya". "bhārata". So, "kaunteya" refers to him by
the son of Kuntī. "bhārata" refers to the descendant of the Bharata dynasty. So,
of course, there are multiple levels of understanding at this. We could, at a
spiritual level, we could say Kuntī is a great devotee. Bharata. Then, that
dy..., dynasty, there were great devotees in the past, also. And because of
that, those dynasties are illustrious. And somebody's monstrous dynasty, then
that, that, that, that identification of the dynasty does not have to be
material. It can be spiritual. Because one is remembering the dynasty for the
sake of remembering Krishna. And the remembrance of the dynasty increases one's
remembrance of Krishna. So, that is one way of looking at it. And whenever there
are names which are connected with great devotees, then that is, that is one way
we can look at it. But there will be other places where, like in the next verse,
2.15 will have:

        yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete
        puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha

So, "puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha". Best among the "puruṣa"s. So, "deha-bhṛtāṁ vara".
Similarly, later on in the Bhagavad Gita, we will have "deha-bhṛtāṁ vara". That
one who is the best among those who have acquired bodies. So, we may say, this
is, this is complete bodily conception. Isn't it? No. Again, the point is that,
anyway, that the person's swa..., spiritual inspiration can be initiated and
sustained. That is good for that person. So, by the practice of respectful honor
prefix being used, people are inspired to act honorably. And by thus being
inspired to act honorably, they raise upwards. They move upwards in their
spiritual life. So, the point is to elevate people. The point is to enable
people to move onwards in their spiritual lives. And to act dharmically. So,
"kaunteya" and "bhārata" are used to m..., make, oh, you belong to such an
illustrious dyna..., dynasties. You must act honorably. So, we discussed in our
Isopanishad course how we should not pinch the false ego, nor inflate the false
ego. We should pat the false ego along. Yes. You belong to a great family. Then,
act g..., act greatly, now, act in a great way. So, "mātrā-sparśās". What is
this "mātrā-sparśās"? "sparśās" is contact. "mātrā" is the sense objects,
material things which comprise the sense objects. So, "mātrā-sparśās" refers to
the contact with the material senses. So, sen..., sense objects contact with the
material senses, at that time, there can be various dualities. There can be
"śītoṣṇa". There can be "sukha-duḥkha". Happiness and distress. Heat and cold.
Now, one understands that this is "āgamāpāyino ’nityās". There is a beginning.
There is an end. And therefore, this is temporary. And because of that, one
should tolerate it. "tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata". So, in some cases, you know,
f..., know, there are some leeches, or some bloodsucking animals. So, if they
come to suck the blood. So, at that time, actually, if you, they just get such a
deadly crib on the b..., on the skin that if you try to rip, it, pull them
apart, they will hold onto the skin. And they will die holding onto the skin.
And if you try to pull them out, actually, they will rip the whole skin out with
it. You know, you know, so, in many, otherwise, actually, they have, they have
some small tubules which they want to fill with blood. That is their filling
basically. So, if we let those tubules get filled. Then, after that, they
themselves let go. And just gently, a tapped, also, they will fall away. Before
that, you had to bring them out. You had to rip apart. So, like that, now, of
course, that does not mean that if leeches are biting us, we just have to
passively watch on. They do not according to time, place, circumstance. Some
leeches may be removable. Some leeches may be, entirely be eradicable. We have
some kind of protection. Then, the leeches will not come only. But if sometimes,
there is this kind of situations, where we just cannot change anything. Then, we
find that, ok, just be patient. Just be patient. Person is patient. The things
will go away. So, Krishna is telling, "āgamāpāyino ’nityās". There is a
beginning. There is an end. This is temporary. But sometimes, weather just
becomes too hot. Or sometimes, it rains too much. What does one do at such a
time? Ok, some people may just throw a fit over it. Become irritable. Become
frustrated. Become irritated. But what whappen? What can, what will be gained
by that? Not, not really much. Better tolerate it. That means it will go away.
Now, tolerance, sometimes, people think that, tolerance is a sign of impotence.
He says, oh, not, you are so tolerant. You are not doing anything. He says, so,
so impotent, you know. If somebody is doing wrong, if I had been tolerant like
that.  Why are you so impotent? Now, now, of course, in today's language,
today's, you know, idiom. Idiom is the way to the language is used. W..., w...,
as devotees, we use the word tolerance in quite a different way from the way as
it is used in the media. In the media and today's culture, the word tolerance is
used with respect to religious tolerance. But here, the Bhagavad Gita is talking
about a different kind of tolerance. The idea of tolerance is as we use it in
today's idiom is, oh, you know, we should tolerate other people's views. So,
looking this, they have different believes. They have different believes. They
have different believes. Ok, everbody has the right to have their own believes.
And as they had their own believes, so, accordingly, they will act. So, let them
act according to their way. And we should not interfere with anybody's right to
practice religion or whatever nature they want. That is the idea of tolerance.

And this idea of tolerance is important. At the same time, that idea of
tolerance, where we talk about different people's right to believe. So,
similarly, what about tolerance in a more different sense where our right to put
things first is concerned? You know, who takes away that right from us? That is
we ourselves. What am I meaning by all this? Say, when we are talking about
tolerance over here, in the Bhagavad Gita. You know, the idea is not that we
become impotent. The idea of tolerance is that we allow things to happen in
whatever way they are happening. But we keep our priorities fixed. So, the
biggest battle in life is to keep the biggest battle the biggest battle. That
means all of us decide, this is important for me. And then, we want to put time.
We want to put energy. We want to put heart in doing those things, in doing that
particular thing. But then, when we start doing it, another thing comes up.
Another thing comes up. Another thing comes up. Another thing comes up. And
then, we get distracted. We are not able to do anything at all. So, the biggest
battle in life is to keep the biggest battle the biggest battle. So, tolerance
enables us to keep first things first. You know, if I am going for a car to
office. If somebody just cuts me along the road. I get so irritated. I start
ranting at that person. And my mood gets spoiled. And then afterward, I reach
the office. And I have some meeting. And I am just so irritated with myself that
I just cannot do anything properly. So, I cannot present as effectively as I
could have. So, what happens is, the ability to insulate ourselves from our
surroundings enables us to stay protected. And to stay focused. And that is what
is required. So, tolerance, Krishna says, yes, at the material level, things do
change. So, Krishna is giving two examples to illustrate the example of the
chain that was just talked about in the previous verse. So, He says, heat and
cold, happiness and distress, these come and go. So, similarly, old age,
disease, childhood, youth, sorry, not disease here, youth, childhood, old age,
these come and they go. And similarly, what is going to happen is other things
are also going to come and go. So, when these things come and go, we do not have
to get unduly carried away by them. Just stay focused.

        tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata

So, tolerance is not impotence, but vigilance. Vigilance means vigilance to keep
our energies focused. This is what I am going to do. And these are other things,
which I am not going to do. So, we should not think of tolerance as weakness.
Tolerance does not mean that we let o..., others step on us. And we make, let,
others, let others use us, or drag. Anything. Oh, I have to be tolerant. I have
to be tolerant. Yes. But what is tolerance for? Ultimately, all of life is meant
for mak..., gaining spiritual realisation, making spiritual advancement. And how
will we do that unless we are focused? So, tolerance is not impotence, but it is
vigilance. Vigilance by which we can focus on the things that are important for
us. Now, Krishna tells Arjuna. Yes, you tolerate. Understand that things will be
temporary. So, tolerate it. And then, Krishna takes the vision further, deeper.
And He says, actually, there are two natures. So, m..., before He says that, we
will talk about what will the fruit of tolerance.

        yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete
        puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha
        sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ
        so ’mṛtatvāya kalpate

"yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete". So, who one is not bed..., bewildered by such
things. "na vyathayanty". So, one who is not bewildered. "puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha".
So, that "puruṣa" who is the best of all "puruṣa"s. So, what about such a
person? "sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ". Such a person who is saved from happiness
and distress. Such a person is "so ’mṛtatvāya kalpate". Such a person will
attain eternal existence. "so ’mṛtatvāya kalpate". So, here, the fruit is talked
about of practicing spiritual life, centered on tolerance. How does this work
out? It is just a matter of knowing what about, what to put first. For example,
if I am going on a road. And if I had decided, if I know, this is the road along
which I have to go. And then I find another way, to road over here. Which is
actually not a distributed. It is, it may be a little bit u-turn and end up going
where I was originally. So, if I see going along this, when I find out. Oh, this
road is dirty. This road is messy. This road is bumpy. And then, other road.
This road is so growth, so cosy. This road looks so comf..., comfortable. You
know, so smooth. There, have you. Let me take this road. So, we decide roads,
which road to take, not based on appearances, but based on destinations. It is
not that, suppose somebody is going from, ok, where are you going? Whichever
road looks good, I will go there. No. We do not do like that. Do we? Yeah, when
we, if the road is good, that is a bonus. But where we go is not decided on how
the road looks. Where we decide, where we go is decided on where the road takes
us. Similarly, we de..., cannot decide our life's priorities by first looks, by
appearances. So, Krishna is telling, yes. Now, these appearances are not just
the way people appear, look. Or the way people dress. Or the way people, you
know, people's hair style is. Or whatever. Here, Krishna is talking here about
something much deeper. The way things feel to us at first may not necessarily be
the best indicators of what they actually are. So, Krishna is telling that do
not be distracted by this, by these temporary changes of the world. Whether it
is, be happiness or distress. Whether it is, you know, "sukhaṁ", so, so, things
like that. Happiness and distress. "s...", "sukhaṁ".

        sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ

Whatever causes. Just tolerate it. It will go away. "yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete".
One who is not bewildered. "puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha". That person, oh, best of the
persons. What happens to such a person, "sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ". After
seeing, equipoised in one's happiness and distress. "so ’mṛtatvāya kalpate". "so
’mṛtatvāya kalpate". So, such a person will attain eternal existence. So,
2.4..., 2.15 talks about the fruit of liberation. It talks about how by
tolerance, one will achieve liberation.

        yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete
        puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha
        sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ
        so ’mṛtatvāya kalpate

"so ’mṛtatvāya" that by this, we will attain "amṛtatvāya". By it, it, we will
attain eternal life. So, after describing this that when we do not let ourselves
get distracted by the small, small things of life. We are able to focus on the
big things in life. But describing this, now, Krishna moves forward to describe
that, actually, there are two natures. What is this "amṛtatvāya"? What is this
eternity that we will attain? Where is it situated? That, He describes in the
next verse. So:

        nāsato vidyate bhāvo
        nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ
        ubhayor api dṛṣṭo ’ntas
        tv anayos tattva-darśibhiḥ

So, "nāsato". That "vidyate bhāvo". "asataḥ" here, this is, this is quite a
poetic use of words. Where we have "asataḥ" and "bhāvaḥ" being repeated. "nāsato
vidyate bhāvo". So, "asataḥ" and "bhāvaḥ" is there. And then, "bhāvaḥ" and
"asataḥ", their positions are interchanged. So, "nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ". So,
these are varieties of literary devices they are called. Or figures of speech,
which are used as ornaments to make a speech more beautiful, more appealing,
more, more aesthetically sweet. So

        nāsato vidyate bhāvo
        nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ

So, when we say that Bhagavad Gita is a poem. So, it is a Gita. Gita means it is
a song. So, it is sung, it, it was sung by Krishna. And, actually, it was
arranged at the time, when the Mahabharata was about to take place. That now,
sanskrit was the origin..., or..., ordinary conversational mode. That was there.
That is normal. And now, in the Rigveda, if you see, there are, or in the
Upanishads, there are many passages that are not so much, that are meant for
recitation. Of course, we can find the tune to recite them. But they are more in
the form of text. You know, there are two kinds of writing. There is text. And
there is poetry. So, gadya and padya, also, it is called in sanskrit. So, like
that, text and p... , prose and poetry is there. So, now, a prose can also have
some poetic qualities, some ramming words. But poetry is more, it is more
esoteric. A..., the poetry has levels of meaning. And poetry, writing poetry is
art. So, in the scriptures, there is prose. And there is poetry, also. So, the
Bhagavad Gita is poetry. Poetry in the sense that, it is, it is a poem that has
been recited by the Supreme Lord. It is a philosophical poem. Philosophical poem
means it is a poem that deals with philosophy. That explains how the theistic
devotional philosophy is the topmost of all philosophies. And while describing
this, it also describes that we are all meant to not just understand and
assimilate it, but also recite it. Now, reciting is not only purifying. It is
definitely, it is purifying. But it is also aesthetically, musically brief,
enriching, fulfilling, pleasing. So, these, these are just. Now, within a
poetry, also, what makes the poetry beautiful is, the ramming of, ramming of
wo...,, the use of ramming words, the use of, you know, different figures of
speech. So, here, there is a figure of speech. Where:

        nāsato vidyate bhāvo
        nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ

So, there is an inversion of the normal way of speak, of the, in the second
text, there is an invesion of the way, the statement is made in the first text.
And in this way, there is a musical effect that is created, also. So, for
example, in English, we may have, you can, you can take a devotee out of
Vrindavan. But you cannot take Vrindavan out of a devotee. So, this is an
example of a play of words where the moral structure of the sentence is the
same. But what comes second is made first. And what comes first is made second.
You cannot take, you can take a devotee out of Vrindavan, but you cannot take
Vrindavan out of a devotee. So, Vrindavan and devotee interchange positions. And
by that, the second part of sentence, while contrasting the first, also
emphasizes the first. And it, overall meaning becomes more impactful. Or like,
ask not what your nation has done for you, ask what you have done for your
nation. So, these are figures of speech, which this, which help to ornament the
s..., text. So:

        nāsato vidyate bhāvo
        nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ
        ubhayor api dṛṣṭo ’ntas
        tv anayos tattva-darśibhiḥ

Now, when we talk about, "ub...", Krishna is telling over here, "ub...",
"ubhayor vidyate bhā...". "ubhayor api dṛṣṭo ’ntas". So, there are "ubhayoḥ".
"ubhayoḥ" is two. "dṛṣṭaḥ". There are "dṛṣṭo ’ntas". Now, first, we have
"dṛṣṭaḥ". But when we take our "dṛṣṭaḥ" deep. When we become more philosophical
in our vision. And when the "dṛṣṭaḥ" goes to the "antaḥ". It goes to the
conclusion. Like we have Veda. And we have Vedanta. So, Vedanta is the
conclusion of Vedas. Similarly, "dṛṣṭaḥ", "’ntas". So, "dṛṣṭo ’ntas". So, "dṛṣṭo
’ntas" means that when our "dṛṣṭaḥ" comes to its conclusion. Then, we understand
that essentially there are two natures. There is the material nature. And there
is the spiritual nature. And what is the characteristic of each of these?
So, "nāsato vidyate bhāvo". That of the "asataḥ", "asataḥ" means temporary. Of
the temporary, there is "nāsato vidyate bhāvo". There is no l..., existence for
a long time. Of the temporary, there is no endurance. And of the eternal,
"nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ". "sataḥ" is that which is eternal. Of the eternal, there
is no association. "nāsato vidyate bhāvo". Of the eternal. "nāsato vidyate
bhāvo". Of the temporary, there is no endurance. Of the eternal, there is no
association. Now, when Krishna is talking about this, what is He referring to?
He is referring, in a generic sense, to spiritual, material natures. And
specifically, He is referring to the soul and the body. So, the soul is the
eternal. The body is temporary. Now, "asataḥ" can mean temporary. Prabhupada
uses the translation over here "nonexistent". And then, he says, the material
body. So, those who are the seers of the truth have concluded. So, "dṛṣṭo
’ntas". "tattva-darśibhiḥ". "tattva-darśibhiḥ", seers of the truth have
concluded, concluded, "dṛṣṭo ’ntas". That "dṛṣṭo ’ntas". Then the, the, of the
nonexistent, there is no endurance. So, and of the eternal, there is no change.
Non..., nonexistent and aternal, Prabhupada puts in these square braces as the
material body and the soul. So, a..., in English, there is mul..., there is
different convict..., conventions, when a, you know, parenthesis, or a circular
bracket is put. At that time, it is something which has been put to clarify the
meaning further. It is an additional elaboration. Whereas a square bracket
indicates that it has been put to cl..., to just add to what has been said
earlier. So, a, these brackets can have the, sometimes interchangeable purposes.
But the square bracket generally indicates that what has been added immediately
qualifies what has been said. It is just a clarification of the meaning. Often,
the square bracket is also used at times when the author has said something. And
then, for example if we have h..., he. If I am quoting some sentence. He, he
went to Rome. But he never came back. That is a quote. Now, who, who that he is?
Now, it, because that quote is coming from a particular play. From the cont...,
within the context of the play, that who that he is will be very easily clear.
Because there will be preceeding and succeeding passages. You know, which
provide context. And make, and tell what is the antecedent for that pronoun
"he". Who that he is referring to. But when we take it isolation. Then, what is
done at that time is, along with the "he", then, then, now because the quote is
out of context, and he is not clear over there. So, in the square bracket, we
put, ok, he is, ok, it could be, say, you know, whoever. It may be a, it may be
some Roman character, say, whatever. Brutus, Ceasar, Hoer (?). So, he went to
Rome. But he never came back. So, now, the square brackets indicate something
which is an additional information. Which makes the point clear. So, that is
something which is added to make the point clear. Where a parenthesis, something
put in parenthesis, that is indicated by the author to put something more clear.
So, the author himself wants to clarify what has been said over there. Of the
nonexistent, there is no endurance. The eternal, there is no association. So,
Krishna is telling Arjuna that there is, this world is nonexistent. The body is
nonexistent. We may say, how is that possible? Now, I can see my hand around me.
This exists.

So, actually, Prabhupada often uses the word nonexistent in terms of the word
temporary. As a, for example, Srila Prabhupada once gave a class. In which, he
said, actually, this world is an illusion. And our sense of separate
identific..., separate existence apart from Krishna is also an illusion. So, we
have to go out of this illusion. Now, when he said this. So, he, one of his
disciples, he went to his room. And then he was stating that. You see, this wall
is here. And I am here. This wall is illusion. I am illusion. You know, he is,
Prabhupada did not say I am illusion. But Prabhupada said, actually, this world
is an illusion. So, our current conception of who I am, I am the body, that is
illusion. This world is an illusion. So, if I just meditate this world is an
illusion. And I walk through it. Can I walk through it? So, this wall is an
illusion. This wall is an illusion. This wall is an illusion. And walking into
the door. Boom. He banged his head, banged his head. He went to Srila
Prabhupada. And he said, Prabhupada, you said the wall is an illusion. But I
got, I got into, walked to the door. And I got a blow on my head. So, Prabhupada
said you have to understand what it means to, when you say it is an illusion. It
is like a dream. While we are experiencing it, the dream is the reality for us.
You know, if a tiger is chasing me in a dream. You know, while the is dream
going on, it appears to be real for me. So, then, when we wake up, we call the
dream false. Because we understand that, ok, nothing is here. All that I was
thinking of, what was it all about? There is no meaning to it. So, when we think
in this way, then we understand that, actually, you know, we call the world
illusion in the sense that it is temporary. It is there. But afterwards, it will
not be there. So, we have some relationships now. We have some possessions now.
We have some, you know, hobbies now. So, are all of these going to be there
forever? No. When, now, so, if they are connected with Krishna. Then, they have
some, they have some s..., something spiritual with them, also. But otherwise,
they are connected with the body. And to the extent, we get caught up in them,
to that extent, we suffer. To that extent, we perish. And perish, not just
physically at the structure of the body. But we also perish emotionally. You
know, we suffer and torment ourselves emotionally. When our atta..., when the
things that we are attached to, you know, they are taken away from us. A part of
us can at one level emotionally choke and die. So, getting attached to illusion
is unfortunate. Now, we have, the whole process of bhakti is such that, the
illu..., it tells us the illusion is not the body, or the relationships, or the
inclinations, or the world at large. The illusion is our inability to see them
in connection with Krishna.

        prite yartam yat pratiyeta
        na pratiyet chatmani
        tam vidya dat mano mayam
        yata hasoya ta tamah

"prite yartam yat pratiyeta". What we think of as meaningful. "na pratiyet
chatmani". But if you do not see its connection with the Absolute Truth. "tam
vidya dat mano mayam". Know that to be in maya. So, essentially, the illusion is
the inability to see the connection of things with Krishna. When we see the
connection of things with Krishna, then we, actually, move forward and use those
things in Krishna's service. So, here, Arjuna is not able to, or the people,
bodily conception, in general, are not able to see to see the connection of
things with the Absolute Truth. And in that sense, things are "asataḥ". So, they
are not illusory. They are not illusion. But they are illusory in the sense they
are temporary. And if you get attached to the temporary, do not see the
connection of the temporary with the eternal, then we come under illusion. So,
this, they have concluded, so, by their studying the natures of both. So, first,
"dṛṣṭaḥ" will just be caught by the word. But when we look at the word, we may
say, so many things are happening. There must be some underlying, some reality
beyond this world. That is the spiritual reality. So, Krishna is building up a
flow of thought over here. You know, and He is saying that there is an eternal
reality which all of us need to move towards. And the wise see these two
realities. And they move from the temporary to the eternal. Let us move forward,
next verse.

        avināśi tu tad viddhi
        yena sarvam idaṁ tatam
        vināśam avyayasyāsya
        na kaścit kartum arhati

"avināśi tu tad viddhi". Know that all that is "avināśi". You know, what is
that? "yena sarvam idaṁ tatam". That by which everything is pervaded. "vināśam
avyayasyāsya". Of this, which is "avya". That the "vināśam" of that. "na kaścit
kartum arhati". Nobody can do that. So, here, Krishna is talking without giving
any clear antecedent. What is the, that "sarvam"? What does the "sarvam" refer
to?  "sarvam" is not the, the antecedent for that. Everything. So, what does
it everything refer to? Is it referring to all existence? Or is it all referring
to the body? You know, so, now, Prabhupada explains to us that it refers to the
body. The impersonalists say that, actually, this refers to the soul. You know,
sorry, it refers to, you know, all of existence. And they say this is a
statement about, supporting impersonalism. This verse basically, it means. What
does it mean? That, that which pervades the body, know it to be indestructible.
And nobody can destroy that soul. Nobody can that, destroy that which is "avya",
that which is imperishable. So, what is the difference between "avināśi" and
"avyaya". "avināśi" means indestructible. And "avyaya" is actually meaning,
Prabhupada translates it, imperishable. That means that, it is not something
which degrades due to old age. So, it is, so, there is degradation or
deterioration. And there is destruction. 47:11
