Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VvQL0aUyl8o
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_077_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_05_Text_15_to_18_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=Ne7qrU06tV9Hl7_qhmEO8Lfxzud8MTU0ODQ4ODA5NUAxNTQ4NDAxNjk1&event=video_description&v=VvQL0aUyl8o

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Today,
we will discuss the Fifth Chapter. We discussed till the middle of the second
section of the Bha..., Fifth Chapter. Let us look at the section overview. Then,
we will move forward and discuss further. So, the first section is kali-yu...,
karma-yoga is equal to, but easier than jnana-yoga. Then, Krishna is elaborating
how the karma-yogi can also attain freedom from bondage. So, then, by fixing the
mind on atma, karma-yogi remains free from bondage. And that is seven to
sixteen. So, we are in the middle of that right now. Then, next section will be,
by fixing mind on Paramatma, karma-yogi attains liberation. So, we will discuss
that s..., today, also. And, this, this verse is, short chapter, 29 verses among
all the chapters that we haved discussed till now, this is the shorter chapter.
First Chapter had, you know, 46 verses. Second had 72. Third had, you know, 43.
Fourth had 42. So, this has 29 verses. So, some of the chapters are short. The
shortest, you know, the chapter is which have 20 verses. So, 15th Chapter has 20
verses which is among the shortest chapters. Similarly, 12th Chapter also has 20
verses. Although these two chapters are short. They are, you know, by far among
the most important chapters of the Gita. 12th Chapter is bhakti-yoga. 15th
Chapter is Purushottama Yoga. This chapter is Karma Sanyasa Yoga. So, let us go
on with our discussion of verses. So, we discussed till fourteenth verse. The
fourteenth verse was saying that, the s..., you know, that the soul is not the
doer. "svabhāvas tu pravartate". "svabhāvas". Material nature. That was what it
was saying. So, now, somebody may say, b..., but "svabhāvas", actually, doesn't,
isn't there some ultimate cause? You know. Is the Supreme Lord responsible? Ok,
if I am born as a, you know, shudra. And I act like a shudra. Then, is the
Supreme, the Supreme Lord has made me as the shudra. So, then, Is He responsible
for the way I am made? So, if I act according to the way I am me..., I am made,
then, is He responsible? So, that is the point which is addressed in this verse.

        nādatte kasyacit pāpaṁ
        na caiva sukṛtaṁ vibhuḥ
        ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ
        tena muhyanti jantavaḥ

"nādatte". "ādatte" means ac..., "ādatte" means to accept. "nādatte". The Lord
does not accept. "kasyacit pāpaṁ". "kasyacit" means anyone. The Lord does not
accept anyone's "pāpaṁ". "na caiva sukṛtaṁ vibhuḥ". Nor does he steal anyone's
punya. That means the Lord is not responsible for anybody's, you know, pi...,
sinful or pious activities. Then, what is making the living entity act in that
way? "ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". So, the "jñānaṁ" of the living entity is covered by
"ajñānenāvṛtaṁ". The similar word "āvṛtaṁ" was used with, by Krishna with
respect to descri..., lust. When He was talking about how "āvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ".

        āvṛtaṁ jñānam etena
        jñānino nitya-vairiṇā

So, He talked about this in response to Arjuna's question in 3.36. So, He
sa..., this is 3.39. Now, after describing this, "ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". So,
"ajñānena" is covering the "jñānaṁ". Of whom? "tena muhyanti jantavaḥ".
"jantavaḥ" is the living entity. The conditioned soul. "jantavaḥ". The soul who
is covered by the body and the mind is called the conditioned soul. So, that
soul is referred to as a living entity or the "jantavaḥ". "tena muhyanti". The
"muhyanti" is, the soul is put into illusion. Now, let us look at these two
parts of the verse. First part is saying that, the Supreme Lord is not
responsible for anyone's good or bad actions. He does not accept the reactions.
He does not acc..., accept, He does not accept the actions. He does not accept
the reactions. You know, now, of course, when a devotee surrenders to Krishna,
the Lord takes away the sinful reactions. Even the pious reactions the Lord
takes away. But we are not talking about bhakti over here. Krishna has not taken
this chapter to the point of bhakti till now. So, what is He talking about? He
is talking about, you know, the consciousness of a karma-yogi. And as contrasted
to that, with the consciousness of a karmi. So, when an ordinary materialistic
person is working. Or when a karma-yogi is working. The focus is not Krishna.
So, at that time, the Lord does not get directly involved. So:

        nādatte kasyacit pāpaṁ
        na caiva sukṛtaṁ vibhuḥ

Lord does not accept anyone's good or bad activities. Just like a judge, the
judge does not accept anyone, the criminal's crime, nor the m..., victim's
compensation. He does not, the judge does not accept the cri..., criminal's
punishment. Nor the, you know, victim's co..., you know, compensation.
Redressal. The judge does whatever is required according to the merits of the
case. Same with the Supreme Lord. Now, the question may come up. You know. Ok.
At one level, he said, the soul is not the doer. Another level, it is said that,
actually, the Lord is not the doer. Then, "svabhāvas tu pravartate". It was
said. "svabhāvaḥ". So, the, it is the nature that is the doer. Then, the
question comes up, wh..., where does this nature come from? What is this nature,
actually? "svabhāvas tu pravartate". He says. That is described as
"ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". That "ajñānena". By ignorance, "āvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". Sorry.
Here, it is said:

        ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ
        tena muhyanti jantavaḥ

So, you know by the covering of ignorance, the living entity gets deluded. And
by, based on that illusion, the living entity acts in self-defeating or even
self-destructive ways. Self-defeating means because harm to oneself.
Self-destruction means, the, if a soul acts in a way that causes the soul to
lose its human body, goes into lower species. That is called atmaha. The killer
of the soul. The spiritual path, prospects of the soul have been lost for a long
time by such a, such misdeeds. So, the self-defeating means the soul is trying
to make spiritual advancement. But the soul makes long s..., long choices. And
defeats oneself. So, both of these can happen. Self-defeating, you know, and
self-destructive activities. But they all happen because of "ajñānenāvṛtaṁ". So,
what is this "ajñān"? It can be analysed in different ways. You know, we can
call, refer to it as lust. Lust is one type of "ajñān". Pro..., you know, ab...,
ahankāra, arrogance is another type of "ajñān". So, these are various. They are
called as anarthas. Anarthas means those which have no artha. Artha means value,
or meaning, or value. So, they do not have any values. They do not have any
meaning. So, these are anarthas. Then, we can also refer to discu..., discu...,
a..., "ajñāna" in terms of the three modes. There is goodness, passion,
ignorance. So, they also create a kind of ignorance. These are, can be seen from
different perspectives. The point is, the soul forgets, you know, you know, who
I am. And takes on a false sense of identity. So, the soul forgets that, I am
the soul, a part of Krishna, meant to serve Krishna. The soul starts thinking
that I am mean..., I am meant to enjoy in this world. So, I am a male. I am a
female. I am an Indian. I am an American. I am a, a, you know, I am
fair-skinned. I am dark-skinned. Whatever. All these misconceptions come based
on the body. "tena muhyanti jantavaḥ". So, by this, the living entity becomes
bewildered. So, now, let us look at this once again. The soul, there are three
parties involved. There is soul. There is the Supreme Lord. And then, there is
the material nature. So, now, Krishna has said, "svabhāvas tu pravartate" in the
previous verse. So, you know, now, if "svabhāvas tu pravartate", if nature is
doing everything, does that mean that we are helpless? And so we are not
responsible? No. Nature is doing, making, going to make us act in certain ways.
But even within the natural urges, there are certain urges, or certain, certain
pushings we can say, which can be dovetailed. And certain things which have to
be curtailed. So, you know, what are the things that, you have to be, cur...,
you know, dovetailed? Which can be dovetailed? So, for example, acco..., one's
varanic propensities, one's, whether one is brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, shudra.
So, these are propensities. And they can be dovetailed in Krishna's service. So,
on the other hand, there are the inclinations of lust, anger, greed, envy, pride
and illusion. They need to be curtailed. So, certain things need to be
dovetailed. Certain things need to be curtailed. So, you know, the, both of
these, we could say, they result from our material identification. You know,
from our situation in the body. And our identification with the body. But some
of them can be utilised. Some of them have to be controlled. Now, in one sense,
even a brahmana, the per..., if the person thinks that I am a brahmana. That is
also an "ajñān". And then, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says:

        nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir

That I am not a brahmana. I am not a ksatriya. Like that, he rejects
identification with all varanas, and all the ashramas. He says, I am simply the
servant of Krishna. Servant of the Lord of the gopis, he says. So, that is true
at a pure liberated level. At the sadhaka level, we understand intellectually.
We accept in principle that I am, I am a soul. But then, I understand my body
has a particular nature. So, then, I, I act according to the nature. But when I
act according to my bodily nature. I do not become infatuated, or dejected, or
elated by whatever I do with the body. So, if I am a brahmana. And I can speak
very eloquently. Or I can remember a lot. Then, if I become infatuated. Oh, you
know, it is so good. I am so clever. And then, I become elated. When I am able
to do things. And people praise me. Then, I am, become "kartāham iti manyate".
On the other hand, if I am a brahmana. But I somehow do not have such a good
memory. I do not have such a good speaking ability. Then, I have become elated.
Oh, I am good for noth..., and, I may become dejected. Oh, I am good for
nothing. But that is also another form of illusion. So, whatever the bodily
faculties I have, I will use them in Krishna's service. And that way, I will
make steady spiritual advancement. Now, when I make spiritual advancement in
this way, I will move forward steadily. And ultimately return to Kri..., a,
Krishna, once we, I transcend the modes. So, that, this is how every a..., every
aspirant in the varnashrama system should think. Whether bra..., brahmana,
ksatriya, vaisya, shudra, they all can engage in the path of transcendence
according to their natures. And they can eventually attain liberation. So, the
"ajñān". The "ajñān" is definitely there. B..., but the "ajñān" has to be a,
different aspects of "ajñān" have to be dealt with differently. So, now, whether
a person is a ksatriya, or a vaisy..., a vaisya, or shudra. Everybody has lust.
You know, even brahmana has lust. Now, now, different people in the different
a..., varnas, different ashramas, they will deal with lust differently. But they
all have to regulate lust to some extent. You know, they have to regulate lust
to some extent. So, lust, anger, greed, envy, pride, and illusion, you know,
they, the extent to which they can be expressed, they will vary. So, a ksatriya,
ca..., a, general, can have polygamy, also. Can have many wives. And can live in
opulent palaces. Can have a lot of wealth, also. That is within the varanic
duties. And the varanic f..., f..., you know, arrangement. Varanic mean..., I am
using as an adjective for varana. So, within the arrangement of varana, that is
perfectly. That is accepted within the scriptures. So, you know, when Krishna is
saying, "ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". Yes, we are covered by knowl..., by ignorance.
And that ignorance makes us behave in particular ways. Now, when we identify
with those ways of behavior. And think that that is our essence. And let our
desires be caught completely in what we are seeking according to our bodily
nature, then we will become entangled. But when we understand, yes, this is my
bodily nature. This is how I will act. But I am different from all this. I am a
soul. And as a soul, I meant to love and serve Krishna. Then, the bondage will
be now there. In fact, when we work in that way, we will stay free from bondage.
So, now, Krishna will talk about how to come free fro..., become free from
"ajñāna".

So, Prabhupada here contrasts the word "vibhuḥ" in this verse with the word
"prabhuḥ" in the previous verse. The "prabhuḥ" means to living entity who is
thinking I am the Lord of the nat..., Lord of this body. But "vibhuḥ" is Supreme
Lord. "vibhuḥ" means one who is great. He is full of. Prabhupada talks about the
six opulences. And then, Prabhupada says that the, you know, living entity being
in a bewildered condition. "ajñānenāvṛtaṁ". "muhyanti"

"therefore, the embodied soul identiﬁes himself with the circumstantial material
body and becomes subjected to the temporary misery and happiness of life."

So, circumstantial material body. Normally, we may think of circumstantial, you
know, jo..., or by circumstantial meeting. But from the point of view of
eternity, the mor..., material body is also circumstantial. Just temporarily, we
have got it. Certain circumstances, because certain circumstances, certain
desires came up in our mind. Those desires, we developed. And we had become
attached to those things. Then, we developed a certain kind of, you know,
thought process at the time of death. And accordingly, we got this body. So, it
is all, ci..., it is largely circumstantial. Of course, we are not victims of
circumstances. We cooperate with the circumstances. We also chose desires
accordingly. So, in that sense, i..., i..., we are also partially responsible.
But the word cir..., use of the word circumstantial emphasises that there is
nothing intrinsic that connects us with the body. We are different from the
body. And then, Prabhupada now quotes h..., various, you know, interesting
verses. So, one is, let us look at these verses which Prabhupada quotes over
here. "Kauṣītakī Upaniṣad", Prabhupada is quoting.

        eṣa u hy eva sādhu karma kārayati taṁ yam ebhyo lokebhya unninīṣate. eṣa u evāsādhu karma kārayati yam adho ninīṣate

        eṣa u hy eva sādhu karma kārayati taṁ yam ebhyo lokebhya unninīṣate

Now, "eṣa", "eṣa" is that Absolute Truth. Prabhupada translates that as Lord.
"sādhu karma kārayati". So, that, that Lord makes the living entity to do good
activities. And "taṁ eva", "taṁ yam ebhyo lokebhya unninīṣate". "unninīṣate".
"unninīṣate" is a rela..., can be related with the word "unyanti". Progress. It
is there anything. So, "unninīṣate" means to progress. You know, elevates the
living entity. "eṣa u evāsādhu karma kārayati". "āsādhu karma". That is
inaus..., impious activities. And then, "ninīṣate". "ninīṣate", you know, is
lower. The lower, living entity may go to the lower places. So, now, this verse
may raise a question. Does the Lord engage us in good activities or bad
activities? Or do we engage ourselves? Both are there. Actually, you know,
unless the Lord sanctions, nothing will happen. But it is we who desire. So,
after we desire, the Lord engages accordingly. The emphasis on this verse is
that, again, and Prabhupada is quoting this "Kauṣītakī Upaniṣad" verse. He
emphasises on the point that the Lord is f..., facilitating us. The Lord is not,
per say, primar..., fac..., engaging us. The Lord is facilitating our desires.
And Prabhupada also quotes here. Sometimes, Prabhupada gives verses which are,
you know, m..., m..., which are unreferenced. And then, the devotee has not been
able to find references. Then, the devotee has not put any references over
there. So, Prabhupada has written, left certain verses like that.

        ajño jantur anīśo ’yam
        ātmanaḥ sukha-duḥkhayoḥ
        īśvara-prerito gacchet
        svargaṁ vāśv abhram eva ca

So, the same point is made over here. "ajño jantur anīśo ’yam". "anīśo", "īśa"
means controller. "anīśo" means non-controller. So, this "jantur" is "ajño". And
is "anīśo ’yam", is ignorant, and is not, is not in control. And
"sukha-duḥkhayoḥ". "sukha-duḥkhayoḥ" means the way the misery and the happiness
will come. We are not in control. It is like, you know, suppose, a soldier is on
a battlefield. But soldier is on battlefield without any weapons. Weapons have
fallen off. And then, you know, right in the line of fire. So..., soldier is
helpless. Tuck. Tuck. Any moment, the bullet may come and knock the person
down. So, in many ways, we are like that. You know, any time, tuck. Some karmic
bullet come and can come, and hit us. You know, karmic bullet can be in the form
of adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika kleśas. And when these happen, they can
be very distressing. Very debilitating. Very devastating. So, you know, these
are, this is the way we are, you know, completely dependent. "anīśo ’yam". Now,
of course, we may say, we have a gun. I have determination. I have free will.
You know, I will, whenever problems come, I will deal with them. Yes. We, we
can. And we should deal with them according to our capacity. But our capacity
is also limited. Sometimes, if somebody is just living a normal life. And
suddenly, the person gets a terrible disease. You know, terminal disease. And
what can the person do? You know, we may go from one end of the globe to the
other. We check if some treatment is available. But if no treatment is
available. Then, the person has to accept. That yes. You know. What do we
accept? When we understand that I am not the body. I am the soul. Accept. Ok.
This ending is, is over. There is another ending is going to come. That if I am
pur..., if I am purified enough. Then, I may enter the spiritual world.
Otherwise, I will continue my sadhana-bhakti in this life. But if I do not
understand I am not the body, I am the soul. That can be so crushing. You know,
I am just, like, it is like a candle being extinguished. One blow by the, one
blow, just like a phew. We blow a candle. And the light gets extinguished. So,
like that, one blow by destiny, and we just end. That is what people feel. It is
actually very helplessness inducing. So, when we understand that ultimately,
w..., we are greater than our body. And our life is greater than this lifetime.
Then, that expands and enriches our conception of existence. And that is how,
that is the only thing that can bring us hope, a, when, again, when such, one is
in such grim situations. Other times, we may have some other hopes. Of course,
this, many of those hopes turn out to be false. But other hopes keep us going
con..., between the, even material, when we have no hope in material life. Then,
we need to have spiritual life. Otherwise, we will have no hope at all. So,
Prabhupada makes this very significant of, use phraseology over here.

"Therefore the embodied soul, by his immemorial desire to avoid Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, causes his own bewilderment."

So, the immemorial desire. Immemorial means that which we just cannot know. When
it started. How it started. Immemorial. It has been a desire that has been going
on for a long long time. Hmm. Then, Prabhupada quotes one, "Vedānta-sūtra". Now,
Prabhupada is balancing here. First, he is saying, the Lord engages. But then,
he quotes from the "Vedānta-sūtra". "Vedānta-sūtra" is like a conclusion of the
Upanishads. And there, he says, 2.1.34:

        Vaiṣamya-nairghṛṇye na sāpekṣatvāt tathā hi darśayati

"na sā...", a, "na sāpekṣatvāt". There is no "pekṣat" that the Lord takes. The
Lord neither hates, nor likes anyone. Or "tathā hi darśayati". But it appears
like that. It appears like that. It may appear that the Lord has made somebody
wealthy. The Lord has made somebody poor. But it is not like that. The Lord has
done that according to their own karma. According to their own, you know,
activities in the past. So, the Lord has "sā...", "hi darśayati". It may appear
like that. But it is not actually like that. The Lord is impartial. "na
sāpekṣatvāt". The Lord has not take..., sides. Now, you know, here, Krishna is,
the next verse will tell us how we can become free from this ignorance.

        jñānena tu tad ajñānaṁ
        yeṣāṁ nāśitam ātmanaḥ
        teṣām āditya-vaj jñānaṁ
        prakāśayati tat param

So, "jñānena tu tad ajñānaṁ". So, that, a, "tad ajñānaṁ". That refers to that,
the previous verse which was "ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". So, the "jñānaṁ" has been
covered. You know, the "jñānaṁ", the living entity has been covered. But
"jñānena tu tad ajñānaṁ". But a, by "jñānaṁ", "ajñāna" can be removed. A, you
know. "yeṣāṁ nāśitam ātmanaḥ". "ātmanaḥ". The soul's ign..., ignorance can be
destroyed. And then, when that happens, you know, when that knowledge comes.
How, what is the nature of that knowledge? "ādi...", "teṣām āditya-vaj jñānaṁ".
"āditya" means Sun. So, that knowledge arises like the Sun. You know. And
"prakāśayati". That illuminates. What does it illuminates? "tat param". That
Absolute Truth. Prabhupada ca..., translate that. Krishna Consciousness. So,
now, here, this is a very significant verse which is marking the transition from
atma-jnana to Paramatma-jnana. So, when the karma-yogi keeps practicing
karma-yoga, you know, with detachment. And gradually, the knowledge awakens. So,
when the knowledge awakens, then at that time, there is inner illuminaton. Inner
illumination. And that inner illumination, the living entity s..., understands,
not only one's own spiritual identity. I am not the body. I am the soul. But
also understands the presence of the Supreme Lord. That the Supreme Lord is
present in my heart. The Supreme Lord is my well greatest well-wisher. And it is
He who should be the object of my devotion. The object of my sacrifice. The goal
of my life. So, when that is "prakāśayati tat param". That is a supreme
illumination. And that knowledge arises like the Sun. So, when there is darkness,
we may use a torch. And try to find our way and move forward. With a torch, we
can see a little bit. And maybe we can move, whichever direction we want to see,
we can move the torch. And see, also. But how much can we see with the torch?
But when the Sun rises, then everything becomes c..., evident. We can see all
directions. We can see right ahead. And the way, to a long long distance ahead.
So, like that, when you are practicing sadhana-bhakti, we use our scriptural
knowledge. We use our in..., intelli..., intelligence based on scripture
whatever we have developed. And we try to see. But that is like a torch. You
know, we are able to see little bit. We are able to see little bit. And of
course, we need the torch. And by that, we can see few steps and keep moving
forward. But as we become purified, as we make spiritual advancement. Then, the
Sun of spiritual wisdom rises in our heart. And then, things become clearer, and
clearer, and clearer. So, that is how the clarity comes. "teṣām āditya-vaj
jñānaṁ". So, this knowledge is like the Sun. And "prakāśayati tat param". So,
darkness is destroyed by this knowledge. You know, the inner darkness, the inner
lack of clarity, you know, is, is removed. And then, the inner world becomes
clear and comprehensible. We can start seeing. And not only seeing. We can start
understanding. We start understanding, ok, if I do like this, this is, all my
conditionings will increase. If I do like this, this is how I will make
advancement. This is the way I should move forward in my spiritual life. So,
things will become clear and comprehensible for us. So, that is how we will move
forward. "prakāśayati tat param". So, that "tat" refers to the Absolute Truth.
That refers to, now, here, Krishna has not told what that "tat" is. He will tell
in the end of this chapter, 5.29.

        bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

There, "jñātvā māṁ", He says, just know Me as that Absolute Truth. But here, He
is saying that basically, the karma-yogi comes to know, ig..., c..., understands
the, by that knowledge. "tat param". That, you know, "tat param", that Absolute
Truth becomes revealed. And when that Absolute Truth becomes revealed, then that
Absolute Truth becomes the focus of one's practices, becomes the focus of one's
practices. So, instead of staying focused on, ok, I am not the body. I am the
soul. Therefore, I should not get en..., entangled with the material things. Let
me work with detachment. One starts shifting the focus, not just from one's own
identity. B..., b..., from one's own identity to one's connection with the
Absolute Truth. And one's f..., you know, meditation on the Absolute Truth
increases. "tat param". How that meditation happens, Krishna will exain...,
explain in the next verse. So, in this purport, Prabhupada explains that:

"One can know God and one’s relationship with God only when one actually meets a
representative of God."

So, what is the point over here? When he say..., why, why do we need the
representative of God? So, the soul is here. Hmm. The soul is like a small
ci..., a, spark of consciousness right now. The soul is covered ignorance.
"ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". So, "jñānaṁ" is there in the soul. But that is covered.
Now, when the soul comes in contact with another soul who has got "jñānaṁ".
Then, that "jñānaṁ" illuminates. That "jñānaṁ" illuminates. And then, that
"jñānaṁ" starts removing those ignorance. "ajñāna". And then, the inner ign...,
inner kno..., knowledge also gets kindled. Inner knowledge faculty gets kindled.
And then, the person starts becoming m..., more and more self-aware. More and
more spiritually aware. Devotionally aware. So, you know, just like, pe..., if
there is a candle, the candle has the potency to be lit. And to give out flame.
But that candle will be lit by some other candle, needs to be lit. So, the
candle or not a, necessarily the candle. Matchstick. Something else that is lit.
So, like that, when there is "ajñāna". That "ajñāna", how is it removed? It
requires the help of somebody else. Somebody else who has got "jñānaṁ". Now,
Prabu..., now the, Krishna is talking about the "jñānaṁ" which will culminate in
bhakti. Because this "jñānaṁ" is not just an atma-jnana. Atma-jnana, to some
extent, one can get by, you know, in one's own inner contemplation. M..., m...,
m..., so, Prabhupada says that Socrates also had understood that I am not the
body. I am the soul. That is why he was fearless. And we discussed how in
Phaedrus, he consorts his, you know, friend was, lost his wife. But, you know,
giving many reasons for the immortality of the soul. Now, you know, the, one can
understand atma. But understanding Paramatma is diff..., is nearly impossible.
That level of inner illumination happens when one is connected with a spiritual
master. So, that is why one needs a representative of God. So, there is inner
darkness. Then, there is outer illumination. That outer illumination starts
activating our inner flame, our inner awareness. And as it, as it flame...,
blazes forward. Then, the inner illumination increases more and more. And
eventually, the inner illumination becomes like a Sun. And everything becomes
clear. Then, we see the Supreme Lord in our own heart. And then, Prabhupada
concludes by saying, a..., hmm, interestingly, the mayavadis say that oneness is
a sign of illumination. One..., oneness, that means, you know, everything you
see is one. You will see, the diversity you see, that is ignorance. Ultimately,
everything is one. See oneness. Do not see diversity. You know. They want to
unify. They want to homogenise. And they say, see oneness. Now, Prabhupada says,
actually, oneness is the sign not of ig..., a, not of illumination. But oneness
is the sign of darkness. How? Prabhupada says here:

"At night we see everything as one in the darkness, but in day, when the sun is
up, we see everything in its real identity. Identity with individuality in
spiritual life is real knowledge."

So, if I come to a room. And I cannot see anything inside the room. Because it
is dark. Then, all that I see is darkness. There is oneness. That oneness is
darkness. But actually, when the light turns on. I see. Oh, there is a chair
here. There is a table there. There is a friend sitting over there. There is a
picture of Krishna behind. I can see so many things in the room like that. When
light is there. So, now, of course, in spiritual l..., you know, illumination,
one also see one's, oneness in the sense of seeing everything as connected with
Krishna. In the material darkness, one does not see any connection with Krishna.
So, one, initially, one sees all varieties. And one thinks, oh, they are all
for, meant for my enjoyment. Then, in darkness, one is, everything is one. That
means nothing is for my enjoyment. Everything is illusion. Jagat Mithya. But
then, we, as we move forward. We see the variety. And we see the unity, also.
The, so, variety in existence is there. But unity, purpose is there. Everything
is meant for service of Krishna. So, now, Krishna will say, once we understand
that Absolute Truth, what do we do after that? Then, we start making that
Absolute Truth the focus of our meditation. So, that is what is told about in
this verse.

        tad-buddhayas tad-ātmānas
        tan-niṣṭhās tat-parāyaṇāḥ
        gacchanty apunar-āvṛttiṁ
        jñāna-nirdhūta-kalmaṣāḥ

So, Krishna is telling we fix four of our faculties. Four of our inner faculties
on that Absolute Truth. What are those four faculties? "buddhayas". "ātmānas".
"niṣṭhās". And "parāyaṇāḥ". "buddhayas" refers to fix the intelligence. Then,
"ātmānas" is fix the mind. "niṣṭhās" is put the faith. And "parāyaṇāḥ" is make
that Absolute Truth the goal. And then, when do, when we invest these four
faculties, then what happens? "gacchanty apunar-āvṛttiṁ". "gacchanty" means move
forward. Towards what? "apun...", "punar-āvṛttiṁ" is coming back to this material
world. "apunar-āvṛttiṁ" is never coming back. "gacchanty apunar-āvṛttiṁ". How
will we do that? "jñāna-nirdhūta-kalmaṣāḥ". Because when the "jñāna" comes.
Then, that, that "jñāna". What will it do? "nirdhūta". It will cleanse away.
"dhūta" is to wash, cleanse. "nirdhūta" means completely wash. What will it wash
away? "kalmaṣāḥ". So, "kalmaṣāḥ". It will wash away our darkness, our ignorance.
"jñāna-nirdhūta-kalmaṣāḥ". "tad-buddhayas tad-ātmānas". Let us look at these
four points, one by one now. This is very significant. You know. Our
consciousness, we can say, moves in four lanes. Now, these four lanes, if they
are going all four, four different directions, then we cannot move forward in, very
steadily.

        bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca
        buddhayo ’vyavasāyinām

Krishna has talked about this in 2.41. So, if Krishna has told over there. How
should we live?

        vyavasāyātmikā buddhir
        ekeha kuru-nandana

"ekeha". Fix yourself on one. So, we want to become one-pointed. So, how, how
can we make ourselves one-pointed? These are, these four a..., aparas,
directions about how we can become one-pointed. So, if we have con..., can
concentrate all these four on Krishna, then we can become one-pointed. So, first
is, you know, intelligence. Now, serious spiritual life begins with the
intelligence. You know, it is, when we s..., s..., when we study, when we
contemplate, we understand that we have become inteligent. Oh, yes. I, I am,
there is, there must be some higher happiness than material happiness. Material
happiness after all temporary. There must be some richer, deeper, greater
happiness. And I am not the body. I am the soul. The body has an organiser.
World has a co..., designer. So, like that, that "tad-buddhayas". So, the, our
buddhi develops. So, we need buddhi. In this world, sense gratification will
tempt us. Come on. Enjoy. But we have to turn towards Krishna Consciousness. So,
when we turn towards Krishna Consciousness. And turn away from sense
gratification. Then, we can fix ourselves on Absolute Truth. And to do this, we
need "buddhayaḥ". Actually, you know, to learn to doubt the promises of pleasure
that the world presents us with, we need intelligence. And that intelligence,
you know, comes by studying scripture. "tad-buddhayas". So, we understand,
Krishna is the Absolute Truth. Krishna is the ultimate enjoy..., e..., enjoyer.
Krishna is the ultimate source of enjoyment. And all other sources of enjoyment
are ultimately false. Now, we use, sometimes, avoid using the word enjoyment.
You know. But because we often equate enjoyment with sensual enjoyment. But that
is not necessary. M..., in Bilvamangala Thakura, at the start of his, you know,
one of his poetic compositions, he says that, that Supreme Lord is the enl...,
Krishna is the only enjoyer and the only source of enjoyment. So, "buddhayas".
We will, con..., convince, He is the, Krishna is the ultimate reality. Whatever
is attractive in this world, at the, they are the sparks. The whole is Krishna.
So, if I focus my consciousness on Krishna. Actually, I will get far, far more
fulfillment than anything else in the world. So, philosophical contemplation,
philosophical understanding is extremely important to m..., s..., initiate our
spiritual life. And to keep it on a steady ground, a, footing. "tad-buddhayas".
So, now, people may u..., many people use their buddhi. How do they use their
buddhi? They use their buddhi for sensual things. So, but their mind is not
there in it. "tad-buddhayas tad-ātmānas". That means, he has a, mind is
referring to, emotions are not embodied. The student is studying. Suppose
somebody starts studying quantum physics. Because I have to give an exam.
Somebody is studying math. You know, most students, they are not really
emotionally involved in their studies. They are emotionally involved in the
marks that they get. Definitely. Because they feel that is going to help me to
gain success, get succ..., get sense gratification. You know, that is going to
determine my future. And their future, what they think is primarily sense
gratification. But "tad-buddhayas". The, what they think is, I have to study.
I have to study so that I can get marks. So, even when they are studying, they
are thinking, as soon as the exam is over. I will go. And have a party. And I
will enjoy. I will watch this movie. I will watch th..., I will do this. I will
do that. So, actually, the emotions are not involved. "tad-buddhayas". That
alone is not enough.

Then, "tad-ātmānas". So, one has to put the buddhi, along with that, one has to
put the mind. The mind, when one gets involved with that. Then, actually, one
takes one step forward. You know. Now, "tad-ātmānas". Prabhupada uses the word
atma to refer to the mind. Why? Because the word has multiple meanings. And
here, Krishna is dic..., you know, a, talking about subtle attributes of the
soul. So, the soul itself cannot be one of the components of the soul's
attributes. Soul's, you know, faculties. That have to be fixed on the Absolute
Truth. So, atma has to have an alternate meaning. Now, atma can have various
meanings. It can mean mind. It can mean body. It can mean, you know, soul. It
can mean intelligence. So, now, because Krishna is talking about the inner
faculties. If you look at all the other three. "tad-buddhayas". "tan-niṣṭhās".
"tat-parāyaṇāḥ". These are all inner conceptions. They are not talking about
gross body over here. So, it is a..., a, unlikely atma will refer to the body.
And then, atma, it cannot refer here to the buddhi. Because buddhi is already
being referred to in the previous. So, then, atma refers to the mind. And atma
will be referring to the mind in 6.5 and 6.6, also. 6.5, especially. We will
discuss it at that time when we come to it. "tad-ātmānas". So, when we fix the
mind. That means we get ourselves emotionally involved in things. So, when one
gets emotionally involved. What happens by that? Actually, by that, the
involvement becomes much deeper. So, for example, say, if a person is sick and
is trying to understand how a complicated treatment is to be done. So, m...,
that person has to take the treatment. Or s..., you know, say, that person has
to administer the treatment to a relative. So, there is a person who is always
taking allopathic treatment. He has never taken, say, ayurvedic treatment. So,
at that time, you know, a, now, allo..., allopathy has told that this person is
incurable. Because this cancer has no cure. All that we can give you is
palliative treatment. That person goes and start looking for alternative
therapies. He comes to ayurveda, naturopathy, reiki. There are so many other
treatments available. So, when that person is taking ayurveda, he is sceptical.
He does not have much faith. But still, doctor has told, ok, make this mixtures.
And take this. Take this m..., you know, take this kind of food. Take this kind
of, stay in this kind of environment. Sit in this kind of posture. Do this kind
of massage. So, it is all that has been told. The person who is either taking
the treatment, or is, is a relative who is adminsitrating, administering the
treatment. Now, they, "tad-buddhayas", they are trying to understand. Ok. How
does this happen? How does this happen? And that, how, what does ayurveda mean?
How kapha, vata, pitta? I want to understand this. So, they use their
intelligence. And they are emotionally also involved in it. Want to get well.
But still, there is not much "niṣṭhāḥ". What is ayurveda? Ok. Let us try it out.
I do not think it is going to work. That is what the person might be thinking
inside. So, one can ha..., have the buddhi involved. One can have the mana
involved. But still, one may not have "niṣṭhāḥ". So, this can happen in
spiritual circles, also. You know. M..., one may have "niṣṭhāḥ". But one may
m..., one may have, one may try to fix the mind. One may fix the emotions,
also. Like sometimes, people do karma-kanda worship. And they say, oh, God, give
me this. Give me. Sometimes, people come to a temple. And they pray. They pray.
Why? Because, not because they have faith. But because they just want to avoid
trouble. You know, may, sometimes, atheist also starts a business, and then, he
decides to give some donation to God. Why? If He exist, you would not create
some trouble in my business. "tad-buddhayas tad-ātmānas". But "tan-niṣṭhās" is
not there. Some s..., kind of, you know, residual negative fear based faith is
there. But traces of faith. But actually, that is not really faith.

So, here, Krishna is telling, do not n..., not only fix your intellectual
faculty. Not only fix your emotional faculty. That means when we are chanting
Hare Krishna, we intellectually understand. Yes, the potency of the holy name is
Krishna Himself manifesting. The holy name is non-different from Krishna. We
understand that. Then, "tad-ātmānas". Then, we fix the mind. Get emotional.
Krishna Himself is coming. Let me try to offer him the affection of my heart
when He comes. Let me receive Him enthusiastically. And then, "tan-niṣṭhās".
This holy name will purify me. It will give me insights by which all my c...,
co..., inner knottiness, knottiness means 'K', 'N'..., 'N', 'O', double 'T',
'Y'.  Knottiness. Inner knotts are there. They will get resolved. I will be able
to see clearly. And I will be able to act clearly. Krishna will purify me, show
me the way. So, "niṣṭhāḥ". I will have faith. Faith is important. "tan-niṣṭhās".
This is so, this is third faculty. If we direct inwards, towards Krishna, then
we can move forward even more. And then, there is "tat-parāyaṇāḥ". What is
"tat-parāyaṇāḥ"? "tat-parāyaṇāḥ" refers to making that Absolute Truth our goal.
S..., many people, especially those who are worshiping at the level of
karma-kanda. They go to a temple. For example, there are places where there are
Visa Ganesha temples. People think that, oh, I want to go to America. And that
is the goal of my life. And Ga..., Lord Ganesha is, his goal, his purpose is to
remove obstacles. So, that obstacle for me in my life is that I am an Indian. I
want to go to America. But the Visa office. That does the, a, not getting the
visa is the obstacle. So, oh, Ganesha, I go to you and I ask for removal of
obstacle. I go to Balaji and ask, please remove the obstacles. Why? So that I
can be happy. So, actually, in this case, one is thinking, ok, this is the way I
should do the worship. It is a, buddhi might be there. "niṣṭhāḥ" might be there.
Ma..., atma might also be there. One is emotionally involved. I want to get this
done. But the Lord is not the goal. "tat-parāyaṇāḥ" is not there. What is that?
"iha-parāyaṇāḥ" is there. I want to be here, only. So, we see in the Eleventh
Canto of the Srimad Bhagavatam. You know, in the Ninth Canto, in the Eleventh
Canto, both places, the Pururava pastime comes. So, actually, Pururava, m...,
he, you know, he gets inf..., besotted, infatuated by, you know, Urvashi. And
then, then she goes away, he tries desperately to get her back. And he does a
yajna to get her back. And when he does the yajna, Lord Vishnu himself appears.
He does the yajna for satisfying Lord Vishnu. Now, Lord Vishnu is
all-attractive. Now, when one gets, one gets the sakshat darshan of Lord Vishnu,
you know, once infatuation with everything in this world should be forgotten.
But does that happen to him? No. It does not happen immediately. So, he, Lord
Vishnu's darshan is definitely going to have its effect. But it can take time.
If one is too infatuated.

        bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ

If one is too attached to one's desires. Then, o..., it may take time. So, what
happens is, he has darshan. And he does not say, oh, my dear Lord, you are so
L..., attractive. Thank you very much, you know, for beholding me. Please purify
me. Please grant me "śuddha-bhakti". Pure devotion. He does not say that. He
says, please give me Urvashi. So, what happens? It was the lay..., his goal was
not "tat-parāyaṇāḥ". His goal was, was Urvashi-parāyaṇāḥ. He wanted Urvashi.
That was all that he wanted. So, that way, he was entangled. So, actually, if we
want to make spiritual advancement. Krishna should not just be the object of
meditation so that we can do things better in life. Hmm. Krishna should be the
goal of meditation. And not just the goal of meditation. He should be the goal
of our life, also. Many people practice spirituality, nowadays. Because they say
spirituality will offer some, you know, stress relief. You know. I do some
singing. I do some dancing. I do some meditation. Yeah. It, it relaxes me. That
is good. Anyway, we connect with, a, spiritual dimension of life, that is good.
But if we stay at that level, itself, then we do not really, you know, benefit
fully. We miss out on the actual gift that spirituality is offering us. You
know. You know. Spirituality is not just meant to be a stress reliever.
Spirituality is meant to be the complete distress remover. Complete distress
remover is, we are in a distressed state in material existence. And all
distresses can be removed when we redirect our life from material to spiritual.
So, yes, we do need, we get stressed. And we do need really, if we, we need
relief from stress. And we can use spirituality for that. That is not wrong. But
as we become purified. As we become illumined with spiritual wisdom. That we
understand, Krishna is not just meant to be a stress reliever. Krishna is going,
"Krish", "na". The word Krishna has many meanings. One of the, you know, one of
meanings, of the word Krishna is "sarva-ākarṣīty". Krishna. One who attracts
everyone. Another meaning is that "Krish", "na". One who ends. "Krish", the
kar..., the karshan. The repitition of birth and death now. One who ends that is
called Krishna. So, you know, the goal of co..., a, spiritual life is to make
spiritual life our goal. The goal of spiritual life is to make spiritual life
our goal. That spiritual lie is ul..., ultimate destination when we want to
purify ourselves and return back to Krishna. So, "tat-parāyaṇāḥ". So, initially,
we may have some such motivations of trying to m..., improve our material life.
But eventually, we purify ourselves and turn towards Krishna. So, Krishna says,
th..., what will happen when you do all this?

        gacchanty apunar-āvṛttiṁ

That will move on the path from which there is no return. And how will this
happen? "jñāna-nirdhūta". By "jñāna", "nirdhūta" means we will become completely
cleansed. We will become completely purified. "kalmaṣāḥ". All contamination will
go away. So, you know, earlier we discussed about how s..., spiritual knowledge,
when we seek knowledge about Krishna, knowledge about the Absolute Truth, that
is not meant to be theoretical. That is meant to be transformational. So that
transformation is "nirdhūta-kalmaṣāḥ", is washing away of everything. How will
that washing away happen? When we invest our consciousness. Hmm. So, you know,
you know, what we have to do is:

        tad-buddhayas tad-ātmānas
        tan-niṣṭhās tat-parāyaṇāḥ

All these four faculties, we try to. These are four lanes of our consciousness.
They all may be going in different directions, right now. You know, we,
sometimes, you know, just, we are, sometimes, we like the philosophy of
Krishna Consciousness. But sometimes, we think that buddhi, oh, science has also
made so much advancement. You know, science is also quite impressive. You know,
"tad", "sa...", "tad-buddha...", "ātmānas". Sometimes, we feel, yes, when I
come, and chant, and dance in kirtan. That is very nice. But then, when India
wins a cricket match, oh, that is also very nice. Our mind gets emotionally
caught up there, also. Then, "tan-niṣṭhās". We have faith in Krish..., some
faith in Krishna. Or we may think. Ok. But material life is also not so bad.
Material life is also enjoyable. So, "tan-niṣṭhās". There is like that. Our
faith is certain..., currently splayed. So, "tat-parāyaṇāḥ". Us, goal is?
Krishna-parāyaṇāḥ? No. No. You know. Not so much. Ok. Yeah. I want to go back to
the spiritual world. But I want to have a good time here, also. Then, afterwards,
we will think about going back to the spiritual world. Right now, I want to be
here. And I want to make it big over here. So, what happens is our ill..., the
lanes of our consciousness are all splayed in different directions. I, as we
make spiritual advancement, our spiritual conception, our c..., conception of
spiritual life will evolve. So, let us understand how they evolve. Yeah. So,
spiritual evolution of our concepts. We discussed about sadhya. And sadhana.
Sadhya is that which is to be achieved. And sadhana is the means by which it is
to be achieved. So, sadhya is say, if I want to go to Mayapur. That is a sadhya.
Then, how will I go? I can go by car. I can go by train. I can go by plane. That
is sadhana. So, now, initially, for most people, their sadhya is something
temporary in this world. You know, I want a house. I want a spouse. I want a
job. I want fame. Whatever. Things like that. Then, gradually, when one starts
understanding that I am not the body. I am the soul. Then, one, one sadhya
becomes both temporary and eternal. One think that, yeah, I want something in
this world. But I want something beyond this world, also. So, as, thi..., this
is a stage where most of us probably are right, we are right now. Then,
eventually, the sadhya becomes only eternal. Now, I am ready to give up this
world for the sake of an eternal destination. Of course, we may not have to give
up this world, entirely. You know, we can still be in this world. And act in
this world. But our hea..., our c..., heart's goal becomes fixed in the next
world. Eternal. And then, eternal, also. There, also, our conception of what the
eternal reality is, ca..., you know, can involve. We, initially, we may think
that eternal reality is Brahman. I just want shanti. Shanti. Shanti. But then,
gradually I understand what I want is not a, shanti. I want the Supreme Lord. I
want Bhagavan. So, I want to, you know, you know, c..., you know, surrender
myself to Krishna. Love Krishna. Make Krishna my be all and end all. This how
our conception of sadhya will evolve. And similarly, as our conception of sadhya
evolves, then our conception of sadhana will also evolve. M..., we will look at
the precise correlation between each of them later. But initially, when my
sadhya in this world is temporary. I am, I will be doing karma-kanda. Of course,
most people, today, do not even do karma-kanda. They do vikarmi. Vikarma is one
level below. That means there is no conception of religiousness. Religiosity or
piety. Just whatever I want, I get it whichever way I want. But karma-kanda
means, there is dharma to get artha and kama. So, initially, when I want artha
and kama. When I want artha and kama. At that time, I do, m..., karma-kan...,
dharma. And that level of dharma is karma-kanda. Then, after that, from there,
as I start identifying a spiritual goal. An eternal goal. Then, the yoga aspect
comes in. The connection with that eternal goal. And that is how one involves
from sakam karma-yoga to nishkam karma-yoga. You know, since sakam karma-yoga
means yes. You know, one has some desires, also. But one when wants eternal,
also. That is like going to the second stage. Temporary eternal. Then, nishkama
karma-yoga, one focuses more on the eternal. Then, jnana-yoga. Then,
dhyana-yoga. In jnana-yoga, one's conception is brahman of the eternal truth. Of
the, a, then, when dhyana-yoga, ma..., as one advances in dhyana-yoga, one's
conception usually is the Paramatma. As the goal of the eternal truth. And then,
bhakti-yoga. And then, finally, we come to kevala bhakti. You know, in kevala
bhakti, we simply want the pleasure of Krishna. And we want to love Krishna. And
return back to Him. So, in this way, our conception, that "tad-buddhayas". So,
what is that "tad"? That conception will evolve. As we move forward in spiritual
life. As we move forward, the conception of "tad" will evolve. Gradually. So,
let us look at the purport of Srila Prabhupada. Prabhupada explains, first point
in the purport, he says, is. What is that "tad"? Krishna has not explained it
right now. He will make it very clear in the later chapters.

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat

He will say. There is nothing except Me as the higher truth, highest truth. But
Prabhupada makes it categorical in the purport.

"Supreme Transcendental Truth is Lord Kṛṣṇa."

And then, Prabhupada makes that. Hmm:

"A Kṛṣṇa conscious person can thoroughly understand that there is duality
(simultaneous identity and individuality) in Kṛṣṇa, and, equipped with such
transcendental knowledge, one can make steady progress on the path of
liberation."

So, what is the duality Prabhupada is talking about? Identity and individuality.
Identity, here, is not in the sense of identification. Identity is in the sense
of similarity over here. Identity, you know, you know, the word can have two
meanings. One can be, what is your identity? It means who are you? Can, could
you show me your identity card? So, that ha..., first, two, who I am? And that
means I am s..., a person separate from somebody else. That is how the word
identity can be used. But the word identity can also mean, you know, identical.
You know, there is tremendous identity between the two of you. Are the two of
you twins?  That identiy means similarity, connection. So, Prabhupada say...,
either simultaneous. Identity and individuality. Identity means there is
sameness. There is oneness between us and Supreme Lord. But the same time, there
is individuality. The Lord is an individual. And we are individuals. So, in
Krishna, there is duality in Krishna. In the sense that, you know, actually,
that same Absolute Truth is one. But it is manifested in many forms. And many
forms are also his parts. And some of the forms are his parts and parcels, also.
So, we are one with Krishna. But we are different from Krishna, also. In this
way, there is duality in Krishna. Now, Krishna will describe in the next verse
here, you know, about how such a person is "ta...", "tad...". When we fix all
our faculties on Krishna, then how do we see this world? How do we see the
things of the people of this world? That is what is talked about in next verse.
It is a well-known verse which Prabhupada would quote quite often.

        vidyā-vinaya-sampanne
        brāhmaṇe gavi hastini
        śuni caiva śva-pāke ca
        paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ

So, "vidyā-vinaya-sampanne". So, here, He is talking about "brāhmaṇa".
The "brāhmaṇa" is a person who is a member of the highest among the varanas. And
what kind of "brāhmaṇa"? "vidyā-vinaya-sampanne". So, now, this can refer to, a,
the "vidyā" and "vinaya" referring to the qualities of the "brāhmaṇa". You know,
the "brāhmaṇa" is learnt. And the "brāhmaṇa" is "vinaya". That is humility or
gentleness. Hmm. And then, "gavi hastini". "gavi" is a cow. "hastini" is an
elephant. Now, "śuni caiva śva-pāke ca". "śuni" is a dog. And "śva-pāke" is a
dog-eater. The "paṇḍitāḥ", the learned person sees all of them equally.
"sama-darśinaḥ". Now, that means, in this, you know, number of peo..., you know,
b..., living beings that are talked about. There is a gamut of living beings.
The brahmana is considered the highest among the four varanas. And "śvapaca",
the dog-eater is considered to be not just the highest, you know, not just, the
person is so low that is not even among the lowest, lower caste. Lowest caste.
That is shudra. That person is an outcaste. So, that is a dog-eater. So, all
these, you know, person sees equally. Now, in the, in the conventional Vedic
culture, the difference between all of them is very significant. This is a
brahmana. This is shudra. And, you know, there has to be separation among them.
Why? That is what people think. You know. M..., that there has to be separation.
We have to stay. We have to maintain our purity. But Krishna is saying, ok,
there has to be separation. That separation is ok in terms of we understand that
everybody should stick to their duties. So that they will become puri..., you
know, they will be engaged properly. And they will gradually become purified.
But at the same time, that should not mean that, we should reject others
entirely. We should at, you know, we should see their diversity as externally.
But internally, we should see their similarity, also. "sama-darśinaḥ". And m...,
see all of them as equal, you know, ultimately. And then, Kri..., I mean, the
animal specy, also, is, Krishna is giving three. He is talking about you know,
you know, a, elephant, a, a, a cow, an elephant, and a dog. So, now, these three
refer respectively to the three modes of material nature. The cow is in
goodness. The elephant is in passion. And the, you know, the, you know, dog is
in the mode of ignorance. So, Krishna is talking about that whatever situation
one might be in among three modes. Similarly, the brahmana is in goodness. And
a "śvapaca" is in ignorance. But whatever situation a person might be in, that
does not matter. We should be able to see them spiritually. When one has the
"tad" vision. What is that "tad" vision? One sees both. The atma and the
Paramatma. One sees that all of them are souls. And one also sees that,
actually, the Supreme Lord accompanies all of them. And one, because the Supreme
Lord accompanies all of them, they are all, you know, equal, the, I should be
treat..., you know, they are all to be seen equally. So, Prabhupada explains
that, these are:

"these differences of body are meaningless from the viewpoint of a learned
transcendentalist."

So, learned transcendentalist. "paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ". Now, Prabhupada talks
further about the difference between the soul and the Supersoul. Now, yeah. So,
this equal vision towards the full spectrum of everything in the three modes.
So, then, the goodness, a, passion, ignorance. All of them, there is equal
vision. But at the same time, we have to understand equal may, d..., reci...,
vision does not mean equal reciprocation. There has to be appropriate
reciprocation. You know, one can go and embrace a cow. But one cannot go and
embrace a tiger. You know, if we embrace a tiger, then we will have to bra...,
we have to brace afterwards. We may be, there, we may be knocked down. We may be
fractured. And we, we, if we, if at all we survive. We may be devoured
completely. But even if somebody comes and survives us, helps us survive. Still,
we cannot, there cannot be equal reciprocation. There has to be appropriate
reciprocation. But the point is, there has to be equal vision. So, this equality
of vision comes when we see the atma-tattva. When we see the atma-tattva. So,
this is what is talked about. This vision is so important in today's society.
And the world is fractured with prejudices. There are many verses of the
Bhagavad Gita which we can talk and w..., talk, which we can tell new people.
And, you know, certainly, we would like to talk about how you are not the body.
You are the soul. You know. And that is important. But people also want to know
what is practical hel..., help. That can come by understanding Bhagavad Gita.
The world c..., is caught up in so much, you know, sectarian conflict. So, the
Bhagavad Gita helps us to bring about unification. By unification, not just
among different human beings. But among all living beings. Beyond the human
beings, also. You know, the, how does that happen? Through spiritual vision. So,
these are the verses which are very important for pr..., you know, which we can
appropriately present to people who are concerned about the conflicts in the
world. And, you know, the, if we, oh, if we start understanding that we are all
souls. And everybody is connected with Krishna. Then, once we understand we are
a pa..., all part of one family. Then, the conflicts will decrease
substantially. So, you know, Prabhupada would often quote this verse to, and
the, we practically see this, also, within our Krishna Consciousness movement.
That there may be devotees from different parts of the world. And they may be
from different backgrounds. But when kirtan start, they all s..., dan..., chant,
and dance, and sing. And they are all happy. When Srila Prabhupada was doing a
big kirtan pandal programme in Mumbai. So, at that time, you know, he arranged
that on the Pandal itself. On one of the last day, one of the l..., concluding
days of the Pandal. He arranged that, you know, you know, he had two office
disci..., peoples getting married. So, a, the, the boy was f..., the ma..., the
Prabhuji was from America. The, you know, girl was from Australia. The Mataji
was from Australia. And they were going to get third country. In Europe,
somewhere to preach after that. So, Prabhupada talked about. Prabhupada was so
happy and so proud. Then, he said, this is the real United Nations. You know.
So, actually speaking, you know, the point is that people from all over the
world can come together and glorify Krishna. Once we understand that spiritual
vision. Srila Prabhupada wanted the same. Bhaktivinoda Thakur had the same
vision when he talked about, oh, the fortunate day when people from all over the
world, from Russia, Germany, you know, m..., Russia, Prussia, Germany, all these
countries, E..., England, America, they all come. And they chant the holy names
in Nabadwip. So, to some extent, Srila Prabhupada has fulfilled that prophecy.
And at the more we internalise th..., this, you know, spiritual vision and the
more we share the spiritual wisdom with others, that vision will become more and
more manifest. And we can have, you know, more and more equality and unity in
the world. That will bring peace and harmony.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
