Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KjiTawa1Y6Q
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=KjiTawa1Y6Q&event=video_description&redir_token=Oyw3O60sWMro9cDZEwqFCr5sd-x8MTU0ODQ4Nzc0MEAxNTQ4NDAxMzQw&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_066_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_37_to_40_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri course. Today, we will discuss
the last part of the third chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. So, we discussed
Arjuna's question, 3.36. What is that impells to sin? Let us look at Krishna's
answer now in 3.37.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        kāma eṣa krodha eṣa
        rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ
        mahāśano mahā-pāpmā
        viddhy enam iha vairiṇam

So, Krishna says, "kāma eṣa". It is lust indeed. "eṣa". This. "krodha eṣa".
"krodha" is anger or wrath. How do they begin? "rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ".
"udbhavaḥ" is to be created. "sama" means with. They arise, with born of.
"rajo-guṇa". So, when we come into "rajaḥ-guṇa", then "kāma" and "krodha" come.
"mahāśano mahā-pāpmā". It is "m...". "aśanaḥ" is to eat or to devour.
"mahā-aśanaḥ" is that which is a great devourer. "mahā-pāpmā" is that which is,
you know, extremely sinful. Very very sinful. Very great devourer. "viddhy enam
iha vairiṇam". Know this to be "vairi". "vairi" is the enemy. Know this to be
the enemy. So, now, so, Arjuna's question was, what is it that impells us to
sin? So, Krishna says that it is lust. And then, it is anger. Which is v..., the
all-devouring, Prabhupada translate, all-devouring sinful enemy of the world.
So, "iha vairiṇam". The word "iha" is often used in the Bhagavad Gita to refer
to this world.

        ihaiva tair jitaḥ sargo
        yeṣāṁ sāmye sthitaṁ manaḥ

This will, verse will come in, later on, also in the fifth chapter of the
Bhagavad Gita. Where Krishna will talk about "sāmye". He says that those are
situated in equanimity. They have actually conquered. They have attained
brahman. "ihaiva". "ihaiva" means in this world. So, "iha" also means here. So,
in this world, for everyone, lust is an enemy. And lust transmogrifies.
Transmogrifies means, transform is to change, transmogrify, om..., that means to
change into an ugly form. So, lust transmogrifies into anger, wrath. So, what
exactly is this lust? Where does it come from? Prabhupada's purport is very
interesting. So, Prabhupada writes that, how all of us are expansions,
ultimately, of the Su..., Supreme Lord.

        eko bahu syam

The Lord:

"expanded Himself into many for His ever-increasing spiritual bliss, and the
living entities are parts and parcels of this spiritual bliss."

So, it is interesting word. Prabhupada is not saying we are parts and parcels of
the Lord. He is saying that we are parts and parcels of this spiritual bliss.
Now, what does it mean? How can we be parts of bliss? So, it, the, it is a usage
which indicates the point that we are meant to be blissful. So, we are parts of
Krishna, no doubt. But Krishna is Himself "anandamayo 'bhyasat". The, He is,
actually full of joy. And similarly, we are also part of joy. So, Prabhupada is
referring to that over here. Now, we are, Krishna is blissful. We are blissful.
But the difference is that Krishna is independently blissful. We are dependently
blissful. We are tiny. Because we are tiny, if we try to enjoy separate from
Krishna, the happiness that we can get through that is tiny. When we connect
with Krishna, the happiness we get through that is huge. So, therefore, what is
advised, what is glorified is that we connect with Krishna. Then, we can get
enormous happiness. You know, and that is the ultimate goal which is being
sought over here. So, we, now, w..., w..., because we are tiny, we can, if we
try to enjoy ourselves, we will get only tiny happiness. But when we try to
enjoy separately, there is another consequence that comes. That desire to enjoy
separate from Krishna disconnects us from Krishna. And then, we come under
illusion. And we seek enjoyment, where there is no enjoyment. So, we seek
enjoyment in this world in the objects of this world. And that causes bondage
and suffering. So, how do we come out of this bondage and suffering? For that,
we have to inquire about spirituality. So, Prabhupada writes in the purport.
Hmm.

"This material creation is created by the Lord to give facility to the
conditioned souls to fulﬁll these lustful propensities, and when completely
bafﬂed by prolonged lustful activities, the living entities begin to inquire
about their real position."

So, when they are completely baffled, then they begin to inquire. So, "athāto
brahma-jijñāsā". That is what Prabhupada will talk about in next verse. So, when
will the person do "brahma-jijñāsā"? Actually, as long as the person is caught
up in doing a, "indriya trupti-jijñāsā". That person will have no impetus for
doing "brahma-jijñasa". "indriya tripti-jijñāsā" means, oh, where will I get,
enjoyment? You know. I may get enjoyment. I may get enjoyment here. So, the
whole culture, media, advertisements in today's society, they provide us with
newer and newer avenues for "indriya tripti-jijñāsā". Oh, enjoy here. Enjoy
there. Enjoy there. This is where you will enjoy. And you know, sometimes,
nowadays, on television, there are three hundred channels. And people, who say,
don't they think, there must be at least one programme that I will enjoy. And I
start, start surfing. It is boring. And switch to another channel. And switch to
another channel. Switch to another channel. Switch to another channel. So,
actually speaking, you know, people, when they are watching TV, they are more
eager when they are surfing channels than then, when they are watching channels.
Because when they are surfing, they are expecting. Oh, maybe, I will get
something better. Something better. Something better. But once they start
watching, it is boring. You know. It is. It is not what I expected. It is not as
enjoyable as I expected to be. So, there may be three hundred channels on the
TV. But actually, happiness is not available on any channel. It is available,
happiness is actually available only on the bhakti channel. And that is not
there on television. Even if there are some programme which talk about bhakti.
Just, they themselves cannot make us happy. It is, the bhakti channel is our
connection with Krishna. So, yes, of course, if there are devotional programmes,
coming from proper sources. We can watch them. But the important point is that
the conditioned soul gets really excited. Yes, maybe, this will make me happy.
This will make me happy. So, "athato indra trupti-jijñāsā". Let me see. Where
can I get happiness? Where can I get happiness? But after prolonged lustful
activities, you know, c..., soul is completely baffled. You know. There is no
happiness in sense gratification. So, I have tried so much. What should I do
now? And at that time, maybe, there is happiness somewhere else. That is what I
need to inquire. And it is that point, then "brahma-jijñāsā" begins. So,
"brahma-jijñāsā" is just, it is not just an idle intellectual inquiry.
"brahma-jijñāsā" is not just an idle intellectual inquiry. Idle intellectual
inquiry means somebody just sits down on armchair, and thinks, hey, you know, is
there something called spiritual world? Is there something called God? Maybe.
Maybe not. Anyway. Who can know about these things? So, let me just turn on my
ipod, i..., and enjoy some music. Or let me turn on television and watch some
TV. So, no. That sort of inquiry, anyway, we, somebody inquires about
spirituality, that is good. But that sort of inquiry is not really
"brahma-jijñāsā". You know. "brahma-jijñāsā" is when one is serious. Is there
something beyond this world? If there is, I want to know about it. Because what
is in this world does not satisfy me. It is all tiny. It is all insignificant.
It is all an anticlimax. So, then, one starts thinking. What? What can be there
me on this world? Let me find that out. And that is how the person starts
inquiring about spirituality. So, therefore, the important point is, that all of
us, you know, we ha..., all have to come to that level some time. We may have got
some realisations of the ultimate futility of sensual pleasures. But although we
get that realisation, that realisation does not stay an ultimate realisation.
Because again, the world is filled with so many promise of sense gratification
that maybe this will give me happiness. Maybe, that will give me happiness. So,
again, we return back to the same things. So, if you want to go beyond that,
what we need to do is, we need to get a channel where, which we can also
experience spiritual happiness. And then, we contrast. This happiness is so
fulfilling. This happiness is so unfulfilling. Why should I chase after that?
Let me chase after that. So, "athato brahma-jijñasa" actually begins when we
become frustrated with material enjoyment. And start seriously seeking for
spiritual enjoyment. So, Prabhupada, in a lecture, to the hippies, in one of the
Rathayatra festivals in America, said. So, all of you hippies, you are
considered, you are not very much a pleasure to the America. You are considered
frustrated people. You know. People think that, oh, you are all frustrated. But
Prabhupada said, you know, I appreciate all of you. He said, human life is meant
to become frustrated. Human life is meant to become frustrated. You know, he
said, actua..., but frustrated in what sense? Frustrated in, so, in America,
people had huge amount of enjoyment available. Actually, after the Second World
War, America became enormously prosperous. Because, practically speaking, no,
none of the Se..., you know, none of the Second World War conflicts were fought
on American territory. So, America suffered very little casualties in terms of,
you know, infrastructure damage. Of course, there were some soldiers who were,
k..., who ki..., killed. The only attack on American territory was on P...,
Pearl harbour. That was right at the flag end of the war, practically speaking.
And America provided weapons to the allies. And selling weapons means, getting
money, also. So, the, they did not suffer much damage. And they got a lot money.
So, tho..., the, for World War II veterans, they, when they came back. They had
a fairly good life with them. And when, so they, generally, whatever m...,
material dreams people have, want to have a good house, and I have a good
family, a good job, a good bank balance. You know, these, these kind of dreams,
the children of the Second World War veterans, they had all this right from the
beginning of their lives. Second World War ended 1945. And ni..., nineteen sixty
f..., 1960-65, the gen..., the generations of the children, they had all this.
And they had it all. And they felt that it was too, it was nothing. It did not
satisfy them. So, what the previous generation of Americans were dreaming about.
This is what we should have. These people had this. And they felt that there is
nothing in it. I want this, there must be something more to life. And that is
how they started exploring. Maybe, we will get this ho..., whatever more is there
in life, maybe, we will get it through drugs. And that is how they started going
towards drugs. Later on, of course, they started, they, once they got into
drugs, drugs got into them. And then, they got caught by drugs. And it just
became a search for drugs, not a search for spirituality. So, that was u..., 
unfortunate.

But there was some people who d..., did seriously seek spiritual experiences
through drugs. And Prabhupada told them that Hare Krishna is a, will give you,
as a spiritual experience which is far greater than the experience that you may
get through drugs. So, now, Prabhupada is saying that, human life is meant to
become frustrated. That this, you know, routine stereotype life of trying to
make it, you know, happy and big in this world. That is not the ultimate goal of
life. One should seek something higher. So, "athāto brahma-jijñāsā". Now, then
Prabhupada says that, how does one, you know, hmm, this is a very significant
point.

"the origin of lust is also in the Supreme."

Now, how can be said that the origin of lust also in Supreme? Because Prabhupada
says "janmady asya yato". Everything comes from Supreme. So, even lust will come
from the Supreme. So, what does it mean that lust come from the Supreme? It
essentially means that the desire, desire for loving, and the desire for being
happy, which is what creates the male-female attraction. Which is what underlies
the male-female attraction. That actually is present in Supreme also. So,
everything come from the Supreme. So that, desire, lust, also, in its original
form, it is called ādi-rasa, that comes from the Supreme. And it is meant to be
directed towards the Supreme. When it is misdirected, then that causes
suffering. And Prabhupada gives example of redirections of this desire is there,
if it goes down lower, then it can become ange..., anger, and it can cause a
lot of suffering. But it moves upwards, then it can become transcendental. So,
Prabhupada gives the example of Hanuman, spiritualising anger. But the important
point here is that where does lust come from? It comes from the Supreme Lord.
And it is a misdirection of our original search for happiness. So, Krishna is
telling, "mahasano maha-papma". It is all-devouring sinful enemy. Why
all-devouring? All-devouring, because once a person becomes lusty, actually,
lust can just go out of control. And it can blind a person completely. You know,
fo..., once this, there is normal sexuality. Then, there is, you know, there is
all sorts of, you know, different kinds of sexualities which people have. You
know, homosexuality, and bisexuality, and this sort of things. And then, beyond
that, there can be, you know, different kinds of, even perversities that are
there. So, there can be pedofilia, where chi..., where male people are attracted
to small children. And after, they brutalise small children in that. And this is
even coming in a very, very revolting way in the form of, you know, abuse of
children within families. You know, small, small children, many of them suffer
child abuse. You know, because th..., they have some relatives whom the family
members trust. And those relatives, they sometimes bruta..., you know, violate
and a, brutalise the children. It is terrible. And sometimes, it ha..., when it
may happen with parents, also, bru..., you know, abusing children. That is rare.
But that al..., you know, a, that also happens. That is incest. So, actually,
lust has no limits to where it can go. So, all-devouring. Once, lust gets
triggered. Then, in many cases, for lust, nothing remains sacred. Nothing
remains sacred. So, for lust, when nothing remains sacred. Anything can happen.
And n..., n..., there can n..., ha..., perverse fantas..., perverse fantasies
which people have. You know. So, you know, these can make "mahāśano mahā-pāpmā".
So, lust leaves nothing sacred. Lust devours everything. So, "maha". That is why
I said. "mahasano maha-papma". It is the "viddhy enam iha vairinam". So, we see
today in the world, you know, sexual assaults, and sexual abuse, rapes, and
everything surrounded with that is such a big problem. It all originates in
lust. And when it originates in this way, you know, it is, it is, so, quite
s..., you know, sad that people are not able to see the link between what they
are looking at eagerly in the media, and what they are looking at, horrified in
the news. What does it mean?

You know, sometimes, in the advertisements, in the billboards, in the movies,
there is so much sexuality being explicitly promoted. That means, you know that
there are sexually, hmm, ob..., there are obscene pictures, revealing pictures
with, of male-female sexuality. And then, you know, there are w..., there
incidents, which are reported in newspapers of, of people being, you know,
perversely violent. And people become victims. And people look forward to that
kind of d..., depiction in the media. And they are horrified. How can you do
that? It is, but actually, the same force. Same lust that is being triggered
through tho..., those kind of holdings, those kind of pictures. Then, when it
gains our deadly momentum, it becomes like this. So, most people may say, oh,
no, no, no. Actually, the movies are depicting romantic, consensual sex. So,
con..., you know, that they say, you know, boy, both men and women, they are
attracted. Which is, are, they are doing everything vountarily. But here, what
is happening, it is, it is forcible. It is not, and it is not at all romantic.
It is brutal. Yeah. And they may say that, you know, that is something good.
This is something bad. You know, that is, you know, that is, that, there is
a difference the two, no doubt. But the point is, that reference can be
understood when a person is not blinded by lust. Once that person becomes
blinded by lust, then lust does not see all these differences. Lu..., once lust
is triggered. And then, it can just transmogrify into ugly forms which people
cannot even think about, most people. So, of course, if people have culture.
People have morality. Then, may, most people may not go from m..., m...,
romantic, consensual to a forcible, brutal things. But there, actually, most
people have too much a, too much of a positive self-image. You know, h, I will
never do such things. Well, actually, lust does not respect our moral boundaries
most of the times. So, we have to be careful. You know, Ajamila, when he just
saw, well, passing by, saw that image. Saw that shudra and shudrani embracing.
If somebody had told him before that, you know, you know, you know, after one
week, you will be throwing out your wife from your house. You will be throwing
out your parents from your house. And you will be cohabiting with a prostitute.
You know, the shudrani said, what nonsense? You know, in today's time, if
somebody says like that, a person says, I will do a libel case against you. How
can you speak something like this to me? Ajamila would never have thought I
would ever do something like this. But then, once that lust came, just
devastated him completely. So, therefore, you know, lust is "iha vairiṇam". It
is the enemy of the world. So, it is an enemy. And Krishna says that this is the
enemy which impells us to act sinfully. Now, normally, when we think of an
enemy. We think of somebody with a gun. You know, there is a, our country is
there. Some other country is there. And the enemy is attacking from the border.
Or maybe, they are coming by fighter pilots. Or nowadays, we may see some masked
people with, you know, suicide bombers. You said, we will think of that side of
people as enemies. So, when the question comes up, if, lust, say, lust is an
enemy, what kind of enemy is that? Krishna, Aryan..., Arjuna, they are on a
battlefield, and the enemies they are seeing, Duryodhana, Duḥśāsana, Karṇa, they
are the, Karṇa is not there right now. But Karṇa is very much there in the minds
of everyone. So, they are all there on the battlefield. You know, Dur...,
Duryodhana, Duḥśāsana, you can see. So, what kind of enemy is this? And how does
this enemy attack? So, that Krishna explains in the next verses. So, He gives
three examples here to illustrate how lust covers a person. 

        dhūmenāvriyate vahnir
        yathādarśo malena ca
        yatholbenāvṛto garbhas
        tathā tenedam āvṛtam

So, "dhūme" is by smoke. "āvriyate". "āvriyate" is covered. "vahnir" is fire.
So, just as smoke is covered by fire. "yathādarśo malena ca". So, "darśaḥ",
"ādarśaḥ" is, you know, mirror. That when, which we can get "darsah". You know.
"adarsah". That is mirror. And "malena ca". "malena" is dirt, dust. Just as dust
covers a mirror, "yatholbenavrto garbhas". "ulbena" is the womb. "garbhas" is
embryo. So, just as the womb covers the embryo. Similarly, "tatha tenedam
avrtam". Similarly, "tena". "tena" is, refers to that. You know. That lust.
"idam". This. That is a, soul is covered. "tenedam avrtam". So, it is giving
three examples of how lust covers the soul. So, let us look at these three
examples now. Yeah. So, Prabhupada explains in the purport. And Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura also elaborates this in his commentaries, Rasika Ranjana and Vidvat
Ranjan. So, what does he say over here? The first, you know, analogy is, this is
fire covered smoke. So, this refers to the human species. So, what is the nature
of the covering? It is thin and penetrable. It means, when smoke is there, just
phew, phew, phew, just blow and then proper stroking, the, you know, f..., this
can be moved aside. But then when du..., dust is there in the mirror, then that is
considered to be the covering in animal species. Now, sometimes, the dust may be
so much that one cannot, you know, know, practically see the mirror, only. That,
there appears to be just a wall of dust, only. Now, they can, that sort of
thing is, one may not even know that there is a mirror behind the dust. Just
happens to be wall of dust. That is, that is thick and tough to penetrate. So,
the animals, they will take some time, you know, to recome to a higher level of
consciousness where they can perceive spirituality. And womb and child, that
refers to plants. In the, you know, child in the womb, the embryo in the womb is
in a state of helplessness. It cannot do much. And you know, it is, it cannot
prematurely come out. You know. Often, pre..., premature pregnancy can leads to
problems, also. So, it has to take its own time. So, sick. So, it is a super
thick and penetrable only after long effort. The effort is what? Effort is in
the plants. Plants cannot do any effort. So, it is just, the effort is here in
terms of time. The plants will have to go through many, you know, go through
their own life course. And that soul will have to evolve. And eventually, it
will come to the human specy. So, essentially, the point, which Krishna is
making is, lust covers us. Now, we will say, what kind of covering is it? So,
first is, what exactly is lust? Is lust a thing? Or is it a desire? That means,
is there something called lust which is there out there? Or it is just when I
have some desire, it is called as lust? So, is lust a thing? Or is it just own
feeling? Actually, it is both. What does it mean it is both? Krishna, He is here
talking about lust as being a thing. He, see, ok, this is a co..., this is the
kind of covering. And He is referring to as enemy. So, that means there are
lusty impressions which is thought in the mind. And there are lusty desires which
are triggered in the mind. And so, lusty impressions means what? That we may
have seen certain images. We may have heard of certain things. And those have
created certain impressions which are in the mind. So, for example, in a small
infant, at least, from this life's point of view, they are not there. But in
most people, they are there. A..., so, this, this is the impression which are
there. Now, different people may have been exposed to different degrees of lust.

So, lusty imagery, nowadays, with, you know, the availability of, you know, 
internet porn, people may have so much garbage in their minds. So, you know,
different people have different levels of impressions. And these impressions are
what are stored in the mind. So, in that sense, these impressions are actually
there. That is a thing which is there in the mind. Lust is a thing. But that
thing, what does it do? That thing provokes us. And when it provokes us, then we
get the feeling? So, when I am talking about a thing, it is not a thing like
this hand. Or it is not a thing like a, or like a table or something like that,
not like a, thing like a wall. It is not gross. It is subtle. But subtle,
subtles are al..., subtle things are also things. So, they are real. So, feeling
refers to, so, based on that kind of thing, there is a certain thing, certain
feeling that gets activated. So, for example, if there were no, you know, lusty
impressions in people's minds. Then, even if males and females saw each other,
you know, then they would not have so much agitation. But when male, you know,
when there is lusty feelings are there, when male and female see each other,
then there is agitation that happens. So, this agitation, what is it the result
of? It is the result of the impressions. So, now, the impressions, Krishna is
telling, they are already there. We should not assu..., we should assume that we
are pure devotee. We should assume that lusty impressions are there. But just
because the impressions are there, does not mean that we have to have those
feelings and allow those feelings to take control of us. Those impressions will
create certain feelings in our heart. But we can say no to those feelings. Just
like, you know, when we are walking on the streets, you know, we cannot, you
know, say, we cannot say that, you know, there should not be any holdings which
are obscene. You know, that is the way the culture is in most, many places in
the world. And the ho..., holdings will be there. You know, people will be
dressing in provocative ways, also. Now, we cannot stop that. That is the
lus..., that is the lusty stimulus. You know, that is just there outside. But
what we can do is, we can avoid exposing ourselves to that too much. And we can,
you know, avoid succumbing to it. Avoid getting, you know, controlled by it. So,
s..., just as, we understand that there can be external provocative stimuli,
which we can be, avoid, prevent from controlling us. Similarly, there can be
internal provocative stimuli, which are the impressions of what we have exposed
ourselves to in the past. Which we can say no to. When they start proposing
themselves. When they start, you know, prompting, and pushing, and pinching, and
punching, and prodding us. Do this. Do this. Do this. Do this. We can s..., we
can say no to that. So, here, Krishna is right now talking about lust as a
thing. It is there in all living beings. So, now, Krishna says, it is a
covering. You know. What does this covering do? So, this covering ma...,
prevents us from having spiritual awareness. It makes us spiritually forgetful.
And it makes us materially desirous. So, in a sense, this is a covering. So,
many of us may have heard about the "our atmika shakti" and the
"āvaraṇātmikā-śakti" and the "prakṣepātmikā-śakti". Maya has two energies.
"āvaraṇātmikā" is, here the word used "āvṛtam". Hmm. So, covered.
"āvaraṇātmikā" is that which covers. "prakṣepātmikā" is the, that which pushes.
So, "āvaraṇātmikā-śakti" means that which makes us forget our spiritual
identity. And "prakṣepātmikā-śakti" is that which the, drags us towards material
illusion. So, simple example to understand this is, when people go to a theater
to watch a movie. There are two stages in the progression of the illusion. First
is, the lights are turned off. So, when the lights are turned on, people forget
the reality. And then, the lights are turned on. Which lights are turned on? The
image on the movie screen starts. So, the first turning off of the lights makes
people forget the reality. And the second turning off of the lights, cag...,
you know, drags people into the illusion. So, "āvaraṇātmikā-śakti" is like the
switching off of the lights. And "prakṣepātmikā-śakti" is like the turning off
of, turning on of the lights which start the illusion. So, both these, they
propell the soul into illusion. They rip the soul out of reality and propell the
soul into illusion.

So, similarly, you know, Kr..., this lust, what does it do? "āvṛtam". It covers
us. So, it makes us forgetful of our spiritual identity. And it prompts us to
push upward to get into material illusions. Now, Kr..., now, we may wonder.
"āvṛtam". Krishna is saying, it is, covers. How does it cover? That Krishna will
describe in the next verse. So, Krishna here says, these are the degrees of
covering. But what is the method of covering? It is not a f..., like if a
blanket is there on my face, I cannot see anything. So, what kind of covering is
this? So, Krishna will describe that in the next verse.

        āvṛtaṁ jñānam etena
        jñānino nitya-vairiṇā

So:

        āvṛtaṁ jñānam etena
        jñānino nitya-vairiṇā
        kāma-rūpeṇa kaunteya
        duṣpūreṇānalena ca

So, "āvṛtaṁ". What does it cover? "jñānam". That knowledge. "etena". "etena"
means of ths. Who is this? "jñānino". It covers the knowledge of the soul who is
actually the knower. The atma is here called as a "jñāni". The atma knows that
actually, you know, sat-cit-ananda. "sat-cit" is a faculty of the soul. So, soul
is knowing. The soul has the capacity, knowledge. But that knowledge capacity,
the awareness capacity of one's spiritual identity is covered. And then, after
that, "nitya-vairiṇā". This is a frightening word, actually. Now, Krishna has
said earlier, in 3.37, "iha vairiṇam". This enemy here. But here the word is
"nitya-vairiṇā". "nitya-vairiṇā" means eternal enemy. So, why eternal enemy? You
know, a, this enemy is such an enemy, so, you know, say, if we have some enemy
in this world. Then, that enemy will, maybe torture us, kill us. And that is the
end of the enmity. But this is enemy which goes on lifetime after lifetime.
Lifetime after lifetime. So, you know, in terms of identities, strategy and
longevity. This is a worst enemy. Longevity means, this lust will keep
tormenting us lifetime after lifetime after lifetime. Longevity,
"nitya-vairiṇā". Then, identit..., you know, identity means what? Actually, most
of the time, we do not even come to know who is the enemy, only. What happens
for most people is, they feel lusty, and when they feel that lust has not
satisfied. Then, lust, when they will, feel angry, because lust has not
satisfied, then they think that those people who did not allow me to satisfy my
lust, they are my enemies. So, th..., rather than becoming angry with lust, they
become angry with all the factors that are obstructing their fulfillment of
lust. So, it is identity. So, what has happened is identity. We are not even
able to identify the enemy. And then, so, that is out of enemy is very
dangerous. That is like a spy. You know, if a spy has penetrated into the enemy
ranks, then the enemy can be s..., sabotaged from within. Because, you know,
enemy is, the enemy is, o..., ok, you know, ok. We will shoot there. We will
shoot there. Shoot there. But if the home pa..., if, say, if an enemy, or we
are, say, if a spy has, you know, penetrated into our ranks. Then, we are
prepared for the enemy. Where, where the enemy? I am going to shoot. I am going
to shoot. And a spy comes from behind and throws a bomb. And they are our feet,
only. So, the spy can sabotage out efforts from inside. So, like that, we are
thinking, our enemies are outside. But our enemies are actually inside. And that
way, we get caught up. It is, it is what identity can. Strategy, you know, what
happens is, normally, when enemy attacks us. You know. The enemy attacks.  And
we fight. And the enemy has to use its forces to curb us. But actually, when
lust conquers, it, what does it, lust do? The lust use our own force to destroy
ourselves. How is that? When a person becomes lusty, when the person does not
have to be forced to do bad things, forced to, does not have to be forced to do
wrong things. That person does wrong things oneself. And that is a tragedy.
When, then the people get so many nasty, sexually transmitted diseases. So, how
do they get those diseases? Actually, it is they themselves who intend, indulge
in those things. And that is how they got the diseases. So, so many US people
get such terrible, you know, this is, you know, terrible complexities people get
into. So, the, rather than the enemy destroying ourself. Just as if there is a
computer virus. You know, when a, once a virus comes into a computer, it uses
our own computer space. It uses our own comput..., the electricity that we are
providing to the computer. And it uses our own computer's prog..., programming
s..., and you know, programming, you know, res..., technological resources. And
then, it damages the computer. So, like that, when lust comes in, it is said, it
turns our own resources against us. So, person right there, ready to shoot the
enemy. And somebody comes along. Hey, no, why are you pointing the gun there?
Turn the gun here. Point here. Shoot now. So, that is zero. That is how Ajamil,
you know, well-educated brahmana. A cultured person. But what happened? Lust.
Tuck. Then, he destroyed himself. This is, that is how, you know, that is how
lust is "nitya-vairiṇā". In terms of identity. In terms of strategy. In terms of
longevity. Lust can destroy us. And that is why "nitya-vairiṇā".

And then, "kāma-rūpeṇa kaunteya". Who is this enemy? "kāma-rūpeṇa". It is in the
form of lust. Any Krishna says "duṣpūreṇānalena ca". So, "analena" is fire.
"duṣpūreṇa" is insatiable. It burns like fire. And it is insatiable. So, now,
in, you know, the, this idea of lust being like fire is something even
acknowledged in romantic literature. You know, for example, in, in movies, they
may have songs. You know. My heart is in fire. Or they may, in hindi movies,
they have songs like "sawan Jo aag lagaye". You know, thus, the fire that is lit
in spring. Now, they also acknowledge that the fire. But their illusion is what?
That indulgence will extinguish the fire. But indulgence would extinguish the
fire. Indulgence will aggravate the fire. Why will it agg..., aggravate the
fire? Because indulgence acts as a fuel. When it acts as a fuel. The f..., when
a fuel is put in fire. The fire is going to blaze further. The fire is not going
to get extinguished. So, Yayati, in the Ninth Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, there
is a story which describes how he was captivated by Devayani. And he enjoyed
with her for hundred years. But then, after:

        viṣayān seva...

        pūrṇaṁ varṣa-sahasraṁ me
        
He says, enjoyed for hundred years. You know. But then:

        viṣayān sevato ’sakṛt 

Continuously enjoyed. But still, not satisfied. And then, he says that, he says,
actually:

	na jātu kāmaḥ kāmānām
	upabhogena śāṁyati
	haviṣā kṛṣṇa-vartmeva
	bhūya evābhivardhate

He says, "na jātu kāmaḥ kāmānām". By "kāmaḥ". By lust. "kāmānām". By indulgence
in lust. You cannot be satisfied. You know. "upabhogena śāṁyati". No. It,
"upabhogena". By indulgence. "śāṁyati". Pacifying. No. No. He says "na jātu
kāmaḥ". It will not happen. Why? "haviṣā kṛṣṇa-vartmeva". When we purt..., how
we, you know, we should, when we put some, in fire, we put some oblations. We
put some fuel. "bhūya evābhivardhate". It will blaze forth all the more.
"duṣpūreṇānalena ca". So, lust will be aggravated by indulgence. It will not
become, you know, subdued by indulgence. So, then, we may wonder. Actually,
then, what is, if, if is, it is like that, then is there something like, you
know, dharmic lust? So, there is marriage. Then, is it that within the pre...,
limits of dharma, also, if one engages in lust, that will also aggravate? Then,
what is the point of grihasta ashram? So, if lust is always going to get, you
know, fueled by indulgence, then what is the point it at all? How is the
grihasta ashram an ashram? And how is it going to purify us? So, actually, in
grihasta ashram, it is not the indulgence that gives realisation and
purification. It is the, it is the observance of dharma that brings about
purification and realisation. So, grihasta ashram is not, Prabhupada would say,
differentiate between grihasta and grihamedi. So, grihamedi is a person who is
in..., interested only in sense gratification. And grihasta is a person who is,
yes, sense gratification is a part of life. And as if, then a man, woman may
come together. But that is only one part. And their center is dharma. Center is
Krishna. So, what brings purification, what brings realisation is not the
indulgence. It is the practice of dharma. So, when there is a practice of
dharma. Then, that brings about purification. That brings us, that reminds us,
oh, there is a higher happiness available. And then, when we have that high
class, when we keep ourselves connected with that higher happiness, and then,
there is the worldly happiness that are, also, that is there. Sensual happiness.
One compares, oh, he says, you know, actually, this is there. I am, I am, you
know, I was so excited about it. But it is nothing so great. This is better. So,
actually, it is only when we practice dharma that there is a c..., there is the
comparison that can be done. This is higher. This is lower. If one does not
practice dharma, then one, you know, engages in sense gratification. All that
results by that is just the lust keeps getting more and more. And then, the
person, you know, feels unsatisfied with one partner and then goes to, goes to
some other partner. Then, people can have extramarital affairs. And then, all
sorts of things happen. You know, like that. Why? Because it is not that
marriage itself is meant to be reduced to be arrangement for, you know, sexual
indulgence. That is only one part of it. Actually, the primary f..., purpose is
to be, practice dharma and to become purified by that. So, you know,
"duṣpūreṇānalena ca". "duṣpūreṇa" means that which cannot be satisfied at all.
So, you know, yes, there is dharmic, you know, allowances there for
indulgence. But the allowance means that it has to be done under regulation. And
by doing it under regulation, gradually, and by the practice of dharma, one, you
know, goes bey..., go..., gets a higher taste. Which gradually frees one from
it. So, otherwise, if one just fuels b..., through indulgence alone, it will
just keep blazing more, and more, and more. So, Srila Prabhupada explains in the
purport, here, very, it is a classic statement. He first says this world is like
a "maithunya-āgāra". You know, everybody here is shackled by sex life. He says:

"criminals are kept within bars; similarly, the criminals who are disobedient to
the laws of the Lord are shackled by sex life."

Now, it is interesting. The people, nobody will think, oh, sex life as a
shackle. People think, oh, sex life is very enjoyable. Where is the shackle in
that? But the shackle is, you know, that, that is what keeps us in the bodily
conception of life. You know, one cannot en..., you know, get into sexual
enjoyment without thinking that I am the body. And thinking I am body is the
cause of bondage, is itself bondage actually, at one level. You know. It is the
bondage of misidentification. And beyond that, there is a further bondage that
results when we act with the bodily platform. So, sex in that sense is a
shackle. Why? Because the soul is, soul is here, say, and the body is here. So,
the sex desire binds the soul to the body. Becau..., why it binds? Because the
soul thinks that, ah, this is one of the way I want to enjoy. And to enjoy this
way, I need the body. So, the sex desire binds the soul to the body. So, that is
how the K..., you know, a, the souls who want, do not want to serve Krishna,
they are imprisoned in the bodily conception of life through sex desire. And in
the bodily conception of life, there is old age, disease, death. There is the
repetition of this saṃsāra chakra. And aḍhyāṭmic, adhibutic, ayurvedic, all
these "kleśa"s" will come. And then, Prabhupada makes another classic statement
in the, next statement only in the purport.

"Advancement of material civilization on the basis of sense gratiﬁcation means
increasing the duration of the material existence of a living entity."

So, advancement of material civilization on the basis of sense gratification.
What does this mean? This means that if we think, what is progress? Progress
means to find out newer and newer ways of sense gratification. If that is what
we think as advancement. So, then the result of this co..., definition,
advancement is that people get more and more entangled in s..., increasing the
duration of the material existence. How? See, in the past, if person, somebody
would get lusty, what, what would the option that person would have? Maybe, that
person could have some, you know, if the person was s..., lus..., so lusty that
person is not satisfied in marriage. And that person may have some affairs
somewhere. Or may go to some, you know, go to some sort of, you know, p..., you
know, some arrangement of prostitution, or something like that. But now if a
person becomes lusty, then what happens? Just by clicking one button, one can
get filthy images and filthy scenes from, you know, everywhere, practically, in,
in the world, put together for access. And not only that. You know. You know.
The, what happens is, you know, people who have their most perverse images,
people with the most perverse fantasies, they make their most perverse images.
And they put them on the net. And then, thou..., thousands of people see it. And
then, what happens by this is, people's minds get so contaminated. You know, the
porn industry, in the world today is, the, one of the biggest industries. You
know. In the s..., the amount of money that is spent in America on baseball and
football. You know, the, the franchises, all the franchises of the various
clubs, the amount of money that is earned through all those franchises, the
amount of money that is earned through the porn industry is much more than that.
So, it is, so many people are caught in that. And porn, you know, porn addiction
is a very serious addiction. Unfortunately. And there is only one aspect of
sexual compl..., of sexual addiction, als..., the complication that comes from
sexual, you know, excessive sexual indulgence. So, now, the point is that, here,
so much technology is, now developing the internet required a huge amount of
intelligence. At least, you know, the intelligence which we are talking about,
material intelligence. The pro..., processing, and understanding electronics,
and telecommunications, and all that. But then, you know, if the definition is
success is yes, you want to have facilities for sense gratification. So, then,
that is pointless. You know, when I was doing my engineering. I came in the
fi.... I was quite interested in science, intri..., now, in, more than how
things work. And understanding nature. Understanding h..., h..., the mechanism
and the principles of how things work. You know, then I studied El...,
Eletronics Engineering. And then, when I came into Fourth Year. Then, they said,
and then I started to came to know that one of the major applications of
Electronics Engineering is to develop, you know, you know, develop better and
better forms of television, and other sorms of, other similar kinds of
multimedia that is used for entertainment. So, then, I thought, here, you know,
I was, used my in..., intelligence for several years, for what? You know, to
provide a better idiot box for people? And by, what is happening by watching
this idiot box? You know. People are becoming idiots. So, if I use my
intelligence to develop better idiot box by which pe..., I am, people become
more idiotic, then I am an idiot. Is this the way I want to use my intelligence?
Thankfully, soon after that I was introduced to Krishna Consciousness. But, you
know, now, it is not that all engineers are going to do only this. But we have
to understand that people who are in the field of science are not free to do
whatever research they want. You know, they are also, they also need the career.
They also need finances. And most of the finances for science and technology,
they come primarily from the defense industry or the consumer industry. So,
defense industry is about defending. And consumer industry is for eating,
sleeping, mating. So, that is where the funding come from. That is where most of
the research has to be done. So, advancement of material civilisation on the
basis of sense gratification. That is the kind of advancement that is mostly
happening today. And what does it do? It means increasing the duration of the
material existence of a living entity. It increases the duration because with
this kind of conception, the mat..., the living entity gets more and more
trapped, more and more trapped. Whatever little imagina..., imagination the
soul had earlier, now, the imagination blaze forth. They become far, far worse.
And then, Prabhupada further says in the purport, last sentence.

"While one enjoys sense gratiﬁcation, it may be that there is some feeling of
happiness, but actually that so-called feeling of happiness is the ultimate
enemy of the sense enjoyer."

So, this is a statement that we can, you know, we can embed in our heart. Yes.
There, Prabhupada is giving concession over, tes, there may be happiness. By one
enjoys sense gratification, it may be that there is some feeling of happiness.
You know, we may say no, not some feeling. The poets write so many songs about
it. The movies depict it so much. And you know, there is so much deter..., the,
lot of happiness there. Actually speaking, it is a huge amount of exaggeration.
The body's capacity to enjoy is very li..., limited. And we cannot expand it. No
matter what we do. So, there is some feeling of happiness. But even if we are
getting, there is some happiness. The point is that, the, actually, that
so-called feeling of happiness is the ultimate enemy of the sense enjoyer. Why
the ultimate enemy of the sense enjoyer? Because that feeling of happiness traps
the person. How does it trap? See, when there is a mouse that has to be caught.
The mouse is running around in the house. Then, some cheese, or some other
eatable suitable for the mouse is brought. And that is put in a mouse trap. And
the mouse comes along and searching, see, the, it sees the cheese and it come
inside. And trap, now, as soon as it..., tuck. The door of the mouse trap
closes. And it is trapped. So, now, that cheese in, eating that cheese, there is
some pleasure. No doubt. But that so-called prep..., feeling of happiness is not
going to make the mouse happy. Actually, it is going to make it miserable. It
may, could cause its life, also. So, it is a, the, that means that feeling of
happiness is the ultimate enemy. There is happiness. But that feeling of
happiness is the enemy. Or like a fish and a bait. So, when the bait is there.
And the fish catches the bai..., bait. When it initially eats, at that time, oh,
so delicious. I want it. And it will cheri..., tuck. At that moment, the bait
gets caught in the mouth. And aaa..., aaa..., aaa..., it is trapped. It is
pulled out. Now, if we just fold out. And then, dragged. Dragged out to its
death. So, like that, actually, there is happiness. There may be happiness. But
that happiness is the enemy. So, that is, you know, just like when a person is
drinking. The person may feel some aaa..., I feel such a relief when I drink.
But then, after that, there is, it is the ultimate enemy of the sense enjoyer.
So, now, this is something, which is a, quite a bitter pin to swallow. That, it
is one thing to say you should not do it. That do not get involved in sense
gratification. But it is quite another to actually express that that happiness
is bad. It is not just bad from moral point of view. Some, nowadays, people
think moral values are u..., up to you. You know, you think that is wrong. So,
it is wrong for you. I do not think it is wrong. So, it is not wrong for me.
People think moral values are relative. More values, even if people do not
believe it, in it, actually, the suffering, and the mo..., comple...,
complication that comes in life, that is not relative. You know, if a person
gets involved illicit sex. And then gets AIDS. That is not relative. You know,
even if that person does not believe in that anything is wrong with illicit sex.
If that person gets AIDS, then there is no relativity in that. So, the
consequences are there. So, the obn..., the obnoxious is considered obnoxious.
Because it is noxious. Obnoxious means that which is bad. Noxious means that
which poisonous. So, actually, you know, illicit sex, a, Prabhupada uses the
word, like abominable obnoxious. Why did he use that word? It is not just a
moral, you know, it is not just, not just a value judgement based on some
outdated conceptions of morality. You know, people in the past thought this is
right. And this is wrong. You know, we have become moral. So, we understand
there is nothing wrong about it. These are not outdated conceptions of morality.
This, what is obnoxious is obnoxious because it is noxious. Noxious is
poisonous. Lust is considered more poisonous than poison. Why? You know,
actually, there is visha. And there is vishaya. So, visha is poison. Vishaya is
sense objects. So, visha destroys only after consumption. But vishaya destroys
just by contemplation. And when one contemplates in sense objects, the
consciousness that are getting contaminated, so, are getting poisoned, and
eventually, it is destroyed. So, visha is not as dangerous as vishaya.
Therefore, one has to be extremely cautious. So-called feeling of happiness is
the ultimate enemy of the sense enjoyer. Let us move forward now. Now, Krishna
i..., what is Krishna describing over here? He is describing the enemy. How does
the enemy act? Enemy covers our intelligence. Now, where, the next question may
come. Where is this enemy present? So, that He describes in this verse.

        indriyāṇi mano buddhir
        asyādhiṣṭhānam ucyate
        etair vimohayaty eṣa
        jñānam āvṛtya dehinam

So, "indriyāṇi mano buddhir". That this, lust is situated in the senses, in the
mind, and in the intelligence. "asyādhiṣṭhānam ucyate". "asyādhiṣṭhānam". It is
situated in this. And "etair vimohayaty eṣa". From there, it deludes the soul.
"jñānam āvṛtya dehinam". How does it delude? It covers the intelligence of the
soul. "jñānam". It covers the knowledge of the soul. This is again a very
significant point. That where is lust situated? Lust is situated in our mind, in
our senses, in our intelligence. You know. You know, sometimes people say that.
Oh, you know, some man may say, oh, we are, we are, we are just males. You know,
if women dress inappropriately, we will naturally become lusty. No. Actually,
lust is not situated in the female form. Lust is not situated in the female
dress, the way female dress, or do not, female dress or not dress. You know,
the, that, say, we may s..., a male may see a female. And male may get provoked.
You know, that same female may have a baby on, in her arms. And that baby may be
touching the private parts of the female. You know, that female, that baby does
not feel agitated. So, if that lust were present just in the female form, then
maybe, baby should also feel agitated. Baby does, maybe not feel agitated
because lust is not present in the form. Lust is provoked through that form. But
lust is present in our mind, intelligence and senses. So, we cannot blame others
if we become lusty. That lust is there within us. So, you know, some, now, there
is, there is this, there is this very sad phenomena called blaming the victim.
Blaming the victim means that if a, say, a wo..., woman is violated. We will say
that, you know, that woman, you know, she dressed like that. She went here. She
did that. That is what she deserved. No. You know, the, s..., no matter how a
woman dresses. The responsibility for, you know, wrongdoing, if some wrong is
done. That is primarily if the male has forcibly violated a woman. Then, the
responsibility is on the male, not on the female. You know, f..., the character
of the female does not matter. Even if a woman is a prostitute, you know, even
prostitutes are meant to be paid. They are not meant to be forcibly violated.
So, the point is that we have to, we cannot wash off the responsibility. Oh,
people dress like that. That is why. What can I do? No. Then, but that does not
mean, that, that gives us license to do whatever we want. You know, lust is
within us. So, having said that, there is also another perspective. The another
perspective is that. You know, the way we dress, the way we behave sends
messages about us to others. That is the way people perceive us. That is, that
is natural. And that is inevitable. So, if woman wear clothes that are revelead.
That are revealing. You know, women wear clothes that are provocative. Then, by
that, they are sending messages that, you know, we want to be seen as sex
objects. So, we want to be seen as sex objects. Now, i..., i..., now, women also
have to ask this question, is that the message that I want to send out to
people? You know, if, if that is, you know, if that is not the message that I do
not, I want to send ou..., I do not want to send out. If that is not the message
that I want to send out, then I should not dress like that. So, you know, it is
like, you know, you know, if a person is walking through a dark alley in a, a
c..., in a city. You know, dark lonely alley. And that person has, you know, you
know, thousand rupee notes coming out of the pocket. You know, maybe fifty notes
from here. Fifty notes from here. Fifty notes from here. Fifty from, notes from
here. And then, some people come and pounds on that person. And rob that
person. And take away the money. And then, you know, the person goes to the
police. He says, I was robbed. You know, police are, a, police is asking. What
all happened? He says, you know, this is all happened. Why did you have to keep
the money like that? He says, no. But that is my right. You know. I c..., I
ca..., it is my money. I can keep it whichever way I want. Now, it is not a
question of legal rights over here. Yes. You know, it is a matter of legal
right. You know, whether that person is exposing the money, or concealing the
money, is somebody else forcibly takes the money, the thieves are wrong. And the
thieves have to be punished. So, from the legal point of view, whether the money
is concealed or revealed, does not matter. If somebody is forcibly taking the
money, that person is forcibly taking the money is a criminal.

So, the point is not whether the pers..., you know, it is a criminally culpable
or not. So, the poi..., the criminal, it is always criminally culpable. The
point is, it is just a matter of common sense. You know. Is this what I want?
You know. Is this I want? Is this that? You know, I, if I want to show, reveal
my money, then people are going to look for opportunities to rob me. So, by
making this common sense inssue into a complicated ro..., mo..., moral rights
issue, an, a rights issue, we just, you know, muddy the whole field of
discussion. So, it is so, similarly, you know, women, when they dress. You know,
if they are going to, it is just like a person, you know, showing the money that
a person has. Similarly, if women are going to dress in such a way that they,
you know, reveal the provocative bodily parts, the result of that is going to be
that people are going to be agitated. And people are l..., so, basically, the
person who is exposing the money, is sending a message. You know, there is easy,
there is a lot of money available. It is easily available. Come and take it. And
now, somebody say. No, I do not want to send that message. But this is the way I
want to keep my money. No. That is not going to work. If you are going to, if
you are going to keep the money showing out of the pocket, like that, that is
the message that people are going to pick up whether we want it or not.
Similarly, when woman dress in clothes that expose their own bodily parts in
provocative ways, then that wo..., they may, they may not, not want to send that
message. Of course, many woman may want to send that message, also. You know,
many wo..., woman may think that, you know, I want men to be attracted to me.
But they should not touch me. You know, they want, I, they should, you know,
they should be amazed that how beautiful I am. You know. I like to see how big
their eyes, oh, mouthful, open eyes become. Ah, I am so beautiful. I want to
attract people's attention. But they should not touch me. You know, if we dress
in particular ways, certain messages will be sent. And those messages, when they
are sent, people are going to respond in that way. So, here, Krishna is saying,
so, that means we have to understand that lust is not just situated in the male
senses. Lust is situated also in the female senses. So, that is, with respect
to, so, then, just as men have to regulate their senses. Women also have to
regulate their senses. And the way, women regulate their senses is by concealing
their body properly in clothes that are that, you know, are meant to be modest.
They are meant to be, you know, you know, non-provocative. So, in this way, the
responsibility is on both sides. Otherwise, esssentially, what is going to
happen is that the person is going to get provoked. And the person is going to
fall prey. So, it is, the lust is situated in the senses, mind, intelligence.
And it has to be, you know, f..., one has to be, a, freed from that influence.
So, how do we free from? So, one, here, Krishna is going to say that it is
situated in lust, mind, intelligence, and senses. The next verse is, even start
telling, from 41 to 43 how one can co..., cu..., control and conquer lust. That
we will discuss in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
