Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yg-LdHe60qo
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=Yg-LdHe60qo&redir_token=z0mPAjbV5kqDZR8uuSDoyQeioz18MTU0ODQ4NzMxMUAxNTQ4NDAwOTEx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_053_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_29_to_37_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita. We are continuing with the
discussion of the second chapter. We will continue with 2.29. So, earlier, we
discussed 2.28. Where we discussed about how death is inevitable. Therefore, one
should do one's duty. Krishna concludes His description of the soul here, in
this verse. In this and the next verse.

        āścarya-vat paśyati kaścid enam
        āścarya-vad vadati tathaiva cānyaḥ
        āścarya-vac cainam anyaḥ śṛṇoti
        śrutvāpy enaṁ veda na caiva kaścit

So, "āścarya-vat". So, here, basically, we see the word "āścarya-vat" being
repeated three times in the first three lines. And it talks about, you know, a
progressive levels of understanding. So, some people percei..., see the soul as
amazing. Some people hear the soul as amazing. "paśyati". That is see. "vadati".
Some, so, some people see the soul as amazing. Some people talk about the soul
as amazing. Some people hear about the soul as amazing. And some people hear and
still do not understand. And there is no "vascharya" with, implied over there.
But here, there is, they also rejected as amazing. That can come by continuation
of the thought. So, what exactly is Krishna talking about over here? Some people
see the soul as amazing. That means, with enlightened vision, if we see,
Prabhupada writes in the purport that the soul is:

        keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya
 
        śatadhā kalpitasya ca

It is just one ten-thousandth the tip of a hair, so tiny. And that tiny soul is
animating the body of a giant wheel. Or a massive elephant. Or a huge sequoia
tree. That one soul is animating the whole giant body. And that same soul is
also animating, not exactly the same soul, but a soul of a similar nature, you
know, is animating entirely different, something which is very tine, very
microscopic. The, what is that? That is the germs. Which are there. And there
may be millions of germs in just a, a small cross-section of space. Especially if
that cross-section is useful, you know, is suitable, conducive for the
generation and the propagation of life. So, in this case, what this indicates
essentially is that, the soul can animate something so small. And soul can
animate something so giant. How is this? So, those who see this, they pursue the
soul to be amazing. So, now, if you see, if I am, if we, sometimes, we can see,
th..., people are so different. You know, some person may be a very, you know,
aggressive, masculine person. Some other person may be very timid and feminine.
And both of them, their souls are i..., more or less similar. The soul
essentially is actually of the same nature. Although, they are, of course,
individuals. But there is so much variety. So, it is amazing, the, all the souls
are of sat-cit-ananda. But still, that potency is there. Inclinations, they are
so different. This is amazing. Actually speaking, we are all known for eternal
life. And we try to eternalise our present life. But that is impossible. None of
us can do that. Because life in this world is always temporary. We struggle and
struggle. But when we understand that, actually, I am already eternal. I just
have to realise my eternal nature. Then, we understand this is remarkable. It is
amazing. When a, so, the soul has the nature of sat-cit-ananda. So, we try to
get this thing to be happy. That thing to be happy. That thing to become happy.
But then, we may understand that, actually, soul by nature is only happy. All
that I have to do is realise my nature. And then, joyfulness will then
automatically manifest. That also is amazing. How does this happen? So, in this
way, if we think about it, soul is truly amazing. Soul is truly amazing. And
"āścarya-vat". So, those who are in knowledge. And they perceive. So, what does
seeing mean? Actually, when our spiritual vision is awakened, at that time, each
of us will be able to perceive the soul directly. So, just as we are seeing each
other, we will be able to see the soul. So, those who are at that level of
realisation, they see the soul. And they say, it is amazing, how this eternal
soul who is a part and parcel of Krishna can come under illusion. And then such
a soul can become a, a ruthless terrorist who has no conscious while blowing up
thousands of people. How can such perversion happen? You know, that is amazing.
So:

        āścarya-vat paśyati kaścid enam
        āścarya-vad vadati tathaiva cānyaḥ

Some people, when they understand, so they speak about it. Oh, you know, the
soul is so amazing. So, at one level, is perception, which can be spiritual
perception or it can also be intellectual understanding. Then, "āścarya-vad
vadati tathaiva cānyaḥ". Then, they start speaking. And when they speak about
it, they understand more and more how the soul is wonderful. How the soul is
amazing. "āścarya-vad vadati tathaiva cānyaḥ". Some other people hear about the
soul. And they think, oh, I never knew this. I never knew that, actually, I was
eternal. I thought that I was temporary. And I was going to die. But now that I
understand I am eternal, this is amazing. So, this knowledge itself is also
amazing. How can, how is it that I am eternal? So, in this way, and there are
some other people who say, how is it possible? You know, when the body feels
pain, I f..., when the body is hurt, I feel pain. When the body is hungry, I
feel hungry. When the body dies, I will die. I just cannot digest. How can there
be a soul? You know, so, they just cannot understand that there is something
beyond the soul. You know, for, a devotee was once giving a class in a country
where, a devo..., a, where there was no, they had no knowledge about the soul.
So, he told, you are not your body. And per..., one person raised. Sir, I have a
question. Then, whose body am I? So, that means the person was so much locked in
bodily conception that, you know, I am my body. So, if I am not my body, then
whose body am I? So, people just cannot come out of their bodily conception. And
even when Srila Prabhupada was preaching in America, in the early days. When
Srila Prabhupada said, I am not my body. So, many of the devotees coming there,
many, many of the people coming there, some of them became devotees later. They
thought that Swamiji is speaking that he is not his body. But we are our body.
So, that, he is a special person. So, he is not his body. But we are our body.
So, actually, people who cannot understand this and go through the whole life,
blundering through their journey thinking that I am the body. That is also
disastrous. Those people are also amazing. You know, how can, one, they just
cannot comprehend the soul. So, now, a, our acharyas are, explain that this verse
can be understood differently. And "āścarya-vat" can apply, till now, we have
discussed "āścarya-vad", as the soul is amazing. So, you know, in English, there
is a figure of speech called as transferred epithet. Transferred epithet means
that when an adjective is at one place, the adjective can be put at, puts at
another place for poetic purposes. And the traveler goes on the weary road. So,
now "weary" means tired. Now, the road is not tired. It is the traveler that is
tired. But in, when the case of poetic ornamentation, the person, the epithet
may be transformed. That is called transferred epithet. And it adds beauty. So,
like that, "āścarya-vat" can apply, it can apply either to the soul, till now,
that is how we have been analysing it. But the "āścarya-vat" can also apply to
people. Those who are the seers. Or those who are the speakers. Those who are
the hearers. And those who are the deluded, who cannot comprehend it at all. So,
if we apply that way, then what happens? So, oh, "sat" means, some amazing
people see the soul. So, actually speaking, you know, to get direct spiritual
perception, that is extraordinary. So, people who are able to see the soul, they
are amazing. So, some amazing people see the soul. And those who are the
exalted, you know, advanced spiritualists. They are, they are atma-jana. They
are, their spiritual vision is awakened. And they are at the sta..., stage of
turya, you know, the stage of spiritual consciousness.

Our consciousness has four stages. There is jagruti. Which all of us are in now.
Then, there is svapna when we sleep. Then, there is sushupti. There is a deep
sleep. And there, there is, svap..., there is, sushupti is deep dreamlessly. And
then, there is samādhi or turya. So, those who attain the stage of samādhi,
their consciousness, they can perceive. So, those people are, those who can
perceive such spiritual reality, they are extraordinary. So, they are amazing.
Then, in the second line, some amazing people speak about the soul. So, actually
speaking, you know, there is atma-jnana. Which is so rare. The knowledge of the
soul is so rare. And the people who talk about the spiritual conception of life,
Who tell, you are not the body. You are the soul. You have to do this. You have
to do that. You have to do this. You have to do that. Those people are amazing.
How? How can they do such a thing? How can they speak about such things? That is
because they are transc..., they are very special. So, they, they may not be
pure devotees. They may not be re..., reali..., entirely realised spiritualists.
But if you consider the number of people who are actually sharing the wisdom of
Krishna. Which centers on the soul and the soul's relationship with Krishna,
they are so rare. So, such people are also amazing. In this material world, the
number of people who are sharing Krishna Consciousness are so tiny. And then,
some amazing people hear about it. So, now, actually speaking, you know, every
person who comes to know abou..., enquire about Krishna, that person is so rare,
so precious. You know, it is so extraordinary that there are so few people who
actually know about the soul. Who actually come to hear about the soul. Later
on, in 7.3, we will discuss in the Bhagavad Gita, how:

        manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu
        kaścid yatati siddhaye

Out of thousands of people, few inquire about spiritual reality. So, it is rare.
So, some amazing people inquire about the soul. So, actually, when we are doing
our outreach programmes, and we see souls com..., people coming to the temples,
to the programmes to take the, to take the books. They, every one of them is a
special person. And they are rare, one among thousands. And then, you know,
those who cannot understand, even after hearing, they are, they are also
amazing. This amazing is more in a, a, in a sad, a regretful sarcastic sort of
sense. Not sarcastic, in a looking down, but sad sense. The word "āścarya" is
used in, in also the famous, you know, Mahabharata verse. Where he says:

        ahanya hinya bhutani
        pasyanti hiya malayam
        sesha hastavaram itchanti
        kimas charya mataha param

So, in the Yudhiṣṭhira Yaksha Samvad, actually Yudhiṣṭhira tells Yaksha, a...,
please ask your questions. And then, I, if I a..., if I answer the question,
then you can revive my brothers. It is a long story in the Mahabharata. The
brothers had bath..., drunk the water. And that water has poisoned them. So, on
the bank of the lake of death, the "yakṣa", there is, actually, this person
asked. That is actually Dharma. It is Yamaraja. But he appears to be like a
"yakṣa" at that time. The father of Yudhiṣṭhira, Dharma. So, there is this
conversation that is going on. So, at that time, you know, he is asked what is
the most amazing thing in the world? So, "Yudhiṣṭhira" Maharaja says that the
most amazing thing is that every day thousands of people die. Yet, the remaining
people think that we will be happy here. We will be secure here. So, this is
amazing. So, now, this amazing is used in the sense of amazingly stupid. So,
tragically stupid. How can people be so foolish? You know, amazingly stupid. You
know, so, just like in the movies. Sometimes, you know, the hero is running
towards the villain. And the hero, villain has got several people around, with
him. And they are all shooting bullets. The bullets hit everywhere, except the
hero. And the hero just runs on, runs on, runs on, and comes and bashes the
villain. So, now, we doubt this all make belief. Things do not happen like this.
But we see the bullets of death, all around us. Tuck. Tuck. Tuck. Tuck. People
are knocked down by the bullets of death. But we think, oh, I will not be
knocked down. So, now, I will be the lucky one, who will except. Like, who will
be an exception. Who escape. So, we have to take exception to our hope for an
exception. Our hope for an exception. That we will be the lucky person, lucky
man, lucky person, who will be an exception. We have to take exception. That is
a useless hope. Take exception to the ex..., ho..., hope for an exception. So,
people who do not do this, they are amazing. How can somebody be so terribly
obtuse? So dumb? So unthinking? That one just does not think about death. Now,
most people, if they are asked, you know, that, you know, that you are going to
die. Yes. Yes. I know I am going to die. But actually, when they admit it, there
is a hollowness to that admission. There is, just, one does not accept it in
one's heart. Yes. Ok. It may happen. But it is, as if, I may say that, I am
going to die, I am talking about somebody else. Somebody else is going to die.
Or I am going to die in such a, in the future, so f..., after so long that I do
not have to bother about it right now. Those people are also amazing. And, so,
now, this "āścarya-vad", as an adjective can be transposed and also applied to
the doing, to the action. So, you know, in a sa..., sentence, there are three
parts. There are the subject. There is the predicate. And if the predicate,
there is the connecting word, but there is the object. So, for example, say, I
see you. So, I am the doer. I am the subject. See is the action. And you is the,
you know, object who is being seen. So, now, I see you. So, you know, so, if I
say, I see you, amazed I see you. So, now, amazed can apply either to I. It can
apply to see. Or it can apply to you. So, of course, this is a rough parallel.
Sanskrit language and its grammar are quite different. But I am just giving a
simple example over here to illustrate the point that, actually, this adjective,
it can either apply, this "āścarya-vad", this describer can apply to either to
the atma, "āścarya", "enaṁ". It can apply to "enaṁ", that this soul. That we
discussed. Or it can apply to "kaścit", to the person who is perceiving. A...,
or it can act to the, apply to the act of perception.

So, if it applies to the act of perception, then what happens? "paśyati".
"āścarya-vat paśyati". So, that means, you know, you know, some, the, so, some,
some, some people amazingly see the soul. So, actually, that act of seeing, oh,
f..., so, one, once we get the spiritual vision. And we see the soul. Let me
stun over. Really? Amazingly, we see the soul. Some people amazingly hear about
the soul. Some people amazingly speak about the soul. So, when, we speak about
the soul, actually, all of us know that, theoretically, all of us know I am not
the body. I am the soul. But most of the time, we act on the level of the body.
But when we speak about it seriously. You know, when we, say, we give some talk
about reasoning, and talk about Christian-Roman or past life memories, and tell
their case studies. And think seriously about it. Then, what we know, i..., it,
it go..., goes deeper when you speak about it. Oh, I am amazed. Oh, really?
Yeah, I am not the body. I am the soul. Some people amazingly speak about the
soul. Some people amazingly hear about the soul. Those people who come and hear.
Yeah, I am not the body. I am the soul. My God, I did not know about this.
Nobody told me about this. What is this? And, so that is also amazing. That, for
the time, when we come to know. I am not the body. I am the soul. So, it is
amazing. Now, some people amazingly do not understand about the soul. That is
also amazing. So, why do some people not un..., understand about the soul at
all? So, Prabhupada says that there can be multiple reasons. One is that they
just do not know. And after hearing, also, if they do not understand, then, that
is because they are too attached to material things. If they are too attached to
material things, then, then, that attachment blinds them. So, attachments are
binding and blinding. So, attachments are what? Binding. We know. That is
binding. You know, alcoholics are attached to alcohol. That means the mind is
constantly thinking about alcohol. When will I get that? When will I get that?
When will I get that? So, attachments are binding. And then, they are also
blinding. So, just as alcohol, like once a person is attached to alcohol, does
not think of anything else. You know, just, just caught in the whole thing and
is entangled. Or there is a s..., a story, we know, Bilvamangala Thakura in his
pre-devotional days. So, when he was infatuated by the prostitute, oh,
Cintamani. So, at that time, you know, the attachment was binding. You know,
although, there was a storm. Although, there was so much a, a misery and
trouble. But still, the, wha..., you know, you know, that attachment was like an
invisible to Prabhuji, that dragged him to that society woman's place. And then,
it was binding. And it was blinding. Why blinding? Because he just could not
think about anything else. He saw a c..., corpse. And he thought, it was a logs
of food. He saw a snake. And he thought, it was a rope. It was blinding. Now, of
course, in this case, he did not meet with any casualty. But, o..., otherwise,
people can meet with casualties. So, for example, if a person becomes drunk. And
a drunken person drives a vehicle. Then, what happens? When there is a drunken
driver. Then, the attachment a, is binding. So, the person, because, he is, you
know, that person is drunk, so, cannot resist the drink. And after that person
drinks, and then drives, the attachment is blinding. The person just cannot see.
That, there are drunk, and maybe a, runs into somebody and kills that person.
So, attachnment is binding and blinding. So, so, that people cannot see.

        śrutvāpy enaṁ veda na caiva kaścit

People do not understand at all. So, to the extent, now, by, as devotees, we
have to hear about from scripture. But along with hearing from scripture, we
also have to work on our material attachnment. So, the extent we give up our
material attachments, to that extent, we may be understand..., we may be
understanding the spiritual reality. Let us move forward. So, now, you know,
after talking about, in summary about the atma-jnana. Krishna now talks about
summary, the conclusion from the atma-jnana. So, He says:

        dehī nityam avadhyo ’yaṁ
        dehe sarvasya bhārata
        tasmāt sarvāṇi bhūtāni
        na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi

So, "ehī nityam avadhyo ’yaṁ". So, "dehī", this person in the body is "nityam".
And that person is "avadhyo", cannot be destroyed. "ayam". This atma, which
"dehī" is "avadhyaḥ", is, "vadhyaḥ " is destruction, killing. "avadhyo" is that
which is indestructible. "dehe sarvasya bhārata". And it is not, "dehe sarvasya
bhārata" means, all souls are indestructible. It is not that only some special
souls are indestructible. You know, now, s..., nowadays, people often, whenever
they want to learn something, people google on the internet. Now, of course, if
you know, and the sources of knowledge, there is, there is, and the devotees
also have many websites. And if the source of knowledge are reliable, we can use
them. But sometimes, people google and then, anybody can put anything. So, there
are so many websites which can tell pe..., which promise people how to determine
your next reincarnation. Do this, this, this. And then you come on, and what to
do. Then, ok, this special book is there. Pay 500 dollars. Pay 5000 dollars for
it. How to know your future life. How to determine your future life. How to
determine..., so, things like this. Actually, or, th..., peop..., these people
make it seem as if reincarnation is something special, which happens to only
selected few. So, only, if you read those book. And you apply what is thaught
in. Then, you will reincarnate. Otherwise, you will be annihilated. It is a
silly idea. "sarvasya bhārata". Actually, all souls are indestructible. Not only
specific souls. You know, for example, in some religions, where the knowledge of
the soul is not so clear. So, what they have, the idea is that there are
different kinds of souls. And human souls are eternal. But animal souls and
plant souls are not eternal. So, animals can be eaten. So, they have the, the,
some ideas like that. But "dehe sarvasya bhārata". All souls are eternal.

        tasmāt sarvāṇi bhūtāni
        na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi

So, this is, the whole point of this is, Arjuna, do not lament. Do not lament.
So, do not let compassion be restricted to the bodily platform. And based on
that ignorant level, do not let yourself become deluted. So, "na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi
". Therefore, Arjuna, you do not, the, the, it is not worthy of you to lament.
"tasmāt sarvāṇi bhūtāni", not lament for anyone. Neither for the e..., your
enemies, nor for s..., your own people on your own side. Do not lament for
anyone. So, this is the first section of the Bhagavad Gita, you know, in terms
of Krishna's instructions to Arjuna. So, Krishna, from 2.11 to 2.30, has
described Arjuna, do not lament. Because the soul is in..., indestructible.
Fight. So, after describing this, now, Krishna takes the discussion to a next
level, to a higher level. What is that level? In this level, Krishna describes,
you know, if I know that I am this, not the body. I am the soul. Ok, I
understand. But how do I act in life? Now, sometimes, people say that, you know,
we, sometimes, our life is considered to, just material boat, existence
considered to be an illusion. It is temporary. It is transitory. Ok, fine. It is
temporary, transitory. But then, wha..., how am I supposed to live? How do I
come out of this illusion? It is not that, ok, I have to, today, I hear I am not
the body. I am the soul. Tomorrow, you know, I, I do not stop, I stop acting at
the bodily platform, entirely. Well, I, I can try to avoid acting at the bodily
platform. But still, I have to live in the material world as long as I have this
body. And, only, at, then, I will become liberated. So, how do I go about doing
this? So, for that, one needs to w..., work carefully. One needs to work
systematically. So, how do we work systematically? That means, we need to m...,
move forward and think. That, what is the way by which I can raise out of the
bodily conception? So, the first in that is karma-kanda. Karma-kanda means,
Arjuna, you are indestructible. Therefore, you know, you should fight. Do your
duty. And attain victory. Then, attain glory. So, here, you know, by acting at
the karma-kanda level. Karma-kanda is, you know, provides material enjoyment.
But it does within the dharmic framework. It leads to gradual elevation. So,
this section from 31 to 38 is answering Arjuna's second argument. Why? Second
argument was enjoyment. I will not be able to enjoy if I do not, you know, if I
fight and kill my relatives. I will not be able to enjoy. So, Krishna says, no,
if you do not fight. You will not be able to enjoy. That is what Krishna
describes in 2.31 to 2.38. So, let us start. Now:

        sva-dharmam api cāvekṣya
        na vikampitum arhasi
        dharmyād dhi yuddhāc chreyo ’nyat
        kṣatriyasya na vidyate

So, "sva-dharmam api cāvekṣya". "avekṣya" means thinking about, perceiving.
"sva-dharmam api cāvekṣya". If you consider your specific dharma, then, what
will you find? "sva-dharmam". Your specific "sva-dharmam". At, so, brahmana has
"sva-dharmam". Ksatriya has "sva-dharmam". If you think about it. "na vikampitum
arhasi". "kampa" means trembling. So, there is no need for you to hesitate, oh,
Arjuna. There is no need for you to do "kampa". "na vikampitum arhasi". So, this
"kampan" is not just physical. It is also in..., it is not just external
"kampan". Arjuna was saying that, I am, I am, I am trembling.

        sīdanti mama gātrāṇi
        mukhaṁ ca pariśuṣyati

        vepathuś ca śarīre me

Yes, my limbs are quivering. My body is trembling. He has said that. But that
external trembling was because of an internal weakness. So, Krishna is telling
Arjuna there is no need for you to tremble like this. "na vikampitum arhasi".
Because of the, because of internal indecision. Now, so, when you, you have no
reason if you consider your "sva-dharmam" to do "kampan". Why? "dharmyād dhi
yuddhāc chreyo ’nyat". You know, so, a, "dharmyād dhi yuddhāc". From the point
of view, "dharmyād dhi yuddhāc", "kṣatriyasya na vidyate". There is no greater
"śreyaḥ". There is no greater glory for a ksatriya than to fight a righteous
war. So, in 2.7, Arjuna had surrendered and had asked what is "śreyaḥ"? What is
my long-term good? And Krishna is answering here. Now, Krishna is also talking
about multiple levels of "śreyaḥ". But here, He says, for a ksatriya, the
k..., "śreyaḥ", there can be no higher good than the w..., righteous war.
"kṣatriyasya na vidyate". So, now, all of us, in our sp..., a, in our current
life, we have two sets of duties. There is material duty. And there is spiritual
duty. So, the "sva-dharmam" can refer to the material duty. The material duty is
the process of varnashram. So, that may be brahman, ksatriya, vaisya, shudra. Or
we have our material duties. We have the duty to our parents. We have duty
towards our family members. So, important duties. Material duties there. And in
spiritual duty is our sādhana-bhakti. So, our process of spirituality, our
process of s..., yoga, of process of sādhana, by which we realise our spiritual
nature. So, we have both these duties. And both these duties need to be done
harmoniously. Here, Krishna is talking to Arjuna in terms of his "sva-dharmam".
In terms of his material duty. Ksatriya has two particular, particular duty. And
what is that, ksatriya's duty? It is actually to fight in a righteous war. So,
Srila Prabhupada explains this, Prabhupada's quotes a verse from the scriptures.
And he says that, actually, for a ksatriya to die in a battlefield, and for a
brahmana to perform yajna, for a sannyasi to lea..., give the body, a, to lay
down the body at the end of the sannyasi. All these are very auspicious. So, of
course, here, Prabhupada quotes two specific things. A ksatriya and a brahmana.
So, when the brahmana leaves the body, a, brahmana does some yajna. In which,
even a, you know, even if does some, brahmana does some faulty things, like
animal sacrifice. Still, the brahmana will be elevated. Because the brahmana is
following the path of dharma. And ksatriya, also, even the ksatriyat has to
kill. In the course of adharmic battle, ksatriya will be elevated. So, now, in
the scriptures, there are references to animal sacrifice. You know, the
important point in the animal sacrifice, as Srila Prabhupada always explains
based on the way Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu explained to Chand Kazi, during their
talks, as they are described in Chaitanya Charitamrita, Chapter 16 in, of the
Madhya-lila. Basically, the point was, there was a conflict. There was a tag of
war. That the principle of ahiṃsā is there in the Vedic scriptures. At the same
time, in the yajnas, the yajnas involve certain activity, certain rituals.
They involve a, as, as one of those rituals is animal sacrifice. So, now,
animals may be killed in various ways. So, sometimes, when mantras, the animals
are killed. Just chanting mantra, and the lying animal falls down. Sometimes,
the animals are killed by tuck, by killing them, by using physical weapons, you
know. But whichever way they are killed, the important point is that if they are
killed properly, then those animals get elevated. They get a higher body.
Because they have d..., died in a righteous, in the righteous dharmic context.
Now, beyond that, the, there was always an inclination from Manusmṛti onwards to
avoid animal sacrifices, entirely. So, for example, Madhvācārya, Rāmānujāchārya,
when they talk about the sacrifices, they say that, actually, the sacrifices are
given for those who are addicted to meat-eating. And those who do not want to do
sacrifices, they can use other things. For example, you know, instead of
sacrificing an animal, one, l..., living animal, one can make a clay replica of
an animal. So, one can take "ata" and make a clay replica. You know, not, not
clay, means mud. But it can, one can have some of the replica made of flour, or
grains. And one can cut that. And offer that in, you know, even in the
sacrifice, also. Or for example, it is, say, it is said that, the w..., now, for
the Kali, it is said that she likes blood. And that is why goats are slaughtered
over there in some of the temples of Kali. Now, she does not like blood. She is
a Vaishnavi.

        vaishnavi jana-mohini

Bhagavatam says. You know, the Ka..., Durga is, she is Vaishnavi. And Kali is
basically her expansion. You know, she is hersel..., she is Durga manifesting in
a slightly more ugra, tamasic form. So, you know, now, some peo..., so, it is
widely accepted in the tradition today that the goddess likes b..., goddess
ocrifi..., offers sacrifice because she likes blood. But actually, it is not she
likes blood. It is the people who like to eat flesh and, you know, things like
that. So, then, she accepts that. But those who want to avoid it, it is told for
them that you can actually sac..., give something red to her. So, you can give
a red flowers to her. So, that is why in the worship of the goddess, red flowers
are given. And red color is there of blood. And red color is there of flowers.
So, in general, the acharyas do not directly reject in, certain things which
have been given in the Vedas. But they contextualise them. So, Krishna, for
example, here, says, "trai-guṇya". Later on, He will say in the second chapter
that:

        trai-guṇya-viṣayā vedā
        nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna

Now, He says, Arjuna, c..., "guṇyo bhavārjuna", "trai-guṇya". He will say in
2.45. Because the Vedas talk about the three modes. But still, Krishna never
rejects Vedic authority. He accepts Vedic authority and then tells Arjuna to
raise beyond that, to transcendental level. So, similarly, the point is that the
acharyas, even if there are certain statements in the Vedas which seem a little
difficult to comprehend. Which seem controversial. Then, the acharyas have
explained to us, how within the context, they have to be understood. So, for
people, who are attached to meat-eating. And for them, to raise upwards
gradually, animal sacrifices are recommended. But for those who have risen to a
higher level of consciousness, there is no need for animal sacrifices. And that
is why that is not talked about. You know. So, the point here is, whoever is the
person who does the prescribed duties, that person gets elevated. So, ksatriyas,
also, yes, ksatriyas, if they fight in righteous war and they die, they will get
elevated. But that does not mean ksatriyas have to provoke war for the sake of
getting elevated. If we see, the Pandavas, they tried everything possible to
avoid the war. You know, the Pandavas sent messengers. And finally, Krishna
Himself went. Krishna brought the, the whole kingdom was the Pandavas' actually.
Because it was Pandu's. And after that, Dhṛtarāṣṭra come to Pan..., Pandavas.
They have never asked for the whole kingdom. For they said, only our rightful
half. And w..., the half which they had got was also actually very desolate. But
they had got Khandavaprastha, which was like a forest. But they had arranged to
make it Indraprastha by the mercy of Krishna. But then, even then, they did not
demand, demand for the part of w..., kingdom, that was there. So, in which, they
had only developed. So, they said, just give five villages. They did not accept
that, also. So, this sort of glorification of death, you know, or, or
glorification of dying in a war field, it is not a license for indiscriminate
violence. If we look at the full cultural context, we will see that, violence is
never the first option for resolving con..., a, difficulties or conflicts.
Violence is the last option. And these kind of statements, which are there in
the scriptures, glorifying a ksatriya, who lays down the body in a war field
attains svarga. These statements are primarily meant to encourage people or to
inspire people so that they do not flinch while fighting, you know, while
fighting on behalf of dharma. That means when we understand, yes, even if we
have to die, it does not matter. I will attain heaven by fighting. So, that is
to inspire people to stick to dharma. The purpose of this is not to condole or
recommend violence. So, Krishna is telling that f..., for a ksatriya, actually,
it is very fortunate to get a human li..., to get a, you know, a dharmic war.
So, Prabhupada writes the principle over here, discharging, discharging one’s
speciﬁc duties within varṇāśrama is always auspicious. So, now, let us move
forward to the next verse.

        yadṛcchayā copapannaṁ
        svarga-dvāram apāvṛtam
        sukhinaḥ kṣatriyāḥ pārtha
        labhante yuddham īdṛśam

So, "yadṛcchayā copapannaṁ". So, "upapannam". "upapannam" means has arrived at.
"yadṛcchayā". "yadṛcchayā" means by its own arrangement. By the course of
nature. So, if by the arrangement of nature, you know, you know, if the war has
appeared. N..., now, then, that war actually opens the doors for heaven. And
"svarga-dvāram apāvṛtam". That "apāvṛtam", it is, opens the doors to heaven.
"sukhinaḥ kṣatriyāḥ pārtha". So, Pṛthā, oh, Arjuna, those ksatriyas are very
happy. Because "labhante yuddham īdṛśam". So, all of them want to attain heaven.
So, when they want to attain heaven. At that time, how will they attain heaven?
Actually, you know, they will attain it only when, they do, will, they will do
the life of dharma and punya. And they, after that, there is a process of
gradual detachment. And eventually, they will attain heaven. But if they live in
such a way that eventually, that, they will get a, a f..., opportunity to fight
in dharmic war and they die over there. Then, they will a..., h..., get heaven.
So, in a sense, the dharmic war is an opportunity for heaven. Dharmic war is an
opportunity where the doors to heaven are open. So, Krishna is telling that the
ksatriya should be happy. So, you are getting a glorious destination. You should
be happy. So, Krishna is telling Arjuna, do not lament. Why are you hesitating
to fight? Now, we may wonder, why is Krishna glorifying svarga over here?
Actually, we say that, we shoud not go to svarga. In fact, we, the devotees are
the, feel that, even Vaikun..., even l..., Mukti, Kaivalya is also
insignificant. So, akasa-puspa. Prabodhananda Sarasvati in a famous verse says
that, actually, it is compared to the joy of devotional remembrance of Krishna.
Everything else is insignificant. There is the heavenly pleasures are like
akasa-puspa. And then, the, even the libera..., heavens of liberation is like
hell.

        kaivalyam narakayate tridasa-pur akasa-puspayate

This is a long verse. We are not going into that right now. But, so, the important
point is we know from our philosophy that spiritual happiness is the topmost.
Then, Vaikun..., Vaikuntha or Goloka, basically, spiritual world is what is the
aspiration. So, why is Krishna glorifying svarga over here? Because Krishna is
taking knowledge to the goal step by step. So, right now, He has not talked
about concept of liberation. He is talking, ok, even if one is, wants svarga.
Even if you want material enjoyment. Krishna is here responding to Arjuna's
question that how will I enjoy without my relatives? You know, of, if, if
enjoyment is what you want. And He is not ch..., changing the definition of
enjoyment for Arjuna. He is not saying, oh, material enjoyment is false.
Actually, if you just enjoy spiritually. No. He has, He has not come to that
level. Even if you want material enjoyment. Still, what does it? Actually, get
that enjoyment, get that enjoyment by practicing dharma. So, you know, the
Mahabharata, which, in which, of which Bhagavad Gita is a part, largely focuses
on karma-kanda. It means do dharma. By which, you will get artha and kama. And, 
of course, bhakti, moksha, prema, that is talked about. And that is definitely
there. But that has to be s..., seen, when, that is, can be seen when we see it
through the vision of the acharyas. Now, moving forward, so, Prabhupada quotes
this verse that ksatriya is our person who is, protect the dharma. So,
Parāśara-smṛti, says this.

        kṣatriyo hi prajā rakṣan
        śastra-pāṇiḥ pradaṇḍayan
        nirjitya para-sainyādi
        kṣitiṁ dharmeṇa pālayet

So, what is the duty of the ksatriya? "prajā rakṣan". Their duty is to
project..., protect the "prajā". Now, Prabhupada always expl..., always says,
"prajā" does not mean only human beings. It means all living beings. Who are
there in the kingdom. We know the story then, when Lord Rama, and a dog came. A
cow came. You know, there is, we have stories of Maharaja, Lord Rama, or
Maharaja Shibi, or Naragranti deva. Anybody who comes, they are considered their
"prajā". And then, for the "prajā rakṣan", what they do? "śastra-pāṇiḥ". They
have to dr..., lift up weapons. And "pradaṇḍayan". They have to give punishment.
"nirjitya para-sainyādi". They have to conquer over the enemy soldiers. "kṣitiṁ
dharmeṇa pālayet". In this way, "kṣitiṁ dha". Earth, the land which they have
got. "dharmeṇa pālayet". They have to protect according to dharma. So, Krishna
is telling Arjuna by this humility and auspiciousness, you will attain heaven.
Now, Krishna will tell, ok, if you do not do this, what will happen?

        atha cet tvam imaṁ dharmyaṁ
        saṅgrāmaṁ na kariṣyasi
        tataḥ sva-dharmaṁ kīrtiṁ ca
        hitvā pāpam avāpsyasi

"atha cet tvam imaṁ dharmyaṁ". If, however. "imaṁ dharmyaṁ". This dharma you do
not follow. "saṅgrāmaṁ na kariṣyasi". You do not follow your dharma. And you do
not do sangram. "sangram" is fighting. Then, what will happen?

        tataḥ sva-dharmaṁ kīrtiṁ ca
        hitvā ...

You will lose your dharma. And you will lose your "kīrtiṁ". Because not doing
your dharma, that is inauspicious. So, you will lose your dharma. You will be
de..., doing dereliction of duty. You will lose your fame. And then, "hitvā
pāpam avāpsyasi". How "pāpam"? Actually, doing our dharma is our duty. If we
fail in our dharma, that brings "pāpam". Now, if a, you know, a doctor does not
treat a patient. You know, then that is, and that is a crime by negligence. The
doctor knows how to cure a patient. And a patient is there. The doctor does not
do anything. Then, that is the crime of negligence. So, even when the ksatriya
does not protect the citizens, there is a crime, there is a crime. The ksatriya
is considered a criminal because of being negligent. So, similarly, here,
Krishna is telling that, actually, if you do not do your dharma. Then, "pāpam
avāpsyasi". You will lose your dharma. So, you will not get the opportunity to
punya. But you will do "pāpam". And then, in the next verses, Krishna will talk
about "kīrtiṁ". So, remember, Krishna has not yet talken..., taken things
directly to the spiritual level. He, so, now, He will talk a lot about "kīrtiṁ".
Krishna is not talking here at the level of Chaitanya Mahāprabhu, "amanina
manadena". He is talking about ksatriyas in their language. You know. You will
lose your fame, also. So, how will he lose his fame? He is, talks about in the
next verses.

        akīrtiṁ cāpi bhūtāni
        kathayiṣyanti te ’vyayām
        sambhāvitasya cākīrtir
        maraṇād atiricyate

So, "akīrtiṁ cāpi bhūtāni". "akīrtiṁ", the word was, "kīr...", "kīrtiṁ" has come
in the previous verse, also. "a...",  "kīrtiṁ" is fame. "akīrtiṁ" is infamy.

        akīrtiṁ cāpi bhūtāni
        kathayiṣyanti te ’vyayām

So, people will speak about it, "avyayām". For a long long time to come.
Actually, in this world, infamy, you know, stays on for a long time. Because
many people like to gossip. Many people like to talk. You know what that person
did. You know what happened, that person did. You know what that person did.
People speak about it. And it just goes on and on. So, now, Krishna is in, by no
means, condoning or recommending this. Krishna is just reporting a universal
pattern of human behavior. This is how it is. So, if somebody acts in a
particular way, in an ignoble way. You know, actually, there is, all the, you
know, in the media, also, there is paparazzi. Paparazzi is like the people who
among those newspaper repor..., newspaper journalists or reporters. There is a,
those who are instead in cheap popularity. Cheap popularity means, you know,
one film star slaps another film star. And there is big photos of that. You
know, and is this person, is this person having an affair with that person? That
person was seen with that person. And that person was doing this. And in this,
all just gossip and scandal. So, what happens is, people like to, you know, hear
about this. Because people's consciousness is low. And there is a whole media
that is cat..., catering to it. So, of course, now with ISKCON, international
proportions. Because of internet and because of technology. But this is a
general tendency. So, Krishna is telling that, Arjuna, if you act in an ignoble
way, people will speak about your infamy. "kathayiṣyanti te ’vyayām". So, as
devotees, we are not concerned about reputation for our own sake. But we are
consider reputation, we are concerned about reputation for the sake of sharing
Krishna's message. Now, for example, for preacher gets a bad reputation, if a
preacher's character is flawed, or even if that preacher's character is not
flawed. But somehow, that preacher gets bad reputation, then the preacher's
capacity to share that message gets impeded. Because whenever, generally, when
can a teach..., when can any teacher share a message, especially a message that
involves spiritual wisdom and personal transformation? Then, when people trust
the person. But whenever there is gossip, then, as soon as we see that person,
we think, oh, I heard that word. But another person has done something like
this. So, it is like a cancer that stays in the mind. And it just erodes our
faith away. So, now, it is, from our point of view, we should always try to
avoid hearing gossip. But it is a universal human nature that people will
gossip. It is of course not a, a recommended nature. It is our lower nature.
Just like, it is the nature to become lusty. It is nature to become lusty, so
like, or greedy. Similarly, it is like nature. It is a conditioned nature to
become gossipy. That has to be avoided. That has to be curtailed. But it is
there. People are going to t..., a, do these things. So, what do you do about
it? So, Krishna says that these all people will talk about you. And then:

        sambhāvitasya cākīrtir
        maraṇād atiricyate

So, when from the preacher's point of view, also, it is important that preacher
not act in a way that will bring, you know, infamy. So, some, Krishna has said
that for our person who has been honored, you know, dishonor is worse than
death. Actually, you know, bow sticks can break a, bones. But words can break
hearts. Harsh words that are spoken, they can inflict wounds that go deeper,
much, much, much deeper than the physical wounds. Most of the time, when people
commit, say, suicide. It is very, it is not so common that people commit suicide
because of physical pain. But when there is emotional pain, and somebody has
spo..., somebody who made love and trusted, that person has spoken harsh words,
that can be enormously painful. It can be worse than death. So, dishonor is,
Krishna is telling, dishonor is worse than death. So, of course, now, when we
are talking about dishonor. We are not just talking about the person speaking
harsh words about us. But the person is speaking harsh words. And those harsh
words going around to the world for everyone, you know, the person is speaking.
Whether it is true or false, if that person speaks to everyone. Ah, this person
did this. This dishonor becomes so difficult to deal with. So, it is impossible.
So, Krishna is telling Arjuna, this is what is going to happen to you. Now,
Arjuna may say, but no, why should people, you know, become, why should I get
infamy? Because I am not doing anything for myself, which purposes. I am doing
for the sake of virtue. I do not want to kill my elders. And for the sake of
righteousness, I am, you know, not doing anything wrong. I just do not. People
do not think like this. What will people think? That is He describes in the next
verse.

        bhayād raṇād uparataṁ
        maṁsyante tvāṁ mahā-rathāḥ
        yeṣāṁ ca tvaṁ bahu-mato
        bhūtvā yāsyasi lāghavam

So, "bhayād raṇād uparataṁ". That "raṇād uparataṁ". You ran away. Why? Because
of "bhayād". You are there in the battlefield, and when you are chickened out.
"bhayād raṇād uparataṁ". "maṁsyante tvāṁ mahā-rathāḥ". All the great people, all
these great warriors that "tvāṁ mahā-rathāḥ". "maṁsyante". They will, what will
they say? They will say, oh, you have run out of coward. "yeṣāṁ ca tvaṁ
bahu-mato". And those who are "bahu-mato". They have thought you are a very
great person. "bhūtvā yāsyasi lāghavam". They will say, you are a, you are
nothing great. You are ordinary person. "bhūtvā yāsyasi lāghavam". So, they will
consider you insignificant. So, actually, our actions, you know, are seen by
people. Our motivations are not seen by people. And people's perceptions are
shaped, not by our motivations, but by our actions. Now, if people come to know
us closely, then, maybe, they can see beyond our actions to our motivations,
also. But people primarily see our actions. And based on their level of
consciousness, they will ascribe, ok, when would I have done like this? Ok,
whenever, if somebody is right there on the battlefield. And then, at that time,
the person says, oh, I will not fight. You know, I will, I will lose the
battlefield. When would I do that? When would other people, I know, do that?
When they are afraid. So, that way, that is what happens to most people. You
know, and we have to remember that. So, there are three things over there. There
is perceptions. There are actions. And there are motivations. So, our
motivations are not known to the world. Our actions are seen by the world. And
based on that, people have perceptions. So, therefore, ou..., our actions have
to be such that, you know, they do not lead to wrong perceptions. That is why
the actions have to be exemplary. And then, sometimes, we have to act in some
unusual ways, then, we have to clear the air. And explain why we are acting in
particular ways. Then, it does not lead to false perceptions. So, Krishna is
telling Arjuna that, you know, people are not going to look at your heart.
People are going to look at you, you know, externally, your actions. I, you
know, a warrior has left from the battlefield. That means that this person must
have been, must have become chickened out, must have become a coward. So, He
says, in this way, they will consider that you are insignificant. "bhūtvā
yāsyasi lāghavam". They will consider you to be insignificant. So, actually, you
know, this is a common human tendency. This is called the attributional error.
Attributional error means, attribution means to attribute to, say, to ascribe a
cause to, to determine. You know, so, whenever there are actions, w..., we
attribute motivations for those actions. So, for example, if we see somebody is
eating a lot, you know, nearly, why is this person eating a lot? This person is
a glutton. This person is a greety..., greedy. So, now, generally speaking, the,
if somebody is sleeping for a long time. We say this person is lazy. This person
is. So, like that, what we do is, we see actions. And we ascribe motivations to
that. And in that, we do usually an attributional error. What is that? We give
ourselves a benefit of doubt. We see, if I overeat, I was hungry. You know, if
that person overeats. That person is greedy. So, how the same action, when I do
it, it is hunger. And if somebody else is doing, it is greed. If I oversleep, I
was tired. If that person overfeels, that person is lazy. So, how does it
happen? That is human tendency. So, actually, we have to avoid this, we have to
learn to avoid this attributional error. And we should not attribute motivations
to actions without understanding circumstances. Otherwise, we can lead to
mis..., we can lead to lot of misunderstandings. You know, once I was, had gone,
I was in the temple. And then, I have just come for prasadam. You know, and
then, I had come a little late. That date was a feast. But most of the feast was
over. So, some last things were remaining. So, I was feeling a little bad that
the sweet had already got over. So, I thought that, ok, I will take whatever is
available. And as thus one senior devotee was sitting, opposite. And I saw that
in his plate, the sweet had been there. And sweet had got over. And he started
asking. Sweet taker, sweet take. Is there some sweet? Is there some sweet? And
then, he asked one person. That person has said, no, Prabhu, sweet is over.
Then, he started asking another server. Is sweet there? And third server. And
practically asking everyone, is sweet there? Now, he was a senior devotee. So,
people started getting a little concerned. And then, finally, I, I was thinking,
you know, what is this person? Why is he? Already had one helper of sweet. Why
is he asking for a second helper? And then, finally, one devotee came along.
That devotee had, that devotee was, they were just like, when people are serving
prasadam. That they make plates for themselves, who, that they will take later.
So, this devotee was serving and had made plate for himself. So, he brought the
pla..., his own plate. And he said, in that, there was sweet, and started
serving. And when the devotee served that. He said, no, no, no. I do not want
it. And that devotee pointed to me. And he said, he has not got sweet due to
him. So, I was so shocked. So, that devotee did not want to save for himself. He
wanted it for me. He was so sensitive. So that I have come and did not get
sweet. So, he said, please give him sweet. So, now, afterwards, I was thinking
that, say, when I ask for sweet, my action is because, I, I am, I have a tongue
which wants delicious things. So, when I ask, I see an action. Then,
automatically, the motivation is, ok, I want to taste the sweet. That is why I
think it is for me. But, you know, so, based on my level of consciousness, I
perceive everyone else. And based on actions, as, I attribute motivation. I was
thinking. You know, why is this person so greedy? But there was no greed
involved at all. There was actually a concern for other..., another, somebody
else involved. That is why we have to be careful that when there are, when we
see actions, we do not attribute motivations by default. We have to inter..., we
have to actually investigate and try to understand the circumstance. Then, we
can under..., then we can understand properly. So, as devotees, we should be
careful. But people in the world are n..., not generally going to be careful
like this. So, as much as possible, we should also try to behave in such a way
that we do not l..., that we, things do not come to a mis..., situation not
mis..., mus..., misunderstanding. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, you know, it is said
in Chaitanya Charitam..., Charitamrita, it is said that:

        sannyāsīra alpa chidra sarva-loke gāya

It is said that just as on a white cloth, if there is one dark spot, it shines.
It does not shine. It looks ugly. But it is basically noticeable for everyone.
Similarly, if there is some small flaw in a sannyasi, or in a person who is in a
position of leadership, everybody sees that. So, you know, we have to work both
ways. You know, if we are, as devotees, are representing Krishna. Then, we
should not behave in ways that will lead to attributional error among people.
That means we should not act in ways which will cr..., raise questions and f...,
make people lead to wrong perception. On the other hand, when we are observing
others acting in questionable ways, we should not by default assume that there
are ulterior motives involved over here. That we should be open to actually find
out what it is. Now, Krishna will describe further:

        hato vā prāpsyasi svargaṁ
        jitvā vā bhokṣyase mahīm
        tasmād uttiṣṭha kaunteya
        yuddhāya kṛta-niścayaḥ

So, now, Krishna is telling in this way, "hato vā prāpsyasi svargaṁ". If you
die, "hato". If you are killed over here, you will will attain "svargaṁ",
"prāpsyasi svargaṁ". "jitvā vā". If you win. "bhokṣyase mahīm". You will enjoy
the whole world. So, "tasmād udaṣya kaun...", "ut...", "uttiṣṭha kaunteya".
Therefore, Arjuna, raise. "yuddhāya kṛta-niścayaḥ". With determination, fight.
So, here, we see, Krishna's blin..., blint reasoning that the situation that
Arjuna had thought of lose-lose, Krishna has shown how it is win-win. That even
if you die, soon, you will attain heaven. That is victory for you. And if you
win, you get earth over here. That is also victory for you. So, where is the
loss for you? So, if Arjuna has any hesitation about why, whether to fight or
whether not to fight, Krishna removes that hesitation, and tells fight.
"tasmād", with deter..., "kṛta-niścayaḥ". With determination, Arjuna, fight. So,
this is the second level argumentation, karma-kanda. If you want to en..., if
your enjoyment is your concern, you will best enjoy by fighting, by doing your
duty. Therefore, Arjuna, fight. So, next verse onwards, Krishna will talk about
next le..., lesson. Which we will discuss in the next class. 

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
