Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=15E6YDoFkRQ
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com&v=15E6YDoFkRQ&event=video_description&redir_token=pxQDEKxOtabu9Cw-o5PdF1sWxZh8MTU0ODQ4ODI3M0AxNTQ4NDAxODcz

So, in this section, Sixth Chapter onwards. You know. When Krishna gradually,
evolves His thought, the thought, development of the precincts of yoga, He
eventually moves on to talk about, you know, samadhi. You know, when we are
talking about samadhi. There are different levels of samadhi. So, let us look at
these levels. And then, we will look at Srila Prabhupada's purport. So, here, we
can see, m..., Samprajnata Samadhi. And Asamprajnata Samadhi. So, Samprajnata.
M..., so, that is at the stable, level of ekagrata. Remember, we discussed five
levels of mind control. We start, you know, discussed about mudha, kshipta,
vikshipta, ekagrata and niroddha. So, niroddha. N..., n..., so, now, when we are
discussing these five levels, there is samadhi. It is not like a digital zero,
one. Samadhi is also like analog. We are progress, the yogi goes progressively
deeper and deeper into samadhi. So, when there are different kinds of samadhi.
So, Samprajnata Samadhi means that actually the mind is focused. And the mind is
calm. It is focused on one particular thing. Generally speaking, our mind go...,
is wandering over dozens of things at the same time. Just thinking of this and
that. And that. Hundreds of things like that. But at the level of Samprajnata
Samadhi, the mind is focused on one thing. And after being focused on one thing,
then the mind moves forward onwards. You know. Eventually, the mind at the
material level stops thinking. Stop, when the mind stops, that is called as
Asamprajnata Samadhi. So, remember, we discussed earlier about the, you know,
television example or a virtual reality example when a person is looking at the
television, the emotions are all caught up in whatever is happening on the
television set, on the screen. So, like that, our emotions are caught up. But
within the material world, although there is so much illusion, Krishna also
manifests. Krishna manifests as the holy name. Krishna manifests as the deity.
Is, Krishna manifests as the, you know, scrip..., scriptures. So, when we fix
our mind on these manifestations of Krishna, that is samadhi. And for the yogi,
also, now, we, now, here, samadhi, if we talk it from the, first, let us
understand the concept samadhi. Then, talk about how it happens, you know, on
the path of yoga. Now, when the mind is, Asamprajnata Samadhi means when the
mind is stopped. That means, you know, instead of just focusing on one thing
within the TV, you know, just person, just l..., stops looking at the TV. Turns
away from the TV. And it looks elsewhere. So, that is a higher level. Why is
that the higher level? Because at that level, one has not at all connected with
the illusion. So, the mind is stopped. So, there is Samprajnata and
Asamprajnata. And n..., now, that means, Samprajnata means that the mind is
conscious of the material level of reality. But within the material level of
reality, the focus is on, you know, s..., a spiritual concept. Whereas at the
level of Samprajnata Samadhi, the mind is completely turned away from material
reality. And it is focused directly on spiritual reality. So, now, within
Samprajnata Samadhi. So, Samprajnata, so among these five levels, Samprajnata is
at the level of ekagrata. The mind is focused. Whereas Asamprajnata is the mind
is stopped. So, then, one turns inwards. M..., so, now, let us look at this once
again.

Now, within the ekagrata stage, within the ekagrata stage, there is, there are
two kinds of samadhis for the, Savitarka and Savicara Samadhi. So, Savitarka
Samadhi means that an external object is used to focus the mind. So, their
external object may be, one may start by fixing the mind on tip of the nose.
Or you know:

        nāsikāgraṁ svaṁ 

As we discussed in this chapter, Sixth Chapter itself, in 6.13. Or it may be
"bhruvor madhye". When we fix the on the middle of the eyebrows. So, one takes
an external o..., object. Or one may also look at some external mudra, or, so,
external yantra. Not mudra. Yantra is a particular diagram that can help one
focus on higher con..., obj..., you know, higher realities. So, like that, there
can be various things which one can try to focus on. Now, when we are at least
trying to focus on such things, the essential principle is that one wants to
move from lower level of reality, that is material reality. To higher level of
reality. It is spiritual reality. So, if an external object helps one in
concentrating that way, one can use that. So, now, this is not considered a very
high level of concentration. Because one requires an external object to
concentrate it, to tur..., concentrate and to turn inwards. That is Savitarka,
now, beyond that, one may take an internal conception to focus. So, when one
takes the conception to focus, at that time, also, you know, one is able to
focus. But the focus, even at that time, is on the thought. That now we
understand that the reality that three levels. There is physical. Then, there is
mental. And then, there is spiritual. So, when one ta..., uses some object from
physical reality as a center point, as a cen..., focal point for concentration,
then that is Savitarka Samadhi. Then, when one moves forward, then takes a m...,
o..., object at the mental level of reality. That means one takes a thought, or
a conception. And focuses on that. That means it may, we say the yogi wants to
meditate and one may think of an image of Krishna. So, one is not really, it is
not a revelation coming from the spiritual level. It is a conception that we are
trying to have in the mind. So, when one tries to concentrate on a thought, that
is a Savicara. Savicara means there is thought. There is thought. You know,
m..., now, is thought bad? It is not that thought is bad. But at the current
level of conception, at the material level of consciousness, even the thoughts
that we have are material. And when one is having material thoughts, one cannot
be considered to be at the spiritual level of consciousness. So, Savicara
Samadhi means that one is at a mental level of conception. And one is not
necessarily at a spiritual level of conception. But one chooses a mental
conception. One chooses an obj..., a thought for contemplation that helps us to
thin..., one to go inwards. That helps to one's consciousness to raise higher.
So, this is Savicara Samadhi. Now, all this, which we are discussing is largely
from the Patanjali Yoga Stura. Where he talks about it. And there are
commentaries written on that, also, by various, you know, you know, scholarly
commentators. Which explains this futher. So, this is the level of Samadhis in,
you know, Asam..., Samprajnata. And then, after that, when one moves to the
a..., next level of reality. That is when one moves to the h..., level of
reality where there is no connection at the physical level. So, one does not
need the physical thought. Nor does one need a mental, one does not need a
physical object. Nor does one need a mental object. One is directly at the
spiritual level. So, that is the higher level of samadhi. And one comes to that
level of samadhi, you know, you know, then, that person is considered to have
attained, a..., within the yogic path, perfection. So:

        yogas chitta vritti nirodha

As we di..., discussed. What is the principle of yoga? "chitta vritti nirodha".
"chitta vritti" is the moment of consciousness. "nirodha", control. So, it is
stopping completely. Cessation. So, the material moment of consciousness stops.
This is the understanding of progressive perfection with respect to the path of
yoga. Now, in the bhakti understanding, also, there is samadhi. Now, for the
devotee, the samadhi does not necessarily have to have, a..., cessation of
activity at the physical or the mental level. That may be there. But, you know,
that is not the essential point. The essential point is, not cessation of
activity at the material, physical, or mental level. But it is the stimulation
of activity. It is the at, a stimulation of activity at the devotional level.
That means the devotee starts perceiving higher reality. And not just
perceiving, but participating in higher reality. What is the difference between
perceiving and participating? Perceiving means that for example, sometimes,
th..., we read in the pastime to the Goswamis. The Goswamis are si..., sitting
and meditating on Krishna. And then, Krishna's pastimes started being perceived
by them. So, Krishna's pastimes are happening in the spiritual world. You know.
But they are perceiving it. So, that is samadhi. That means what is happening?
They are no longer acting at the physical, mental level. But that is not the
essence of samadhi. Essence of samadhi is, they are perceiving and participating
in reality at the spiritual level. So, we have the example of Rupa Goswami. You
know. You know. Once he was sitting and m..., m..., m..., doing devotional
meditation. And at that time, he was observing the pastimes of Krishna. And
then, the pastime, Radha and Krishna were in the forest. And when they were in
the forest, Radharani saw a beautiful flower. Which was high up on the tree. So,
then, on a branch of the tree. So, Radharani wanted that flower. And she could
not reach. So, Krishna said, I will lift you up. And Krishna came from
behind and lifted her up. And as she reached the flower. And as she was holding
onto the branch to pack out the flower, Krishna let go. And then, Krishna let
go. And Radharani has cried out in fear. And she held onto the branch. And the
branch was not so strong. And Radharani was crying in fear. And Krishna started
laughing. And seeing this, the stitious nature of Krishna, Rupa Goswami started
laughing. And Rupa Goswami started laughing. At that time, there was a, a
vaishnava, who was passing by that area. Now, this vaishnava happened to be
lame. So, he was walking with a limb. And when he was passing by, at that time,
Rupa Goswami observed this pa..., meditation, this par..., pastime, this
meditation. And started laughing. So, that devotee thought that Rupa Goswami is
laughing at me. And he got upset by that. You know. Why is he laughing at me?
And as soon as, you know, Rupa Goswami got upset, this, you know, Ru..., so
that, that Vaishnava got upset. Rupa Goswami's trans broke. And you know, there,
the, just, wonderful pastime was relishing. What happened? And he tried to
meditate. But the pastime did not come back. And then, he understood, probably,
I am, I must have done something which was, so displeased the devotee. And
because of this, my vision of pastime went off. And then, m..., m..., it is
elaborate story. Then, he considered Sanatan Goswami, Sanatan Goswami said, you
invite all the Vaishnavas for a feast. Whoever does not come, that is a
vaishnava that is displeased. You find out who it was. And then you go, and, you
know, seek forgiveness. So, then, he invited all the vaishnavas for a feast. And
that vaishnava did not come. Then, he went and asked what happened. And then,
when that vaishnava revealed his heart. That, you know, you were laughing at me.
He said. No. No. I was not laughing at you. He explained. And then, the whole
situation was clarified. So, the point here is that, there is perception of
higher reality. So, for a devotee, samadhi is not just:

        yogas chitta vritti nirodha

Not just disconnection from physical realm, mental reality. It is stimulation.
Activation of, you know, you know, perception of spiritual reality. So, now,
s..., perception is one thing. That means one sees the higher reality. But a
dev..., for a devotee, samadhi is even higher. It is not just perception. But
there is also participation. Participation means that the devotee actually
pursues the higher reality of Krishna. And then, not only pursues, but also
recognises that I have a role in that pastime. And the devotee participates in
that pastime, also. So, there is another pa..., pastime of Raghunatha dasa
Goswami. When you know, one day, the devotee is found. The devotee was serving
him. Found that he was sick. And then, they called the vaidya. And the vaidya
said that his stomach is upset. And the reason for the stomach upset is that he
has overeaten. So, the devotees were annoyed. Outraged. They said, you are
committing a vaishnava aparadha. You know. Rupa, Raghunatha dasa Goswami does
not eat anything, practically. They say, he drinks, takes a little butter milk
in one, in two or three days. So, how can you say that he has offended? He has,
you know, he has overeaten? No, he said. But that is the, the symptoms indicate
that he has overeaten. And they asked Rupa Go..., Raghunatha dasa Goswami. This is
what this vaidya says. He says, it is true. Actually, there was a celebration,
there was a festival in the spiritual world. And at that time, kheer had been
cooked, you know, by Radharani for Krishna. And then, all the sakhis, and the
manjaris, they had the remnants of Krishna. So, the kheer was so delicious that
we overate. So, I also overate. So, now, he, and then, he said now, so, what had
happened at the spiritual level, that affected at the material level, also. So,
at the physical level, also, the body got upset. So, there is also, this
conception of manas puja. Where, in Nectar of Devotion, this pastime is
described. That a devotee tries to serve Krishna by offering, you know, a kheer
in the mind. The devotee is very poor. And he tries to offer kheer. But he, he
wants to offer the best worship to Krishna. The best bhoga to Krishna. But he
does not have anything to offer. So, he offers kheer. And when he offers kheer.
At that time, he prepares the kheer in the mind. It is, mind, I will offer. And
he offers it de..., very elaborately. Makes it very delicious. And then, before
offering, one has to test. You know. We treat Krishna as a person. So, it should
not be too hot. So, he is about to offer it, at that time, he finds that,
actually, it is not offerable. He wants to check whether it is ho..., a, cool
enough. And he just put..., touches his finger. And as soon he touches his
finger, in his meditation, touching the finger, but aaa..., his finger, oh, his
finger, it feels if hot sensation on his finger. And opens eyes. And his finger
is actually burnt. So, then, here, what is happening, actually, the devotional
contemplation is making what is a higher reality manifested at a lower level,
also. What is a spiritual level, manifested at a material level, also. So, the
point here is, for a devotee, samadhi is not just passive meditation. It is
active, not just perception, but active participation. Devotee, for a devotee,
samadhi is not just passive perception. But active participation. And this is
the samadhi which we see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was in repeatedly.

Actually, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's transes of ecstasy, you know, can be seen at
three levels. At this level, we can say that, one level is that he, there was
the perception. There was percep..., so, these are similar to what I have been
saying, perception and participation. But there are, a, levels in it. Perception
means, Caitanya Mahaprabhu  would be, at one moment, with other devotees. And
they would be discussing Krishna Katha. Hearing some verses from the Bhagavatam.
Some shl..., songs of Krishna. And suddenly, Caitanya Mahaprabhu would see in
the, they are walking through Ja..., through Jagannath Puri on the road. And in
Jagannath, Vallabha gardens. Suddenly, Caitanya Mahaprabhu would see Krishna.
And when he would see Krishna, he would see Krishna playing his flute. And
suddenly would run, leaving all the other devotees. Charge away at full speed.
And then, you know, he would go, and, you know, charged towards Krishna to
embrace Krishna's lotus feet. To take Krishna's shelter. And then going to reach
there, just as about to reach there, he would faint. And when he would f..., and
Krishna would disappear. And he would faint. And the devotees would come and
ask. What happened? What happened? He says, I saw Krishna. But Krishna
disappeared. I am so unfortunate. This was for, for the first time in Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. You know. He took sannyasa at Katwa. And then, he was going towards
Vrindavan. But he was brought back to, you know, to others', acharyas', Prabhu's
place in Santipur. So, this was, at that time, also, you know, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu had such a mystical visions. So, this is, when one is the, with
others. But suddenly, one s..., pursues a higher reality. Now, this is not an
imagination. Actually, Krishna is present. And the devotee gets temporary
glimpses of Krishna. That is also samadhi. Then, beyond that, there can also be
not just perception. So, K..., suddenly, Krishna, Caitanya Mahaprabhu has run away.
But then, when he would actually not just get a glimpse, but he would
participate in Krishna's pastimes. So, when he would participate in Krishna's
pastime, he will say that, he, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, this was one pastime when he
would, you know, for exam..., this comes in the Antya lila, Caitanya Maha...,
Chaitanya Charitamrita, 18th Chapter, I think, where there is a fisherman. And
that fisherman, one day, catches a fish. And he becomes very happy because just
caught a giant fish. Giant fish. And as he pulls out the giant fish, he says,
hey, what is this? It is not a fish. It is some strange being. And at that
night, the devotee has found. Caitanya Mahaprabhu has disappeared. And
frantically searching everywhere. And then, they find this fisherman who is, you
know, acting like a mad man. And they ask, what happened? You know, just
chanting. He is just ch..., he is frantically chanting the names of Vishnu, of
Krishna. And he is frantic, practically. You know, they ask him, what happened?
What happened? So, he said that, you know, I caught a fish. You know. And
actually, when I, I, he says, I have been haunted by a ghost. He says, you know,
normally, I chant Nrsimha mantra to drive away ghost. But I do not know what
kind of ghost has haunted me. The more this time, the more I chant Nrsimha
mantra, the more haunting increases. So, then, gen asked, what has
happened? I, I, I want to find the exorcist who will drive the ghost. So, then,
you know, amongst the associates of, of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Swarup Damodar was
there, a secretary of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He says, I am an exorcist. I know. I
will drive away the ghost. And what he does is, tuck, he slaps among the fierce.
You know. And he says, what happened? Where, what, how did you get the ghost? He
said, it has now caught a giant fish. And then, you know, as soon as he tried to
touch the fish, then, I got this ghost. He said. No, no. That is not ghost. That
is Mahaprabhu. No, this is not Mahaprabhu. You know. I have seen Mahaprabhu.
This is completely different. So, what has happened was, actually, Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's whole body, you know, bodily limbs had become changed completely.
You know, how, what has happened was, now, he was not only having his spiritual
perception, he would, he was also having a participation in the spiritual
pastimes. And that participation was not just having some small effect in terms
of say, some of dine digestion. Or finger burning. But actually, the whole
joints have become disjointed. You know, it is some, what would happen is,
sometimes, you know, at one particular time, Caitanya Mahaprabhu had, became like
kūrmaḥ avatar. You know, kūr..., like a:

        kūrmo ’ṅgānīva sarvaśaḥ

Krishna says in 2.59..., 2.58. All the limbs of his body had become withdrawn
into the body completely. Completely withdrawn. And he had become very small.
Another time, he became huge. You know. Caitanya Mahaprabhu himself was already
tall and majestic. And each of his joints was separate from his joints for
several inches. And his arms appeared long. His legs appeared long. And what was
holding the limbs together was practically the skin. The joints had become
disjointed. And then, the devotees would be mortified. Frightened. To see such
transformations in Caitanya Mahaprabhu's f..., and then, they would beg Caitanya
Maha..., you know, they would pray. A..., nothing would happen. Finally, when
they would chant, they would chant the holy names. Then, actually, what would
happen is, Caitanya Mahaprabhu would come back to his consciousness. So, like
this, there are ma..., extraordinary pastimes. Now, these are the mystical
visions that can come. Bhaktivinoda Thakur would talk about Sahaja Samadhi.
Sahaja Samadhi means, you know, there is by the pri..., purification and the
elevation of our consciousness, there will be natural spiritual cognition that
will come. And Srila Prabhupada, also, there are times, when, you know, one
time, when he was in Sou..., you know, South America. And he was doing kirtan.
At that time, he, it was, he used to see, here, it comes automatic. And he
saw devo..., already at time, center over there. Gaura Nitai over there. And
devotees chanting and dancing. And they have become overwhelmed. And then, he
went into ecstasy. That was a, there was quite a few occasions. Not many. Srila
Prabhupada would normally try to stay at our level of consciousness. So that he
could, you know, instruct us. But sometimes, this ecstasy would take him to
higher levels of consciousness. So, this is the samadhi that awaits us. And this
samadhi is exhibited at its summit. Just as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibits it,
similarly, the gopis of Vrindavan exhibit it. And not only the gopis of
Vrindavan exhibit it. But, you know, it is Radharani among them who exhibits it
the most. And we see this at its climax in chapters 46 and 47 of the Tenth Canto
of Srimad Bhagavatam. Where for this chapter, 46 is called as Brahmar Gita, the
song to the bumblebee. So, when Uddhava has come from, m..., m..., come from
Vrin..., m..., to Vrindavan, from Mathura to give Krishna a m..., a, Krishna,
here to the gopis. So, at that time, a bumblebee comes along over there. And
Caitanya Maha..., and Sri Cai..., Srimati Radharani sees that bumblebee and
treats it as a messenger of Krishna. She wants to speak to Uddhava. But Uddhava
is a ksatriya. Uddhava is a man. And, you know, it is not appropriate for
Radharani to chastise Uddhava. So, then, whatever her feelings are towards
Krishna. And towards Krishna's messenger, she starts speaking them towards
Uddhava. And it is just, and the way she speaks. It is a very elevated subject.
Which we cannot go into right now. But she speaks her heart out. And she is,
just, you know, frenzy of emotions. She says, you know, you are an unreliable
servant of unreliable master. I do not want to hear anything from you. Go away.
And then, that one will become, rise to come, and ter..., sa..., Radharani says,
I do not want, you do not feel touch my feet. You cannot flatter me. Go away
from here. And then, as soon, one will be, keeps moving around. And she says,
no, no, I am not going to listen to you. And then, the one will be, goes away.
And then, she says, oh, he has gone away. And she becomes so agonised. She is,
you know, I spoke so much about Krishn..., so bad about Krishna. I said that,
Krishna is a cheater. Krishna is a liar. I do not trust Krishna. And he will go
and say all this to Krishna. No. No. No. No. And you know, will, Lord Krishna
will get angry with me. And then, suddenly, the bumblebee appears again. And she
is overly good. You are very merciful. You have come back. You know. And tell
Krishna we always love whatever happens. Is He going to come back? And you know,
there is, the, Uddhava. Now, we might see this is just a mad woman who is
speaking such things. But Uddhava understands. He is the observer. And he
understands. What is the exaltedness of this level of obs..., option, obsession,
you know, in Krishna? And then, he says, oh, gopis, you are so exalted. He does
not pray to the gopis. But he prays to Krishna. He, that, my only aspiration is
that let me become a, you know, shrub, a h..., grass.

Just a part of the wilderness of Vrindavan so that the gopis, when they are
walking along, their feet will come on my head. And I will be blessed by their
head. So, this is the kind samadhi that a devotee is, can get by the progressive
spiritual advancement on the path of, you know, viraha bhakti in madhuri rasa
that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would, offering us. So, you know, this is the
ultimate Gaudiya siddhanta. And then, when a devotee is situated at thus, there
is nothing higher than can be given. And that is why, you know:

        yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ
        manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ

There is nothing more to be gained. You know, generally, the idea of religion is
that God is the giver. And we are the receivers. But, you know, it is nowhere,
in any religious tradition, is this kind of statement made as Lord Krishna makes
to the gopis. 

        na pāraye ’haṁ

Krishna says to the gopis that, actually, the service that you have rendered to
me, I have become so indebted that I cannot give you anything. Cannot give you
anything. Even if I try to repay you for entire lifetime of Brahma, I will not
be able to give you anything. That is the supreme exalted level of the love of
the gopis for Krishna. And that is the kind of samadhi that we will get as we
steadily practice devotional service. And ultimately, come to the level of
perfection in the practice of yoga service. So:

        yadā viniyataṁ cittam
        ātmany evāvatiṣṭhate
        nispṛhaḥ sarva-kāmebhyo
        yukta ity ucyate tadā

"yadā viniyataṁ cittam". So, once one has controlled the senses. "viniyataṁ
cittam". H..., h..., hmm, so, here "cittam" refers to consciousness. So, it can
be the mind. It can be the, basically, subtle body. "yadā viniyataṁ cittam".
Then, "ātmany evāvatiṣṭhate". So, once one has regulated sentence..., and, one
can, senses, you know, sorry, the m..., consciousness, the mind. Then, "ātmany
evāvatiṣṭhate". One becomes situated at the level of the atma. "tiṣṭhate". To
s..., be situated. And the person is "nispṛhaḥ". "spṛhaḥ" is desire. "nispṛhaḥ"
is no desires. "sarva-kāmebhyo". Having no hankering for any desires. So:

        nispṛhaḥ sarva-kāmebhyo
        yukta ity ucyate tadā

Such a person is "yukta". "yukta" is well-situated. Now, it is interesting,
Krishna has used the word "yukta" in the previous verse, also. And then, he
says:

        yuktāhāra-vihārasya
        yukta-ceṣṭasya karmasu

So, there is another meaning of that word, "yukta". You know. "yukta" can, as we
said, there, Prabhupada translates "yukta" as regulated. And here, Prabhupada
translates well-situated in yoga. Now, as we know, the word "yukta" is connected
with the word yoga. So, yoga. Yogi. Yukta. So, yukta means connected. So,
another way to understand the previous verse. And then, we understand this
verse, is that Krishna is telling while eating, while sleeping:

        yuktāhāra-vihārasya
        yukta-ceṣṭasya karmasu
        yukta-svapnāvabodhasya

So, in that verse, that means while eating, while doing recreation, while doing
work, while doing, you know, you know, various activities, one be yukta. One be
yukta. So, this yukta is, you know, can be non-regulated. It can also mean
connected. So, of, that means, this verse, the previous verse can also mean that
if while doing all of one's activities, one stays connected with the Absolute
Truth. Then, by such practice, "yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā". By such practice of
yoga, where the yoga is not just a part-time activity, that yoga is a full-time
activity. Yogi does not stop "āhāra", does not pap..., "āhāra", does not stop
"svapna". These are basic bodily requirements which have to be done. But while
doing all these activities, one stays yukta. One stays connected. One stays
focused on the Absolute Truth. So, for, you know, in the path of bhakti-yoga,
that would mean, we remember Krishna. So, whatever we are doing, when we
remember Krishna, then by that, what happens? By that, we stay purified. And,
you know, we do not get contaminated. And because we are staying connected with
Krishna. We still become, stay purified. And we become further purified. And we
become, you know, free from all desire. "yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā". And then,
Krishna is telling in this verse, what do we need to do to be yukta? You know,
so, if we want to stay connected with Krishna. We want to stay spiritually
conscious. Yukta. Then, we have to do this, this, co..., these things. What?
What is this? 

        yadā viniyataṁ cittam
        ātmany evāvatiṣṭhate

Yes, we are doing eating. We are doing sleeping. But all those t..., times, you
know, we are "viniyataṁ cittam". The consciousness is controlled. And it is
directed towards the, you know, Absolute Truth. So, Krishna is, so, there, the
direction to the Absolute Truth is talked about by yukta. And Krishna says, when
can we be yukta? When while doing the worldly activities, we are "nispṛhaḥ
sarva-kāmebhyo". So, we engage in the worldly activities. But a devotee,
Prabhupada writes in the purport, a devotee engages the senses without arousing
sensual desires. Without arousing sensual desires. So, m..., that means that the
sensual desires are the problem. We can eat. But it is not necessary that while
eating, we have to become agitated by sensual desires. If we are contemplating
on Krishna. And thinking this is Krishna's prasadam. Then, revelation, Krishna
prasad, need, no..., nor does not have to stimulate, ar..., arouse o..., our
spiri..., immerse sensual desires. It can actually elevate us. So, Krishna is
saying, "nispṛhaḥ sarva-kāmebhyo". Whatever activities we do, we do not let, you
know, ourselves become agitated by desires. And one can, one do like this, then
one can stay fixed in the situation of yukta. One will stay engaged. Connected.
And how can one do this? Prabhupada again quotes what he has quoted in 2.61
purport. It is a set of verses from 9.4.18-20. So, how the, how "Ambarīṣa
Mahārāja" fixes his mind on Krishna by engaging all the senses in Krishna's
service. And we discussed this earlier. Now, Prabhupada makes a very interesting
point here.

"This transcendental stage may be inexpressible subjectively by the followers of
the impersonalist path, but it becomes very easy and practical for a person in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness,"

So, what does it mean? Inexpressible subjectively. So, when the impersonalists
are asked, what is the happiness in impersonal realisation? Ultimately, the idea
is we have to silence all our emotions. Ultimate existence is devoid of any
positive activity, any relationships, any emotions. And what is the happiness?
Then, they say, actually, this happiness is "anirvachaniya". It is beyond words.
It is inexpressible. So, actually, it is not only inexpressible. It is also, in
some, in many ways, inexperienceable. Because the happiness of impersonal
realisation is very small happiness compared to the happiness of devotional
realisation. And it is very, very difficult just to detach oneself from matter
without connecting oneself to Krishna. That is why it is a very arduous process.
It is arduous process. And it does not necessarily lead to, you know, very
satisfactory results. So, on the other hand, Prabhupada says, for a devotee, it
is very easy and practical. Easy means, yes, actually, engaging the senses in
Krishna's service is easy. It is practical. It is not that we just have to think
of something abstract. You know, for the impersonalist, the only thing to think
is that there is nothing to think. The only thing to think is that there is
nothing to think. Because ultimately, everything is an illusion. For not just
everything is illusion. But even our thoughts are illusions. So, then, what do
we do? No. Hmm. Actually, we have to think about Krishna. The only thing to talk
for the impersonalist says there is nothing to talk. The only thing to do is
that there is nothing to do. And for many of these impersonalists, the only
ananda is in their name. And their ananda ends with their name. So, actually,
this is the unfortunate predicament. That they are definitely, see, brahmanan is
some kind of anandan. It is actually heave..., a, higher than svyarganand. But
when compared to bhakti ananda. In the Nectar of Devotion, we will study, how
there is a hierarchy in the various levels of happiness. And the happiness of
devotional service is far greater as compared to other forms of happiness. So,
Prabhupada explains:

"Simple abnegation is not practical."

Simple abnegation, what, simply abne..., abnegation means not s..., saying no.
No. No. It is not practical. It will not work. And Prabhupada says that:

"transcendental engagement of the senses and the mind as described above is the
perfect process for transcendental achievement,"

and:

"which is called yukta in the Bhagavad-gītā."

So, here, Prabhupada uses the word "yukta". In the previous ver..., so, here, we
see, context specific explanations of the word. Prabhupada in the previous verse
said yukta refers to, means, regulated. We should be regulating eating,
sleeping, m..., but then, he says, here, yukta means, actually, you know, the,
engaged in the perfect process for transcendental achievement. So, that means
the word yukta has two aspects. To be well-situated, we have to be connected
with the Absolute Truth. And connection with the Absolute Truth means regulation
of the interaction with the worldly objects. You know, and regulation in our
worldly activities. So, in 18, you know, in 17, yukta refers to that regulation
aspect. And in 18, it refers to the connection aspect. So, both are there in
yukta. You know. Let us look at the next verse. So, how is this possible?
Somebody may ask that engaging worldly activities, won't I get a, worldly
desires? So, Krishna uses example how this will not happen.

        yathā dīpo nivāta-stho
        neṅgate sopamā smṛtā
        yogino yata-cittasya
        yuñjato yogam ātmanaḥ

So, "yathā dīpo nivāta-stho". "dīpaḥ" is a lamp. And "vāta" is wind. Air. You
know, in body, also, we have se..., kapha, vata, pitta. So, vata is the air
element in the body. So, "nivāta-stho" means that there is no wind. So, when in
an illumina..., when in a l..., area where there is a lamp. But there is no
wind. "na", "iṅgate". Then, the flame will not flicker. The flame will stay
steady. "sā", "upamā", "smṛtā". Similarly, as a "upamā". As an analogy is given,
"smṛtā", it is given. What is it? "yogino yata-cittasya". The yogi, whose
"citta" is controlled. Whose mind is controlled. "yuñjato yogam ātmanaḥ". So,
for the yogi, whose mind is controlled, the consciousness stays focused on the
atma. That means, hmm, hmm, actually, you know, the point is that it is not
necessary that when a flame is there, the flame has to flicker. When the flame
is present in the place where there is no wind. The flame will not flicker. So,
the flame is, here, refer to the consciousness. So, unflickering flame is
referring to the undeviating consciousness. The consciousness is fixed on the
atma. So, I am the soul. I am a, I am, I have a, in the, bhakti-yogi further
thinks that I have a relationship with Krishna. And I have to fix the mind on
Krishna. The ashtanga-yogi has not yet realised the relationship with Krishna.
He will think. I am atma. And I have to realise myself as atma. So, fixes the
consciousness on atma-tattva. "yuñjato yogam ātmanaḥ". Kee..., by yoga, keeps
situated on the atma-tattva platform. "yogino yata-cittasya". So, that means
what causes our consciousness to flicker is material desires. So, Krishna does
not use the word material desires explicitly over here. But the wind is material
desires. As we said, as we can infer from the "nispṛhaḥ sarva-kāmebhyo" in the
previous verse. So, when material desires are not there, then the consciousness
stays fixed. And when material desires are there, the consciousness gets
agitated. And in, anyways, we can see this in the eyes of people. You know,
people who are materialistic, their eyes are restless. Always looking here.
Looking there. The eyes are like radars seeking sensual objects. Where can I see
something good? And if they are not f..., filled with d..., desire, they are
filled with anxiety. This may go on. That may go on. You know. As compared to
that, a saint's eyes are often very peaceful. Very calm. You know. Moving one
direction. Focus on that. Moving another direction. Focus on that. They are
alert. But not restless. So, you know, you know, w..., actually speaking, we
see, Prabhupada was fast. He would do things so, he would do so many things
throughout the day. How much he achieved single-handedly, you know, is re...
remarkable. But Prabhupada was fast without being passionate. Prabhupada would
do things very calmly. And somebody would bring a cheque to sign, Prabhupada
would have a case for a pen. And he would take the pen out of the case. Then,
remove the lid of the pen. Cover of the pen. Then, sign it. You know, he would,
he would, Prabhupada would never appear as he was pressed for time. You know.
Rushing. You know. R..., rushing one, one place, rushing one place.. He would
never appear pressed for time. But still, you know, because, his consciousness
was fixed. He was able to do so many things. One thing. Second thing. Third
thing. Fourth thing. You know. Fixed. And therefore, he was very productive. So,
on, so, for most of us, you know, we are passionate without being fast. That
means what?

We are passionate. Oh, I have to do that. I have to do that. I have to do that.
But actually, the amount of work that we get done is very little. Although we
seem to be always busy, always running here and there. But the amount of work we
get done is less, often. Why is that? Because the mind is restless. And when the
mind is restless, then even when we try to work, the work's productivity is not
to go. And that is why what we do one time, that we have to undo it. Oh, this is
not well-done. I have to do it that way. Then, I have to do it that way. And as
we keep undoing things like this, undoing and redoing things, it increases our
work load. That is why the morning sadhana time, when we purify ourselves, when
we calm ourselves done. After that, when we focus, then we are able to do things
much more productively. Much more productively. Why? Because then we are able to
focus on the principle of the Absolute Truth being the ultimate goal. The
ultimate sustainer. The ultimate, you know, m..., protector. And then, we
understand, ok, whatever is happening is under the control of the Absolute
Truth. And I am ultimately meant to serve that Absolute Truth. That brings
calmness. And that calmness enables us to do activity intensely. Intensely means
with attention. And with focus. So, for, as devotees, you know, there is the wind
of material desires. And material desires along with it, they bring material
anxieties. The greater our desires, the greater will be anxieties. So, material
desires and material anxieties, they agitate us. Now, if we are, can keep our
mind fixed. Then, we can do so much more. So, this is the whole purpose of
sadhana. Sadhana makes our consciousness "nivāta-stho". Without the mind of
material desires. And then, we can become fixed and more productive. So, here,
Krishna is giving this example that fix the mind on one place. And He is saying,
for that, stay away from material desires. So, if there are no material desires,
then even if one does activities, you know, even if there are worldly activities
in the sense that they, they involve interaction with worldly objects. Still, we
will not get agitated. Now, Krishna will give the description of samadhi. Wh...,
how one attains perfection. And what is the vision of the person who has
attained perfection. A very beautiful set of verses. These are the most, you
know, thrilling description of samadhi that is there in the Bhagavad Gita. Let
us look at it. So, Prabhupada combines three and a half verses into one
narrative. Into one purport. Let us look at them.

	yatroparamate cittaṁ
	niruddhaṁ yoga-sevayā
	yatra caivātmanātmānaṁ
	paśyann ātmani tuṣyati

So, "yatra". "yatra" means in this stage. Which stage? When a person has become
"yukta". And one has become situated in transcendence. So, "uparamate".
"uparamate" means vir..., a, to, like, we have, in nish..., in ni..., we have
the word "viram". "viram" means to stop. "uparamate" means stop. At that time,
what is stopped? "yatra", "uparamate". "cittam". "cittam" means consciousness.
"cittam". And then, how is it con..., stopped? "niruddhaṁ yoga-sevayā". By the
practice of yoga, "yoga-sevayā". "niruddhaṁ". "niruddhaṁ" mean cessation.
Stoppage. So, we discussed earlier the five levels of mind control. So, you
know, mudha, kshipta, vikshipta, then, hmm, you know, ekagrata and niroddha. So,
Krishna is here talking about the fifth level. So, ekagrata means concentrated.
And niroddha means absorbed. So, Krishna is telling what happens. "niruddhaṁ
yoga-sevayā". "niruddhaṁ". One has become passive. One has controlled the mind.
And then, what happens? "yatra caivātmanātmānaṁ". And then, at that stage,
"yatra caivā". "ātmanā". One turns the mind inwards. "ātmanātmānaṁ". The
purified mind turns inwards. And perceives the self. And "paśyann ātmani
tuṣyati". "ātmani tuṣyati". One delights within. So, Krishna is saying that
the "cittaṁ"s, external activities stop. And then, the "cittaṁ" turns inwards.
And then, turns inwards. And not only turns inwards. But delights inwards. So,
here, we need to understand the difference between "cit" and "cittaṁ". "citt"
is 'C', 'I', 'T'. And "citta" is 'C', 'I', 'T', 'T', A'. This is the r..., t...,
this will be in English. So, "cit", consciousness is the original faculty of the
soul. That is always there. Like we have sat, cit, ananda. This is one of three
attributes. Defining attributes of the soul. So, consciousness is an innate
energy, innate faculty of the soul. That is always there. On the other hand,
"citta" refers to the consciousness that is rooted within material energy. "cit"
is original spiritual consciousness of the soul. "citta" is consciousness rooted
in material energy. So, to give an example of this. Suppose, somebody is
watching a movie. And that person has an original consciousness by which that
person can look, see, look around, ok, these are other people sitting over
here. There is another audience. And I am sitting on a chair. This is a movie
theater. Above, there is a roof. Below, there is a floor. So, this is, this
capacity to be aware of the world around, we can say, this is like, there is the
soul is sitting. That is "cit". But once the movie starts. And the person starts
getting absorbed in the movie. Then, the person's whole experience gets centered
on the, you know, events that are happening in the movie. And the emotions that
come from them. So, the consciousness of the spectator when focused on the
screen. And on the events on the screen, that is like "citta". You know. So,
"cit" is the, the soul's original awareness. "citta" is the soul's awareness
rooted into matter. So, the original soul has nothing to do with sensual
enjoyment. Because soul is spiritual. The things of this world are material. But
when the soul's consciousness is rooted into matter. And caught in matter. Then,
the soul gets entangled. Soul gets, you know, distracted. So, that entangled
consciousness is called as "citta". So, "yatroparamate cittaṁ". That means, that
"cittaṁ", the consciousness' entanglement in matter stops acting thereof. That
means the person stops watching the movie.

        yatroparamate cittaṁ

And then, once, one stops watching the movie, one stops getting captivated
by the movie, then one can come out of, of the days. Oh, what am I doing?  Ok. I
am sitting on this chair. I did not realise itself. Sometimes, people are
watching in a movie. And they see the hero fighting. And then, they are
fighting. Tuck. They hit their neighbor. You know. And the neighbor gets angry.
Tuck. They hit back. Aaa..., what happened? So, what happens to them is they are
jolted out, out of their, you know, after of their trance-like state. So, m...,
m..., s..., actually, sometime, the shocks of life. Or sometime, the, our own
philosophical enquiry. We will discuss in the fourth cha..., seventh chapter,
how, the four reasons why people come to Krishna. Four impetuses why people come
to Krishna. So, either way, that "niruddhaṁ". That means the absorption of the
consciousness in matter stops. And then, the person is able to turn around. And
then, so, "yatra caivātmanātmānaṁ". The pu..., impure mind wants to focus on
matter. The pure mind wants to turn away and focus on God. Focus on the Absolute
Truth. So, "niruddhaṁ yoga-sevayā". So, by yoga, this is what happens. Our
connection with illusion decreases. And our connection with reality increases.
And then, "yatra caivātmanātmānaṁ". Then, within the atma, one sees "paśyann
ātmani tuṣyati". One becomes joyful within. Joyful within. And then, what
happens after that?

        sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad
        buddhi-grāhyam atīndriyam
        vetti yatra na caivāyaṁ
        sthitaś calati tattvataḥ

So, "sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad". "ātyantikaṁ", "sukham" means the ultimate
happiness. So, at that time, one gets its happiness. "buddhi-grāhyam
atīndriyam". So, one perceives that happiness with, it is, Krishna is telling
over here, "atīndriyam". So, it is not involving the senses. Generally, people
think of happiness means senses have to involved. The senses are enjoyed, then
we get enjoyment. But Krishna is saying, it is just "ātyantikaṁ". It is
"atīndriyam". It is ultimate happiness. And it is far beyond the senses. And
then, "vetti yatra na caivāyaṁ". "sthitaś calati tattvataḥ". Once one is
situated in this happiness, one never leaves. One never departs from this
happiness. So, here, Krishna is describing that this ha..., ultimate happiness
is so rich. So deep. So fulfilling that one does not want anything else. One
becomes situated in that happiness. And one is forever satisfied in that
happiness. And then, Krishna further says, what is the characteristic of this,
this happiness? Because of which, one will never leave it? You know. Generally,
in this pa..., place, which world, whatever we get, we want something more. So,
why is it that after achieving this, after being situated "yatra", "caivā"? One
is situated here. "yatra na caivāyaṁ". One will not "calati". He, Krishna will
talk. Arjuna will talk later in this chapter itself how the mind is chinchilla.
Chinchilla means going round, and round, and round. But Krishna is telling over
here, "na", "calati". S..., "na caivāyaṁ". "sthitaś calati tattvataḥ". There
will be no "calati" that will happen. The mind will not move here and there. So,
why? That He describes in the next verse.

        yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ
        manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ
        yasmin sthito na duḥkhena
        guruṇāpi vicālyate

So, "yaṁ labdhvā". Having attained this. "cāparaṁ lābhaṁ". Some greater love.
So, having gained this to think that this is some greater. "manyate nādhikaṁ
tataḥ". One does not think that there is any greater happiness. "yasmin sthito
na duḥkhena". Once, one is situated thus. One situate..., then, no matter how
great the misery. "guruṇāpi vicālyate". Even the greatest misery does not
agitate the person. "na". "vicālyate". So, in, this is, this actually gives us
two characteristics of real success. Let us look at these. What is greatest
achievement in life? This is described in the 6.23. That which takes us beyond
hankering. Which is mentioned in A and B.

        yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ
        manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ

And that which takes us beyond lamenting. That which is, it is, it is in next
part.

        yasmin sthito na duḥkhena
        guruṇāpi vicālyate

So, what does this mean? See, anything that we achieve in this world, it keeps
us vulnerable to these two things. Hankering. And lamentation. Lamenting.
Because why? No matter how much I achieve, I always hanker. Let me get this,
also. Let me get this, also. Let me get this, also. So, even if I become the
wealthiest person in the country, I want to become the wealthiest person in the
world. If I want to become the wealthiest person in the world. I want to become
the wealthiest person in the history of the world, also. And like that, it just
keeps going on and on. And there is n..., hankering. You know. It is infinite.
It never ends. Because it never ends, therefore, it keeps us always hankering.
Now, all of us, if we look in our own hearts, we all have our definitions of
success. We may think, ok, if I just get a job in that company. Or if I get just
salary of this much. Or if my, my child becomes an engineer. Or if I get a big
enough house. We all have our definitions of success. And, you know, in our
material life, we do want to have some goals. And we can move forward towards
achieving those goals. But if we let all our ambitions get sucked into that
itself. Then, we miss out on something far higher that life is going to offer
us. So, most people may think there is nothing higher that life is going to
offer. But there has to be. See, we want perennial fulfillment. Lasting
fulfillment. But none of the goals that we have set for ourselves will give us
lasting fulfillment. Why is that? Because even if we achieve those goals, what
is going to happen? We achieve them. And after that, you know, we will want
something more. You know, I get the dream house that I want. And after that, I
want a bigger house. And a still bigger house. Where will this end? Actually, it
will not end anywhere. It will just go on and on. Therefore, we have to be
steady. Hankering. Hankering is always going to be there. But when we achieve
samadhi. So, when we achieve, for a devotee, samadhi is ultimately love of
Krishna. When we achieve the perfection of love for Krishna. Then, at that time,
there is no more hankering. There is complete satisfaction. Perpetual
satisfaction. The achievement of love for Krishna is something which will
totally and eternally satisfy us. It will free us from a..., all hankerings. And
not only that. The second aspect is lamenting. You know, even if some pers...,
person becomes successful. And becoming the world's wealthiest person. Even the
wealthiest person of the history of the world, say, still, does that person will
be free from hankering? No. All that is going to be just taken away. At the time
of death, or maybe even before that. And when all of that is ripped away, that
person is going to hanker, lament tremendously. In fact, you know, the more we
achieve, the more we possess, the more we enjoy in this world, you know, if we
do not have a spiritual conception of life. Then, the greater is the sense of
our loss when we lose everything. No. I worked so hard. I got so much. And now,
everything is ripped away from me in one merciless moment. You know. That kind
of death is there. Or it can be gradually our faculties themselves go away. Hmm.
You know. So, there is lament..., that person may become the president of
America. But if then, after that, the president may get some dis..., person may
get s..., like Alzheimer's or Parkinson's. And that person just forgets that I
was a president, also. Forgets who I am. You know. All of us have forgotten who
I am. I am. In an absolute spiritual sense. But we try to str..., build up a
material identity in this world. But the nature of this material world, they say
that, even that material identity can be taken away from us. We left with
nothing. We lost our spiritual identity. We lose our material identity, also.
Such things can happen. So, actually, whatever one achieves, one is always
vulnerable to lamentation. Always vulnerable to lamentation. You know.

And it is not just a possibility. It is a certainty. In material life,
lamentation is not a question of if. It is a question of when. It is not a
question of if whether we will have to lament or not. It is just a question of,
it is a question of when we will have to lament. All of us will have to lament.
But once we achieve love for Krishna, then there is absolutely no lamentation.
There is eternal happiness. Because love for Krishna, once it is achieved in the
heart, it will never ever be taken away from us. It will forever be there with
us. And it will forever give us ecstasy. So, that is why we may have various
conceptions of achievement in our life. But Bhagavad Gita sh..., gives us the
highest standard of achievement. That that which, that achievement which freezes
us from all hankering. And freeze us from all lamenting. That is life's supreme
achievement. "guruṇāpi vicālyate". No matter how great the misery, the devotee
is not disturbed. Because the devotee has Krishna. And Krishna is the ultimate
source of greatest choice. There is nothing higher to be achieved if one has
achieved Krishna. And then, Krishna describes further:

        taṁ vidyād duḥkha-saṁyoga-
        viyogaṁ yoga-saṁjñitam

"tam vidyad". Know this, oh, Arjuna. "duhkha-samyoga-". All of us have made
contact with "duhkha". All of us have become entangled with "duhkha". "samyoga".
"viyogam". "viyogam" means separation. So, all of us have got contact with
"duhkha". But there is "viyogam". "viyogam yoga-samjñitam". "yoga-samjñitam"
means this kind of, you know, "viyogam" from, m..., "duhkha" is actually called
the perfection of yoga. "yoga-samjñitam". So, yoga can, at sadhana stage, refer
to the practices that we do. And the perfection stage, it refers that when we
are connected with the Absolute Truth. Then, that leads to "viyogam" from
"duhkha". "viyogam yoga-samjñitam". So, no more this, oh, Arjuna. This is the
ultimate achievement of life. Now, you are thinking that, oh, if you fight this
war, then your relatives will be killed. And then, there will be so much
lamentation for you. But do not think that just by the avoiding fighting, you
will avoid lamentation. Ultimately, lamentation will come on everyone. You know.
But if you connect with the Absolute Truth. If you attain samadhi, that will
f..., that, actually, Arjuna, is yoga. That is "viyogam". That is "viyogam" from
"duhkha-samyoga-". Contact with misery will be freed from it. See, the material
world, trying to be free from misery is like trying to be in an ocean and avoid
getting wet. You just cannot do it. You know. We might try to move here. Move
there. But as water everywhere, how much can we avoid? So, like that, in this
material world, we just cannot avoid misery. No matter how much we try. So, it
will come. But when we are taken out of this material world, taken back to the
spiritual world. Then, "duhkha-samyoga-viyogam". There will be "viyogam" from
all "duhkha". And that is, so, Krishna has talked about samadhi in two ways now.
One way is in terms of liberation from misery. And the another is, from contact
with happiness. And that is how:

        sukham atyantikam yat tad
        buddhi-grahyam atindriyam

He has said. Now, let us look at a little bit more of this concept. How this
works. So, there are now, m..., yeah. There are two ways of deli..., dealing
with emotions on the path of transcendence. So, in dhyana-yoga, one, what does
one? One silences and stops all material emotions. In bhakti-yoga, one does the
same thing. But by kindling spiritual emotions. That means what? Material
emotions are the cause of misery. And one has to give up material emotions. Come
what may. But how does one give up material emotions? That varies according to
time, place, circumstance. Or rather, according to the path that one is
practicing. So, when in ashtanga-yoga, you know, you know, in the path of
ashtanga-yoga, Patanjali, it has not described about positive spiritual emotions,
much. There is some indication of it. But not much positive description. So,
"chitta-vritti-nirodha". "chitta-vritti" is the moment of consciousness. So, he
describe what is perfection. What is samadhi. "chitta-vritti". The tendency of
the consciousness. What is that? To go towards material things. You remember,
"chitta" is the consciousness that goes inside ma..., in, ma..., matter,
conditioned consciousness. So, "nirodha". Stopping that. Krishna has used the
word "niruddham" over here. So, "chitta-vrit...", "yogas chitta vritti nirodha".
So, the perfection of yoga is to check the "vritti" of the consciousness towards
to go into matter. That is, so, in the, in the path of yoga, the whole focus is
on m..., cutting down. On eliminating material emotions. But in the path of
bhakti-yoga, that same result is achieved. But something more is achieved by a
different process. We kindle spiritual emotions. And by that, material emotions
go away. So, a devotee, you know, becomes attracted to Krishna. And when the
heart is filled with love for Krishna. And the desire to serve Krishna. And
glorify Krishna. The g..., material desires find no room in such a heart. You
know. Generally, for example, say, when an Indian, or any person from any of the
Third World countries goes to America. America is a land of dreams. And they
say, oh, I will go there. And I will enjoy over there. But when Srila Prabhupad
went there, you know, what was his emotion? His heart was so filled with
spiritual desires that he had, there is no room for material desires at all. He
did not think that America is a place of enjoyment. And I will enjoy over there.
He simply thought, oh, this place is filled with souls who are forgetful of
Krishna. And they are suffering because of forgetfulness of Krishna. So, let me
remem..., remind them. Let me re..., help them remember. Let me give them
Krishna. And Prabhupada prayed to Krishna over there. That please allow me to,
a, turn, towards them. To return to them. So, this was Prabhupada's compassion.
And this compassion was based on a profound spiritual vision. You see, his heart
was filled with spiritual desires. And he saw everything spiritually. So, when
those spiritual desires are activated, automatically, material desires get
eliminated. And that is the process of bhakti-yoga. So, in bhakti-yoga, our
focus is not on rejecting the negative. Our focus is on taking on the positive.
And that is why in bhakti-yoga, the focus has to be on, not just giving up
desires. It has to be on taking up desires. You know. Prabhupada, certainly, he,
he gave up material desires in terms of, terms of taking sannyasa. But what
distinguished Prabhupada among all his godbrothers. Many of his godbrothers were
illustrious. You know. They helped. We should not have a too negative attitude.
All they fought. And broke up the Gaudiya Math. Or something like that. You
know. But before that, when they were under, serving under spiritual master. You
know, th..., they helped Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur build 64 Gaudiya
Maths. And they, many of them were powerful preachers. And, of course, lifelong,
they stayed devoted to Srila Prabhupada, to Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur,
Srila Prabhupada, also. But among all the disciples of Sri..., Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur, what distinguished Srila Prabhupada was,
th..., his spiritual desires. You know. He took up the desire to share Krishna
Consciousness with the world far more seriously. Far more fearlessly. Far more
tirelessly than did anyone else. So, what defines Srila Prabhupada was not the
absence of material desires. That is definitely there. But what defined him, as
distinctive, as unique, was presence of spiritual desire. The desire to glorify
to Krishna. The desire to love and, you know, sh..., love Krishna not just by
meditating in Vrindavan. But the desire to love Krishna by sharing that message
of Krishna with the whole world. And it was that desire that animated Prabhupada
even when his body was old and sickly. That is how he was constantly preaching
Krishna Consciousness to the whole world. So, it is that desire. That is the
perfection of life. And that is the perfection that bhakti-yoga offers us. So,
we will c...

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
