Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=slk8nT5tj68
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_085_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_06_Text_33_to_36_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=slk8nT5tj68&event=video_description&redir_token=H8fDGOdpbgnmH8bBidNis84heNl8MTU0ODQ4ODMyMkAxNTQ4NDAxOTIy

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the Sixth Chapter. Where we are studying the concerns of Arjuna about
practicing ashtanga-yoga. So, we discussed several verses. Yesterday, about
progressive realisations. Let us have a quickly, recap of those verses. And
their thought flow. Yes. So, in the progressive realisation of the Absolute
Truth. The verses 27 and 28 talk about Brahman realisation. M..., then verse 29
talks about Paramatma realisation. Verse 30 to 31 talks about Bhagavan
realisation. So, 27-28, a, 27-28 talking:

        sukhena brahma-saṁsparśam
        atyantaṁ sukham aśnute

Then, 29 talk about:

        sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ

That all living beings are situated at the spiritual level. And 30 and 31, the
word "māṁ" comes very clearly.

        yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra

And:

        sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ yo māṁ
        bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥ

So, in both cases, the "māṁ" is coming with, explicitly. And that is why we can
understand that this is referring to the Bhagavan realisation. And then, 32
gives the conclusion that one should see all living beings equally based on
their spiritual, you know, equality as parts of Krishna. As, you know,
absolu..., as a, particles of the Absolute Truth depending on the, you know,
what is the level of realisation of the yogi. Now, one thing we have to
understand here, when we say this verse refers to Brahman realisation. This
refers to Paramatma realisation. This refers to Bhagavan realisation. Actually,
you know, the names, Brahman, Paramatma, and Bhagavan, they are used
interchangeably within the Vedic literature. This is an important concept to
understand. That there is, h..., there are names. Or there are terms. And there
are concepts. So, just like in the Bhagavatam, we will see that in the
beginning, it says, Krishna is the source of all incarnations. In one, you know,
in the Third Can..., a, Chapter of the First Canto.

        kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

That makes it clear over there. But afterwards, the Bhagavatam uses the terms
Krishna and Vishnu interchangeably. So, even in the pastime of Prahlad Maharaja,
the name Krishna may come. Krishna g..., griha..., grihastatma. And, a, there,
Vishnu name also come. And eventually, Nrsimhadeva may appear. Nrsimhadeva
appears. So, after giving a technical classification of the terms. Then, it is
not that the Bhagavatam, because it involves multiple speakers, multiple
context, multiple threads of conversation. The terms may not always be used in
the same technical sense everywhere. So, in one sense, we have a technical
differentiation between Krishna and m..., m..., Vishnu. Krishna is the source of
all incarnations. But then, after making that one point, the Bhagavatam for all
practical purposes uses the terms interchangeably. So, even the Rasa
Panchadhyayi section, the term Krishna, you know, Govinda. These are the terms
which are used. Names which are used. But then, at the end, Vishnu is used. So,
the point here is that these n..., we should understand that con..., names,
c..., the terms and concepts. You know. So, concepts are intellectual terms are
verbal. And they are both tools for comprehension. So, they are what? Tools for
comprehension. Tools for gaining a deeper understanding. Now, when we use terms.
And we use concepts. We are all trying to gain an understanding of the deeper
Absolute Truth. And, you know, these terms may not always be used, you know, in
the same sense. And as at all times. Just like, you know, when Krishna may be
used to refer to Vishnu. And Vishnu may be used to refer to Krishna. Although,
there is a technical differentiation, in a normal conversation sense, it is not
that the technical differentiation will always be s..., a, always be adhered to.
So, similaly, when the words Brahman, Paramatma, and Bhagavan are used,
sometimes, the word Brahman may also be used to refer to the Absolute Truth in
the personal aspect. And, you know, the word Paramatma may also be used to refer
to the Absolute Truth in the personal aspect. Krishna may be referred to as
Brahm..., Paramatma. Krishna may be referred to as Brahma. We see Vishnu
Sahasranama. It is not that Vishnu is always be referred to as Bhagavan, only.
Vishnu may be used to refer to as Brahma, also. As Paramatma, also. So, the
point is, we have to, you know, with, when we want to look at the meanings of
words, we have to understand the broad philosophy and the specific context. And
then, we can understand what this word refers to. So, we have to understand,
first the overall philosophical message. What is the message? And then, we have
to look at the specific context. And then, we understand. Ok. This is the term
that is used. And in this term, in this context, this term means this. The
scriptures have to be understood always in context. The text and the context are
integrally related. If we separate the two, then we will not get proper
understanding. So, text and context have to be brought together. Now, Brahman.
Paramatma. Bhagavan. These are progressive levels of realisation. You know. You
know. We understand this from the understanding of what the word Brahman means.
What the word Paramatma means. So, Brahman means all-pervasive, pervading. You
know. Non-personal effulgence of the Absolute Truth. Then, m..., m..., Paramatma
refers to the localised, you know, m..., m..., localised manifestation of the
Absolute Truth. And Bhagavan refers to the all-attractive transcendental person.
All three are transcendental. All three are spiritual. And this is the te..., a,
when one pursues a particular level. Then, one is at a Brahman level. When one
perceives the next level, one is at Paramatma level. One pursues the complete
Absolute Truth, that is the Bhagavan level.

So, in these verses 28, you know, 27-28, which talks about Brahman. 29 talks
about Paramatma. 30-31 talks about Bhagavan. The point is that the yogi is
moving higher and higher in spiritual realisation. So, these verses can be
interpreted differently. And different acharyas will interpret in different ways
to, you know, develop the flow of thought. So, this is one way of looking at it.
Where we understand the progression systematically. Now, m..., when we talk
about different acharyas interpreting things differently. The point is that
Krishna's words can have unlimited import. Unlimited does not mean that any
and every import is right. Krishna's words have unlimited import. But
ultimately, Krishna's message has a conclusion. And whatever import is in
con..., consistency with that conclusion, we can use that. But whatever import
is not in consistency with that conclusion, that import will not be usable,
acceptable. Now, so, unlimited does not mean that, you know, even the mayavadis'
inpet..., interpretations are right. The interpretations have to be consistent
with the overall philosophical message. But once it is consistent, the words can
have different meanings. So, we are looking at a particular flow of thought.
Which is based on the acharyas' commentaries. No doubt. But, you know, as a, the
acharyas have different context. And they give different meanings. So, I do not
quote in my classes here. I am planning to write a book, eventually, where we
will talk more critically. More systematically. In the classes, we are thinking,
you know, the, we are c..., trying to get an overall understanding. Without
going too much into technical integrities. So, we are analysing a flow which
helps us to understand how the Bhagavad Gita's thought is evolving. So, Brahman.
Paramatma. And Bhagavan. The yogi moves forward. Higher. Higher. In the
realisations. Hmm. Hmm. So, so, the word "sama-darśanaḥ". As I mentioned, it was
used in 5.18. And it is used again in 6.29. So, "darśan" refers to direct sight.
Or it can refer to philosophical insight. It has both meanings. You know. When
we use the word "darśan". For, when we go and take "darśan" of the deities. That
time, we are referring to, h..., m..., direct sight. But it can also refer to
philosophical insight. When we, h..., actually take, a, when there are six
philosophical system. "ṣaḍdarśana", as they are called. So, philosophy is meant
to give us insight. So, i..., "darśan" can refer to both. And here, the word
"sama-darśanaḥ". That is used. Can result fro..., a, that, "sama-darśanaḥ",
equal vision can result from seeing the Supersoul. Or the soul. Or both. So, in
5.18, both are there. And 6.29 talks primarily about the Supersoul. So, 5.18
was:

        vidyā-vinaya-sampanne

That was the verse. Well-known verse. And one can see the Supersoul. And the
Supersoul. And, thereby, see with equal vision. The 6.29, it is primarily vision
of Supersoul that is there. Hmm. So, then, after that, now, 6.29, some peop...:

        sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ
        sarva-bhūtāni cātmani

You know. Does it support mayavada? Oh, the, one sees the Absolute Truth
everywhere. Actually, mayavada is much mo..., mayavada's propositions are much
more insidious than just a non-pers..., just a sense of oneness. A devotee also
has sense of oneness. What characterises mayavada is not just sense of oneness.
But also the sense that everything else is illusion. That there is only Brahman.
And tattva-traya. The jiva. Jagat. And Jagadish. All three are illusion. That is
the proposition of mayavada. That is offensive proposition. That is definitely
not supported by the Bhagavad Gita. Hmm. So, now, you know, let us look at where
all Krishna has been talked about, m..., in the Bhagavad Gita. So, there is a
lot over here. Till now, where all has Krishna come? Krishna has come, the
mention of Krishna has self-reference. "māṁ". Where all has it come in the
Bhagavad Gita? In the Sixth Chapter. In dhyana-yoga. In 6.14 and 15, it has
come.

        ... mac-citto
        yukta āsī...

        manaḥ saṁyamya mac-citto
        yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

This came in 6.14. So, there, it can refer to Krishna as the object of
meditation. It does not have to be the goal of meditation. What is the
difference between object and goal? What is the difference between object and
goal? You know. A student may have a ph..., you know, physics as the object of
study. But the goal of study is not physics. The goal of study is, maybe, the
student wants to go to America. And in America, the student wants to be
prosperous. Be famous. You know, know, get a lucrative job. So, that, physics
may not be the object of interest, primarily. The object of interest is, just,
you know, you know, money and fame. And physics is a tool to that. So, in the
process of yoga, the yogi can have two attitudes towards Krishna. One attitude
is that, Krishna is the Absolute Truth who is my goal. And the other is, Krishna
is the object of meditation. And eventually, by using this object of meditation,
I will get a hi..., go to a higher reality. So, it is not necessary. And:

        mat-saṁsthām adhigacchati

is talked about in 6.15. You know. 6.15 is:

        mat-saṁsthām adhigacchati

A..., so, attains my abode. Attains my position. That is the spiritual sky that
is talked about over there. Now, in 6.30, Krishna talks about:

        yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra
        sarvaṁ ca mayi paśyati

One who sees Me everywhere. And sees everything in Me. This is the culmination
of dhyana-yoga. So, ultimately, dhyana-yoga leads to samadhi. So, of course,
Srila Prabhupada, when he was correlating dhyana-yoga with, you know,
bhakti-yoga. He would generally quote 6.47. Which is very categorical. Among all
yogis, bhakti-yoga is th..., yoga is the highest. One who thinks about Me, that
is bhakti-yoga, is highest. So:

        yoginām api sarveṣāṁ
        mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

That is 6.47. We will come to later. But here, the point is, there is
culmination of dhyana-yoga. When Krishna is within that progression, He is
leading to bhakti-yoga. And, you know, then, after that, hmm, the significance
of 6.7..., 31 if you have to see, 6.29 says, sees all beings in the atma. 6.30
says, sees all beings in Me. That yogi. And then, the all-pervading one is equal
to me. So, the, who, seer is the yogi who is always situated in Me. That means,
what Krishna is telling that the person who is having the vision of 29 and the
vision of 30, they are the same. As first, we see all-pervading being as atma.
Here, atma refers to the Brahm..., Paramatma. You know. The, and then, He says
the Paramatma and I are the same. So, there is a progressive, progression over
here. Now, let us go to Arjuna's question. So, Arjuna is going to ask here.
M..., "yo ’yaṁ yogas tvayā proktaḥ". So:

        arjuna uvāca

        yo ’yaṁ yogas tvayā proktaḥ
        sāmyena madhusūdana
        etasyāhaṁ na paśyāmi
        cañcalatvāt sthitiṁ sthirām

So, "yo ’yaṁ". What You have told me, oh, oh, Krishna, this system, "yo ’yaṁ
yogas tvayā proktaḥ". What you have talked about me, "sāmyena". So, it has f...,
it focused on "sāmyena". Or oneness of perception. So, Krishna had talked about
"sama-darśanaḥ".

        sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ yo māṁ
        bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥ
        sarvathā vartamāno ’pi
        sa yogī mayi vartate

So, "sama". "sama" has come again and again. Equanimity. Equality of emotion and
perception. So, "etasyāhaṁ na paśyāmi". I do not see it. So, now, it is
interesting, Krishna uses the, Arjuna uses the word "paśyāmi". Krishna has used
the word "paśyāmi" just, you know, two verses earlier. This is 6.33. And three
verses earlier in 6.30. "yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra". I see everything. But Krishna
has used the same. Arjuna has used the same word. "etasyāhaṁ na paśyāmi". So,
Krishna is telling that, you are saying that I should be able to h..., have an
equal vision everywhere. So, I, I do not think it is possible for me. You know.
I cannot see like this. "etasyāhaṁ na paśyāmi". I cannot see everyone equally.
"cañcalatvāt sthitiṁ sthirām". "sthitiṁ sthirām". "cañcalatvāt". The mind is not
stable. It is not in a steady situation. It is in a restless situation.
"cañcalatvāt". It is constantly restless. So, now, Krishna is being told by
Arjuna, you are saying, I should see all living beings equally. But I do not
think I can see "Yudhiṣṭhira" and "Duryodhana" equally. I cannot see "Karṇa" and
"Bhīma" equally. I cannot see, m..., Shakuni and, you know, m..., people on my
side. I cannot see them equally. It is difficult. So, it is, it just seems
impractical to me. "yo ’yaṁ yogas tvayā proktaḥ". What You have spoken, so, we
see, Arjuna, you know, is expressing submission as well as, you know,
reservation. You know. Submission means I will do whatever you say. Reservation
means I cannot do what you say. So, we may say, how can both be there? Actually,
there is submission and reservation. Submission means yes, I am not saying what
you are saying is wrong. Say, when we say that, somebody, what somebody is
saying is wrong, that will be not, you know, that will be, you know, you know,
off..., that can be offensive. So, Kri..., Arjuna is not offensive. He is
submissive. He is expressing submission. Yes, what you are saying is ok. But it
is not practical for me. It is not possible for me. So, there is subm..., there
is submission. Yes. Oh, You have spoken this. But reservation is, I cannot do
this. So, it is interesting combination. Submission and reservation. And we see
this even in Dhruva Maharaja. When Narada Muni gives him two sets of
instructions. You know. F..., you know. Two levels. He is phase that you know,
i..., actually, a child, sometimes, you know, parents chastise the child. And
N..., Narada Muni tells this "Dhruva Maharaja ". You know. Sometimes, children
are in joking, also. They say this and that. And what happens within parents
and children is not to be taken too seriously. You could not a, a, just a small
thing. You could not sit on your father's lap. The next day, your father will
allow you to sit. And, you know, he says that, that is, child, children do not
take such things seriously. Children, sometimes, you know, when they quarrel,
sometimes, they say, "katti". You know. No. I am not going to talk with you. So,
when they say, I am not going to talk with you. And we will see, after three,
four days, all the children are playing together. Not just talking. But playing
happily together. So, he says, children do not take such things seriously. You
know. You know. What happens between children is not taken seriously. And he
says, if you think you are not a child. If you are grown-up. If truly grown-up.
Not just physically. But also spiritually. Then, you should know for such
people. You know. Honor and dishonor is the same. So, even if you are going
dishonored, do not bother about it. You know. Treat honor and dishonor equally.

So, when, n..., Narada Muni tries to test, a, g..., Dhruva by checkmating him.
You know. If you are at this level, still, you should not take it seriously. If
you are at this level, you should not take it seriously. Then, what does, you
know, Dhruva Maharaja say? He is not Maharaja at that time. He is just a small
child, Dhruva, at that time. Five years old. So, what does he say? He just, you
know, he submi..., he is, expresses submission. But he also expresses
reservation. He says yes. But actually, I am in an intermediate stage. You know.
Our ksatriya blood is running within me. And because that ksatriya blood is
running, you know, I cannot tolerate insult. So, you know, just accepting it is
not possible for me. I need a way to get kingdom. I need a way to show father
and others that I can get a kingdom bigger than this. You know. What to speak of
sitting on the throne, on the lap of my father who is sitting on a throne. I
want a throne for a kingdom which is bigger than my father's. I do not want to,
you know, actually, it is, my idea was that you sit on a throne. The father
sitting on the throne. And the son sit on the lap of the father. Even that was
not allowed for me. But what I want is, I will sit on an exclusive throne for a
kingdom which is bigger than my father's. In fact, not just my father, my whole
dynasty. That is the only way the feeling of insult, the feeling of dishonor
that is burning my insides will be resolved. So, please tell me a way by which I
can. So, he accepts that you are, what you are, instructions are true. But I am
not at that level to follow the instructions. So, you know, sometimes, when the,
we are told, when you are given instructions. Just follow the instructions. It
is a good attitude to aspire for. But whether we can do that. You know. It is
not that Prabhu..., you know, we have to always put aside our intelligence when
we are given instructions. If you feel that this is not practical for me. Then,
we have the right to accept our, exp..., express our reservations. Sometimes, we
may hear in some classes, some devotee say, everybody should chant 64 rounds
every day. Now, yes, it is a good aspiration to chant 64 rounds. But it may not
be practical all the time. So, we have to, you know, Arjuna expresses realistic
reservations over here. See, our aspiration is very lofty. We want to be pure
devotees of Krishna. Constantly absorbing the remembrance of Krishna. So, we
want to go towards that. But how do we go towards that? See, in spiritual life,
there are the stars. And there are the stairs. The stars are what we aspire to
be. Stairs are the steps that we take to go there. The stars and the stairs. So,
you know, if we just look at the stars, then do not look at the stairs. Then, we
will never move up. We will just, oh, it is so high level up there. That is, that
is not. We, and if you look only at the stairs, and do not look at the stars.
Then, we may not feel inspiration. Oh, I can get there, also, just by doing one
step at a time. One step at a time. One step. I can eventually get there. Then,
so, we need the stars and the stairs. So, here, Kr..., Arjuna is expressing, a
re..., submissive reservation. He says "etasyāhaṁ na paśyāmi". He says I cannot
see this practical for me. It is not practical for me. Because the mind is
restless. "cañcalatvāt sthitiṁ sthirām". "cañcala". "cañcala" is restless. And
then, he will elaborate on this. You know. So, Prabhupada explains in the
purport that at, it was difficult even for Arjuna.

Now, some people may argue. You know. Prabhupada say, a, Prabhupada wr...,
writes at various places that there is no record of Arjuna having practiced the
system of ashtanga-yoga. Ever. Now, some people may say that, Arjuna, he went
into the forest. If you read the Mahabharata. And he would do meditation. For
example, he went to the, when he was in the Himalayas. Where he was doing
austerities so that he would please Lord Shiva. So, he was sitting in a yogic
asana. And he was doing, you know, you know, meditation. Or he was doing other
kinds of, you know, austerities. Which involved yogic meditation. So, we have to
understand that that is not ashtanga-yoga. See, sitting in a, sitting in a yogic
posi..., you know, pos..., asana, does not make a person yogi, necessarily. That
person has to be a, sitting in a yogic asana does not make a person a practiced
per..., in ashtanga-yoga. A devotee may also sit in a yogic asana. And, you
know, do other kinds of, do bhakti-yoga. So, when we see that in the
Mahabharata, Arjuna is sitting in a yogic posture. And meditating on Lord Shiva.
So that Lord Shiva will grant him weapons. And then, he wants to meditate on
Lord Andra, on Indra. So that Indra will give him weapons. That is in the
Vanvas. When the Pan..., Kauravas are there. Pandavas are in Vanvas at that
time. So, Arjuna's goal is not yogic meditation so that one can get samadhi. And
Brahman realisation. He is doing demigod worship at that time. And why is he
doing demigod worship? That is a part of bhakti-yoga for him. So, he wants to
serve Krishna. And whatever is required for the service of Krishna, he is ready
to do that. So, if he wants to, you know, if he needs weapons. Then, he takes
the weapons from Shiva. He takes the weapons from Indra. So, in the Mahabharata,
what is demonstrated is the devotee is not deprived of the, you know,
benedictions of other devatas, also. The devotee is quite capable of worshipping
the other devatas. And getting their benedictions, also. But ultimately, what
empowers the devotee is Krishna's mercy. So, Arjuna is not doing ashtanga-yoga.
Arjuna is not doing demigod worship. Arjuna is seeing dev..., do..., simply
doing devotional service. But he is using the limbs of other m..., he is using
other m..., aspects of Vedic culture as a part of his devotional service. So,
that is not o..., objectionable. And Arjuna in, in, does not do yogic sadhana
with the yogic sadhya in mind. So, just as yama and niyama, these can be
practiced by people from other prac..., paths, also. In bhaktis, bhakti-yogis
can also practice yama, niyama. So, like that, you know, a yoga asana, sitting
in yoga asana can also be done by Arjuna. And that does not make a yo..., Arjuna
a yogi. So, the point we are saying is, Arjuna never practice ashtanga-yoga as a
sadhana for getting liberated from material existence. He may have done some
tapasya to a..., please Lord Vishnu. At that time, he might have sit in yog...,
sat in yogic asanas. But that does not make Arjuna ashtanga-yogi. So, now,
Kr..., Arjuna will give one more graphically verse which sells his concerns.
What is the problem with, you know, why is he saying the mind is restless? That
is why he can, cannot practice this. He will describe in the next verse.

        cañcalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa
        pramāthi balavad dṛḍham
        tasyāhaṁ nigrahaṁ manye
        vāyor iva su-duṣkaram

So, "cañcalaṁ". The mind is restless. He is saying. "manaḥ kṛṣṇa". And then,
what kind of restlessness? He is giving actually four serious describers. First
is restless. "cañcalaṁ". Then, is "pramāthi". "pramāthi" is wild. As agitating.
"balavad" is strong. And "dṛḍham" is obstinate. So, let us look at each of
these to understand their distinctive implications. So, "cañcalaṁ" is like a
child. "cañcalaṁ". We say, it is, child is restless. Child is "cañcalaṁ". So,
child, if, if say, say, chi..., it is, chil..., child, sit down over here.
Mother says sit down over here. I want to do some work now. Then, the child sit
down quietly. Child. Ok. Let me see what this toy over here. Let me play with
this. Let me go here. Let me go there. And let me do all these things. So, a
child is restless. And often, the restlessness leads to, you know, you know,
mischief. Restlessness leads to, may be fun for the children. Mother. And
father. What am I, child doing now? And restlessness may also lead to some kind
of occasional danger. You know. Maybe, the child may fall off from a, a child is
sitting on a bed. And the, he just falls off the bed. These things are possible.
So, a, there is not m..., there is maybe a little danger. But "cañcalaṁ". So,
mind is restless. It will go one thing. Second thing. Third thing. Fourth thing.
The mind just goes everywhere. Trying to explore. There is a, you know, you
know, that is a, now, childish curiosity can be dangerous. But often it is, you
know, it is innocent. So, K..., Arjuna uses the first word. Yes. The child. Is
the mind the, just like an innocent child? "cañcalaṁ". You know. It is just,
just a f..., just a childish naive curiosity is there. No. It is not that much.
I do not. That is one feature of the mind. But the mind, what makes the mind
dangerous is that it is not just a like child in curiosity. It is also like a
bully in strength. It is "cañcalaṁ". "pramāthi balavad dṛḍham". So, the second
describer is mad. "pramattaḥ" is mad. 

        nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma

The word "pramattaḥ" is used in "unmattaṁ" and "pramattaḥ", is used in many
places in the scriptures. And it generally refers to, "mattaṁ" is intoxicated.
Maddened. "pramattam". It is. "pramatt...", "pramattam". So, "pramāthi". It is
maddened over here. So, it is agitated to the point of being mad. Sometimes,
now, when we talk about madness. See, there are different levels of madness.
There are some people who are, you know, you know, who are, you know, having
some dysfunctionality in their brain. Because of which, they are admitted to
some mental asylums. And they just, they are completely disconnected from
reality. So, they may say that, I am the, I am the president of India. You know.
Say, I am the president of America. Somebody may say. So, you know, actually,
these sort of statements. You know. They are indicative of madness. The
maddness, if people get disconnected from reality. And they live in an illusory
world. You know. In that illusonary world, what thought will come to them and
how they will act, nobody knows. So, that is why sometimes, some mad people are
dangerous. Because they think that, you know, you know, I am in a, suddenly, a
mad person may think that I am in a war field. And the person next to me is my
enemy. And I have to find a gun. And shoot the enemy. And I am going to save a
country. And then, I will get the Param Vir Chakra. It is, it is such a, we may
say, it is such a, rid..., so ridiculous. But the ma..., mad people can get any
idea and act in any way. So, a child is not necessarily mad. The child is just
innocent. But Krishna is saying the mind is not just like a child. It is like a
p..., it is "pramāthi". It is mad. So, you know, there are these kind of people
who are put in mental asylums. Who are completely disconnected from reality. But
we can see that we also go mad sometimes. That means, say, a person becomes
obsessed by anger. And the person starts making such things. Such crazy things
that, m..., so, anger is like temporary madness. It is temporary insanity. When
it comes over us, if we may do such things, you know, speak such things. That we
cannot even conceive of, we would not even a..., a..., dreamt of doing such
things at other times. But at that time, we do it. So, what makes us do it? It
is just madness. So, "pramāthi". It is, mind is mad. And, so, it is not just
restless in an innocent childish sense. It is a rest..., restless in a
dangerous, devilish sense. You know. The m..., m..., so, the mind is not
childish. But devilish. Hmm. Now, "pramāthi". And then, after that, ok,
sometimes, a mad person is that. When, you know, in, even an ordinary mad
person, when the person becomes mad, sometimes, you know, thr..., two-three
people in the employees in the, you know, you know, asymlum are required to get
the person to calm down. You know. Sometimes, the people have to tie this,
th..., tie the hands and legs of that person to get the person to calm down. But
imagine if that person were a big bully. You know. Maybe, a boxing champion. You
know. With huge muscles. And then, the person "balavad". And that person goes
mad. Then, it would be very very difficult to bring such a person under control.
So, the mind is "balavad". It is extremely powerful. And in fact, in the
Eleventh Canto, in the "Avantī Brāhmaṇa" prayers, there is a reference, it says,
the verse which says, you know, the mind's God-like power. The mind's God-like
power. It is a ra..., it is a very significant usage. Because the mind, when it
takes control of us. It, it almost becomes omnipotent. And just as God's command
cannot be disobeyed. So, mind's command, it is almost impossible to disobey it.
The mind's God-like power. God-like power. So, what is the God-like power of the
mind? It is so ferocious. It is so irresistible. When in the Bhagavad Gita, in
the Tenth Chapter, we will see, Krishna says:

        indriyāṇāṁ manaś cāsmi

Among the senses, I am the mind. So, the mind represents the supreme power of
Krishna. So, "balavad". You know. For all practical purposes, maya, we can say,
is equivalent to the mind. You know. How does maya come? It is not that, you
know, so, it is not that maya is, you know, h..., there outside. Yes. Maya, we
can say is there outside. You know. You know. So, a simplistic way of looking at
maya is for men to think of women as maya. And maya, we know, is, she is female.
So, you know, it is very easy for men to think of women as maya. But then, we
also see Sa..., "Sarasvatī" is also female. And "Sarasvatī" is the goddess of
learning. She gives knowledge. So, we cannot just, you know, equate the female,
females with maya. Maya. Yes. Maya is a goddess. She has a service. So,
Prabhupada w..., you know, the Bhagavatam, Fourth Canto also explains that for a
woman, a man can be a maya. And for a man, a woman can be maya. The important
point is maya is that which takes us away from Krishna. And more important than
the external things that take us away from Krishna is the internal thing that
takes us away from Krishna. And that is the mind. So, that is why, for all
practical purposes, the maya means the mind. So, ontologically. Ontologically
means in terms of existence. In terms of the nature of reality. Yes. There is.
There is an energy. She is a goddess. Her name is Mayadevi. So, she is actually
the consort of Lord Shiva. Durgā Devi. She functions as Mayadevi, also. So,
there is a p..., there is a being, may..., named maya. And she manifests in
various ways. So, ontologically, yes, there is an entity called maya. And she is
quite different from the mana. But functionally, practically, for all, for m...,
for all practical purposes, the mind is maya. The mind is what makes us act
restlessly. Irrationally. Suicidally. Self-destructively. So, brahma, a
"balavad". It is very powerful. So, maya is all-pervasive like Krishna. Maya is,
you know, within the material world, maya is omniscient. Maya is omnipotent.
Maya is omnipresent. You know. Just like God. How is that? You know. Maya knows
our weaknesses. By Krishna's, you know, because Krishna has given us, you know,
free will. And ma..., Krishna has given us the material world as an arena to
choose how to act according to our free will. So, we can choose to serve
Krishna. We choose to serve Maya. Just as a, m..., just as the, if a person is
in jail, the jail has the vigilance system by which the jail knows. Ok. Why does?
Which prisoner? And what is that prisoner doing? So, like that, within the, you
know, within the material world, which is like a jail, Maya has it vigilance.
And Maya knows everything. She is given that power by Krishna. So, because she
knows everything. She can be extremely dangerous for us. Dangerous in the sense
that, she can, you know, you know, the Maya can act through our mind. And trap
us. Maya's goal is not to trap us. Maya's goal is to promote us. But the way it
is done is through testing. So, "balavad". "balavad" is powerful. Now,
sometimes, you know, a powerful person may also listen to gudha..., a, reason
and argument. And make, and understand. Ok. This is what, I have strength that I
can do this. But when I see that is. When I see the sense. Ok. This does not
make sense. So, I will not do it. But Krishna says, here, the m..., "bal...",
mind is obstinate. "dṛḍham". He says the word, "dṛḍham" has come earlier.
"dṛḍham" can mean determined in a positive sense. Hmm. So, "dṛḍham" is a word
which can connotate determination. But in this context, it means obstinacy. You
know. So, "dṛḍham" will come a..., the word "dṛḍham" will come several times in
the Bhagavad Gita. One permanent place where it comes is in 9.14. That Krishna
describing the cha..., external characteristics of a pure devotee. And He says:

        satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ
        yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ

You know. "dṛḍha-vratāḥ". "dṛḍha-vratāḥ" is str..., absolute determination. The
wow of determination. "dṛḍha-vratāḥ". Determined vow. This serve it, the
determined vow. So, "dṛḍha" means determined. So, here, Krishna is using word
"dṛḍha" in a sense of obstinac..., obs..., obstinate or obstinacy. So, now, what
is the difference between determination and obstinacy? Generally, it, one is
using the positive sense. Determination is something which is good. Something
which is noble. Something which is, you know, you know, a, laudable. When a
person faces, you know, failures repeatedly in trying to do that. And still,
sticks to th..., sticks to doing that. And that is called as determination. But
obstinacy means when something is undesirable. And a person should give that up.
And one gets a lot of lessons from different places, you know, a warn...,
indicators. Warnings. That one should give this up. But one does not. That is
called as obstinacy. So, we say it, Ravana's obstinacy in not giving up Sita.
The, Ravana got so many warnings. So many cautions. You know. First of all,
m..., he knew that he did not have any protection from manavas. And he had
already seen the, he had already heard about the power of Rama. From various
sources. He had heard about the power of Rama from his own general Akampana. Who
told him that, so, Akampana was his only journal, general. Who survived to the
carnage of the Rakshasas that have, a, Ra..., Lord Rama single-handedly did in
the Dandakaranya. So, you know, the all the other. Khara. Dushan. "suda karama".
Khara. Dushan. Everybody was killed. The only journal, general remained was
Akampana. When Akampana came running to the, you know, palace of, you know, the
court, to the court of Ravana. You know. Akampana was doing all kampana. He was
fearfully trembling. And as he was so fearful, what happened? He, even he told,
you know, he cannot face him head-on. Be destroyed. Maricha also told him. You
would be destroyed. You cannot face him hea..., head-on. Then, Vibhishana told
him. You would be destroyed. Then, his own, you know, generals. You know. Those
who had gone. Shuka and Sarana, who had gone as spies. They told him. Rama's
army cannot be faced. Hanuman came. Hanuman told him. Surrender. Otherwise, you
would be destroyed. And Ha..., and Hanuman showed his prowess, also. Just one,
one spike coming and destroyed in early half of his kingdom. Then, Angada came.
And Angada gave him a warning. And in, he says, in general, s..., could not even
move the feet of Angada. It is a long story. Then, still, he got so many
warnings. But he did not take any one of them. So, that is obstinacy. That
means, you know, the difference between obstinacy and determination is primarily
whether the track one is going on is right or wrong. So, when a person is going
on a wrong track. And still goes on the wrong track. Despite have been given
good instructions. And despite giving not just instructions, but also
demonstrations. Ravana got both. But he just did not listen. Similarly,
Duryodhana. He saw so many occasions when all his attempts to try to, you know,
you know, push down the Pandavas failed. Still, after that, also, he kept coming
back and doing the same things. Trying to push the Kaur..., Pandavas down. This
is obstinacy. So, the mind is obstinate. That means once the mind gets attached
to some idea. I want this enjoyment. Then, the mind just does not listen to
anything else. You know. I want this. Come what may. I do not care. So, the mind
gets hooked to a particular idea. So obstinate. So, actually, this, you know,
combination of four things. Restlessness. Madness. Then power. And then
obstinacy. This makes the mind extremely dangerous. So, Krishna is telling
Arjuna all these four are there. You know. All these four are there. The dealing
with the mind is impossible. So, we have our worst enemy right inside us. And,
you know, Arjuna may be asked by Krishna, you know, no matter how formidable
enemy is. You can always deal with that enemy. You have some very extraordinary
weapons. With those weapons, you can control the enemy. You know. So, you have
in..., celestial weapons. Krishna says. You know. Arjuna says, nothing, none of
these will work. Actually, he says, "vāyor iva su-duṣkaram". Hmm. Wha..., that,
you know, just the winds have, blows off. Tuck. You know. When I, the wind is
blowing off, if I try to raise my hands. You know. Stop. Wind, stop. I will try
to check the wind. Not only can we not stop the wind. Many times, the objects
that blow away because of the wind. We cannot stop them, also. You know. If I
were five of papers. And suddenly, wind comes and blows, start going away. I
can catch one paper. Second paper. Third paper. But it is just, says, blowing so
fast.

So, like that, when the wind blows, we cannot hold onto anything. So, we will
not be even holding onto the wind. It is difficult often to hold onto things
which, you know, wind positively blows. So, he says, the wind, mind itself
is like the wind. And tuck. It just blows off. Now, it is interesting. Krishna
has used a metaphor related with the wind. In this chapter itself. In 6.19. What
was the 6.19?

        yathā dīpo nivāta-stho
        neṅgate sopamā smṛtā
        yogino yata-cittasya
        yuñjato yogam ātmanaḥ

So, there, He has said, "dīpaḥ". "nivāta-sthaḥ". That just as the mind, you
know, just as the lamp kept in a windless space does not flicker. But stay
steady. Similarly, He has said that, the mind of a yogi stays fixed on the self.
So, there, He has compared wind to material desires. And He says that when once.
You know.

        nispṛhaḥ sarva-kāmebhyo
        yukta ity ucyate tadā

6.18, that was. So, there, He has said that one becomes peaceful. Steady. When
one understands that, the mind is, you know, free from material desires. Then,
the mind becomes steady. Peaceful. So, here, Arjuna is telling, actually, what
to speak of "nivāta-stho"? The no wind at all. He says, there is such a wind
that is irresistible. You know. Windless place. And con..., con..., he contrasts
a windless place with a place that is hit by a hurricane. Or a tornado. Or a
cyclone. No. Wind is so forceful that nothing can be done to check with it.
Check it. So, actually, "vāyor iva su-duṣkaram". It is like wind. Impossible.
Even Arjuna says that with my, I have got certain celestial weapons by which I
can unleash a storm. Or I have got certain celestial weapons by which I can
check a storm. But none of these weapons can, will control the mind. The mind is
impossible to control. So, here, Arjuna is expressing, because the whole process
of ashtanga-yoga is centered on control of the mind. The word "mana" has come so
many time. "mana" or its "cognates". Cognates means equivalents have come so
many time in this chapter. So, now, Arjuna's question will be answered by
Krishna. So, let us see how Krishna answers the question. Now, Prabhupada quotes
the famous verse in the purport, you know, about controling the mind. This is
the, in the "Kaṭha Upaniṣad" verse, is there, 1.3.3–4. "āt...". This is the
chariot-body metaphor. So:

        ātmānaṁ rathinaṁ viddhi
        śarīraṁ ratham eva ca
        buddhiṁ tu sārathiṁ viddhi
        manaḥ pragraham eva ca

        indriyāṇi hayān āhur
        viṣayāṁs teṣu gocarān
        ātmendriya-mano-yuktaṁ
        bhoktety āhur manīṣiṇaḥ

So, "ātmānaṁ rathinaṁ". "rathinaṁ". The, so, the soul is like the charioteer.
"śarīraṁ ratham eva ca". The body is like the chariot. "buddhiṁ tu sārathiṁ
viddhi". The intelligence is like the "sārathiṁ". "manaḥ pragraham eva ca".
"pragraham" is that which control the reins. So, that is the mind. "indriyāṇi
hayān āhur". Senses are like the horses. "viṣayāṁs teṣu gocarān". So, the sense
objects are the objects towards which the horses want to run. The senses want to
run.

        ātmendriya-mano-yuktaṁ
        bhoktety āhur manīṣiṇaḥ

So, this, you know, "manīṣiṇaḥ". The s..., souls who have cont..., conquered the
mind. They try to, you know, hmm, hmm, "bhoktety āhur manīṣiṇaḥ". Those souls
who have conquered the mind, here, the difference is all those seers. The seers
give this metaphor. And what is the metaphor? So, it is, a, Prabhupada says: 

"So it is understood by great thinkers."

So, what do they understand? That "ātmendriya-mano-yuktaṁ". The soul equipped
with the mind and senses. "ātmā". That "ātmā" which is "yuktaṁ". With what?
"mendriya" and "mano". "bhoktety". You know. Soul tries to enjoy the sense
objects. Of course, sometimes, the soul gets enjoyment. Most of the time, soul
gets suffering. So, here, it is very difficult to control the mind. And the
chariot-body metaphor is given. And we will see how chariot metaphor, metaphor
develop later in the Bhagavad Gita's sections. Now, let us look at Krishna's
answers. So, Krishna first empathizes with Arjuna. And first, He says, yes,
Arjuna, it is difficult to control the mind. But it is possible. Let me describe
to you how it is possible. So, when a disciple expresses some doubt, there has
to be sympathy. I cannot do it. So, this is, you know, I, you know, somebody
says, you know, actually, I have a, I get angry so easily. What should I do with
my anger? What? What is the use? Chanting ten years. Then, still, you get angry?
You know. You should be able to control your anger. If you cannot control your
anger, you are a fallen soul. You know. We cannot the, we cannot give responses
which dishearten people. Ultimately, we have to, the responses should be
encouraging. They have to be emp..., and to be encouraging, they have to be
empathetic. Empathetic means, we understand that position. See, sympathy
generally means that I am at a higher level. And I offer down sympathy. But
empathy means, I come down to the level of that person. Sometimes, when we are
talking with children. You know, when we are talking with children, generally,
children are physically small. And if we want to become close to children, the
be..., one of the easiest ways to, to come down to their level. To kneel down.
To sit down. And if they have to talk at other time, they look up. And that
itself creates a discomfort. So, you know, you know, the best, one of the ways
to go through, say, to come down to their level. Talk with them. So, similarly,
you know, when we want to share Krishna Consciousness, also. Philo..., our
philosophy is lofty. But at the same time, we have to bring it down to their
level. Help them understand how at their level, how they can practice. And then,
you know, f..., initially, we go, come down to the level of children. But then
children are also growing. They will grow. Grow. So, like that, we represent the
philosophy at their level. At the level of people. And then, help them grow. As
they grow, their level also will increase. So, what does Krishna say over here?

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        asaṁśayaṁ mahā-bāho
        mano durnigrahaṁ calam
        abhyāsena tu kaunteya
        vairāgyeṇa ca gṛhyate

So, "asaṁśayaṁ mahā-bāho". Undoubtedly. Oh, Arjuna. Oh, oh, Arjuna. "mahā-bāho"
is referred. Undoubtedly. Without any doubt. "mano durnigrahaṁ calam". It is
very difficult to control the mind. "calam". It is restless. "abhyāsena tu
kaunteya". However, He says, "abhyāsena". And "vairāgyeṇa ca gṛhyate". So, what
does Krishna do over here? Krishna tells Arjuna, yes, it is difficult. But it
is not impossible. It is possible by right thing. "abhyāsena" and "vairāgyeṇa".
So, actually, Krishna uses very, you know, you know, generic terms over here.
For telling how to control the mind. He is the, the term, he does not s..., he
is not using, you know, sp..., bhakti specific terms. Or jna..., a, yoga
specific ter..., ashtanga-yoga specific terms. Just in generic terms. That by
"abhyāsena". And by "vairāgyeṇa". It is possible. So, what, wha..., is Krishna
recommending a specific process over here? No. He is just giving a general
answer. Arjuna's question is also general. How can the mind be controlled? He
says, yes. It is possible. By practice and by detachment. So, what does this
practice and detachment, "abhyāsena", "vairāgyeṇa" refer to? So, these are
generic principles on all paths. So, you know, a, we discussed about, if a,
there is a medicine, if a person is sick. Then, the person has to take that
treatment. The therapy. That is the "abhyāsena". And the person has to avoid the
items. Which the patient is supposed not to do. So, if a person has got a
fracture. And the person has to be cured. How will the person be cured? Person
may tell therapy. You know. Walk a little bit. You know. Walk in this way.
Exercise the leg in this way. Move these fingers. So, that is the "abhyāsena".
And then, there is, the "vairāgyeṇa" is, ok, do not try to exert yourself too
much. Do not do activities that will damage the ligament. That will damage, so,
the, in one sense, "abhyāsena" and "vairāgyeṇa" is the prescriptions and the
proscriptions. So, with respect to bhakti-yoga, this will apply that, when we
are trying to practice spiritual life, so:

        abhyāsena tu kaunteya
        vairāgyeṇa ca gṛhyate

So, "abhyāsena". We, with their the, we keep practicing to try to bring the mind
under control. The mind goes off. We bring it back again. It goes off. We bring
it back again. "abhyāsena". "abhyāsena". And "vairāgyeṇa" means, we try to
follow the regulative principles. We avoid the activities that agitate our mind,
you know, disproportionately. "vairāgyeṇa". "vairāgyeṇa". So, now, we may say
that, actually, it is because of the mind, only, that I cannot do "abhyāsena".
And I cannot have "vairāgyeṇa". So, you know, the very thing that I am not able
to do, if I am told to do, how will it work? No. That is why there is
progression. Just like, you know, a person who has got a fracture. And that
person who has got fracture and is getting cured, is told, now, walk slowly. He
says, no. Because of fracture, only, I cannot walk. So, how can you tell me to
walk as a cure to fracture? He says, no. Whatever you can walk, you walk. Walk a
few steps. Walk a few steps. Do not, you know, walk till it pains too much. But
walk a few steps. And by walking a few steps, gradually, the strength recovers.
And then, that person begins to walk. Similarly, we may feel that, actually, you
are telling me to chant Hare Krishna to control the mind. But it is because of
the uncontrolled mind, only, I am not able to chant. So, what to do? No. Keep
chanting. We may not have full control over our mind. But certainly, we can have
some level of control. And that level of control can keep increasing as we move
forward. So, "abhyāsena tu kaunteya". And then, "vairāgyeṇa ca gṛhyate".
"vairāgyeṇa" means detachment. One has detachment. No. I am not get involved in
these things. There are certain t..., activities which are undesirable. Doing
which will get us simply entangled. Unnecessarily ceaselessly entangled. So, we
do not want to get involved in those activities. So, "vairāgyeṇa ca gṛhyate".
So, by "abhyāsena" and by "vairāgyeṇa", one can steadily move forward in one's
spiritual life. Steadily. Without much difficulty. "abhyāsena" and "vairāgyeṇa".
So, in this way, if one moves forward, one will be able to, he has controlled
the mind. Krishna is telling. So, Prabhupada explains from the bhakti
perspective, what is "abhyāsena". And what is "vairāgyeṇa". In the purport. And
then, Prabhupada says that, actually, when we practice spiritual life,
Prabhupada quotes from the Bhagavatam.

"This attachment is called pareśānubhava,"

So:

        bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir
        anyatra cai...

So, the exam..., this verse comes in the Eleventh Canto. Which says that how
does one, you know, what does one do when one feels weak? One eats. When one
eats, one gets s..., h..., taste. One gets strength. And one's, you know, hunger
disappears. So, like that, one's hunger disappears. One gets taste. And one
gets, th..., ah, it is so delicious. And then, one's, you know, strength, you
know, one gets nutrition, also. So, like that, when we, you know, fix the mind
on Krishna. When we actually remember Krishna, all these things happen. What all
happens. Firstly, when we remember Krishna, we get, yes, we feel strengthened.
You know, we, our hankering goes away. We are hankering for so many objects of
this world. When we get Krishna, yes, I am satisfied with this. I do not need
anything more. The hankering goes away. Then, after that, we start getting, you
know, taste. Oh, this is so nice. Remembering Krishna is so nice. And we feel
strong, also. Yes. Come. Whatever temptations come, I can face them. So,
Prabhupada gives that example over here to say that, the more we engage in
devotional service, the greater the satisfaction that we get. And he gives the
diseased metaphor, also, over here. Now, Krishna will tell, conclude this in one
more verse, after which, Arjuna will ask another question. So, Krishna gives
general point over here.

        asaṁyatātmanā yogo
        duṣprāpa iti me matiḥ
        vaśyātmanā tu yatatā
        śakyo ’vāptum upāyataḥ

So, He says, you know, you know, "asaṁyata". "asaṁyata" means unbridled.
Uncontrolled. So, when the mind is uncontrolled, "yogo duṣprāpa". That
perfection of yoga is impossible to attain. "vaśyātmanā tu yatatā". However, if
one brings the mind under control. And "yatatā". One endeavors. By endeavoring,
one brings the mind under control. "śakyo ’vāptum upāyataḥ". One will be able to
attain. So, what is the point of this verse? Wha..., the poin..., you know, the
point is that if the mind is uncontrolled, yogic perfection is im..., is
"duṣprāpa", is impossible to attain. But if one controls the mind, "vaśyātmanā
tu yatatā". By proper endeavor. By proper process. Then, "śakyo ’vāptum". It is
possible to attain the success. "śakyaḥ" means possible. So, the point, which
Krishna is making, is that He is em,..., being, encouraging without being c...,
compromising. He is encourage. Yes. It is possible if you endeavor with the
right process. But it is also uncompromising. So, A and B are uncompromising. He
says, if you cannot control the mind, you will not attain yogic perfection. So,
one who does not control, one is not attain. So, that means, it is a
requirement, which has to be met. So, he is uncompromising. But at the same
time, He is also understanding. And encouraging. Yes. There is a right process.
If you follow that process, you will be able to control the mind. "vaśyātmanā tu
yatatā". Bring the mind under control. And endeavor. Endeavor. You will attain
success. So, Krishna is offering encouragement to Arjuna over here. Yes. It is
possible for you to do it, oh, Arjuna. If you just keep practicing. Just keep
practicing. You will definitely achieve it. So, what is the process? That
Krishna will talk about later in the Bhagavad Gita. He is not talking directly
over here. It will, it will come several times. And most directly, yoga, and
ashtanga-yoga and bhakti-yoga will be contrasted in the Eighth Chapter. And
there, in 8.14, Krishna will tell that what is that process. The easy way. Here,
Arjuna has said, it is difficult to do this. Krishna will say, it is easy to do.
What is easy to? "bhakti-yoga". You know, the verses, you know, talk:

        ananya-cetāḥ satataṁ
        yo māṁ smarati nityaśaḥ
        tasyāhaṁ su-labhaḥ pārtha
        nitya-yuktasya yoginaḥ

In the whole Bhagavad Gita, it is the only verse He talks about the, m...,
attainment of spiritual realisation being easy. "su-labhaḥ". How has it become
easy? For one who remembers Krishna. And uses that remembrance of Krishna to
control the mind. So, here, Krishna concludes this question of Arjuna. It is a
two-verse question. And a two-verse answer. M..., in two-verse, Arjuna
explicitly, two verses, Arjuna explicit..., apprehension. And in two verses,
Krishna gives, you know, clarification and encouragement. So, He says, yes, it
is difficult. No doubt. But by the right process, it is possible. Just like the
example of darkness and light. You know. Darkness is impossible to remove if we
do not have the right process. You know. Ack..., vic..., by punching the
darkness. By cursing the darkness. By kicking the darkness, we cannot remove it.
We need to get light. So, Krishna is similarly telling, you know, if you do not
use the right process, then we cannot remove the darkness. We have to have the
right process. You know. Sometimes, people feel that, I have got some anarthas.
You know. I just use willpower to deal with them. See, willpower alone is not
enough. You know. If somebody has, we have discussed earlier, also. If somebody
has got cough. Somebody has got loose motion. By willpower. No. That willpower. I
cannot deal with, you know, disease. Willpower is required. But willpower has to
be coupled with a process. A curative process. Doctor take. Take this medicine.
Take this medicine. Then, I will be able to cure. So, willpower alone is not
enough. Willpower coupled with a process will lead to elevation for us. So,
Krishna is telling. "śakyo ’vāptum". It is possible. But how? "yatatā".
Endeavor. Endeavor. "vaśyātmanā". Bring the mind under control. Endeavor with
the right process. And then, you will attain perfection. So, after hearing this,
Arjuna will ask another doubt. And that we will discuss in the next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna. 
