Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kA-74GSsrNk
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_078_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_05_Text_19_to_24_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=1EmcToaIbF-xPdS6I84-pumqVkx8MTU0ODQ4ODEyNEAxNTQ4NDAxNzI0&event=video_description&v=kA-74GSsrNk

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are now,
you know, coming towards the end of the Fifth Chapter. We are in third secton.
The first section talked about how karma-yoga is, karma-yoga is s..., same as,
but easier than jn..., jnana-yoga. It provides the same result. But it c..., can
be practiced more easily. And then, remaining chapter describes how the
karma-yogi stays free from bondage. So, seven to sixteen talks about how fixing
the mind on the atma keeps the karma-yogi free from bondage. And then, seventeen
to twenty-nine talks about how fixing the mind on the Paramatma freeze the
karma-yogi from bondage. So, we discussed how in the seventeenth verse, the four
faculties of our subtle setup. "tad-buddhayas". "tad-ātmānas". "tan-niṣṭhās".
"tat-parāyaṇāḥ". The mind. The intelligence. The mind. The faith. And the goal.
We center them on Krishna. And those who do that, they are full, they develop an
equal vision towards all living beings. Now, Krishna will dev..., describe what
is the result of that equal vision. Those who have that equal vision. Krishna
says, they are as good as liberated even while being in this material world. So,
5.19:

        ihaiva tair jitaḥ sargo
        yeṣāṁ sāmye sthitaṁ manaḥ
        nirdoṣaṁ hi samaṁ brahma
        tasmād brahmaṇi te sthitāḥ

So, "ihaiva". "iha". "eva". "iha" means in this world. In this life itself.
"eva", certainly. "tair", by them. "jitaḥ sargo". They have conquered, oh Ar...,
"sargaḥ" is cycle of birth and death. They have conquered of the cycle of birth
and death. Who, who are they? "yeṣāṁ sāmye sthitaṁ manaḥ". Those whose mind is
situated in "sāmye". Equanimity. So, "sāmye" is related with the word
"sama-darśinaḥ" from the previous verse. 5.18D is repeated here twice in 5.19B
as well as C. "sāmye" is equanimity. And then, what is the equani..., nature of
that equanimity? That makes them as good as brahman. "nirdoṣaṁ". So, there is no
"doṣaṁ". These faults, these faults refer to, not the faults of, you know that
we often think of. But the faults refers to the contaminating effects of the
three modes. They have gone beyond the three modes. "nirdoṣaṁ hi samaṁ brahma".
So that, what is beyond the three modes? Is brahma. So, they have become as good
as brahma. And, therefore, "tasmād brahmaṇi te sthitāḥ". Therefore, they are
situated in brahman. So, here, Krishna describes how the equal vision can
situate a person in brahman. So, actually speaking, the soul is transcendental.
And for the soul, what is happening in the material realm does not really
matter. Because everything in the material realm is ultimately temporary. It
just comes. And it goes. It does not matter for the soul. Now, why it matters is
because the soul is attached. The soul thinks, ok, this will make me happy. That
will make me miserable. But when the soul is there "samaṁ". Understood.
Actually, nothing material can make me happy. Because I am not material. I am
transcendental. My real life is the life of spirit. Not the spirit of, life of
matter. So, therefore, when a person's lust about seeing everything materially
equally. Then, naturally, there is no more, you know, attachment to matter.
Excitement about what changes happen in the real..., world of matter. And then,
that itself is liberation. You know, what is bondage? Bondage is caused by our
own desires to enjoy this world. And those desires to enjoy the world are
present because we think that certain things in this world are enjoyable. And
certain things are, you know, a..., lamentable. We want to avoid them. But when
we do not feel like this. When we are "samaṁ". Then, that is as good as
liberation from bondage. So, Prabhupada explains what flawless means.
"nirdoṣaṁ".

"The Lord is ﬂawless because He is without attraction or hatred"

So, raga and dvesa. That is based on illusion. And that creates flaws within us.
So, similarly, when a living entity is without attraction or hatred, he also
becomes flawless and eligible to enter into the spiritual sky. C..., so, to
enter into the spiritual sky. That means that per..., so, Prabhupada ex...,
i..., the, Prabhupada uses the word brah..., brahman, you know, to mean the Lord
over here. Brahman can mean brahmajyoti. It can mean Bhagavan. And as the
Bhagavad Gita is, thoughtfully evolve, we will see that Arjuna will tell that
Krishna is Para Brahman. He is the brahman in this highest manifestation. So,
what Srila Prabhupada is giving us over here is what Krishna is going to te...,
what Arjuna is going to confirm later on in the Bhagavad Gita. So, flawlessness
means one is not having attachment to reversion. Now, the question may come, how
does one become situated in this brahman platform? So, of course, Krishna has
given, told once "tad-buddhayas tad-ātmānas". By, a, invest these four
faculties. But how does one practically do it? So, now, Krishna will describe a
process. So, the set of verses from here onwards, they are both descriptive and
prescriptive. So, what I mean by descriptive and prescriptive, let us look at
the verse first. Then, I will explain. Hmm. So:

        na prahṛṣyet priyaṁ prāpya
        nodvijet prāpya cāpriyam
        sthira-buddhir asammūḍho
        brahma-vid brahmaṇi sthitaḥ

"na prahṛṣyet priyaṁ prāpya". So, when one gets something that is dear to one,
"priyaṁ prāpya". "na prahṛṣyet". One does not delight. And "nodvijet prāpya
cāpriyam". When gets, one gets something that is "apriyam". That is undesirable.
One does not, to "udvijet". One does not become dejected. So, one does not
become elated when one gets the desirable. And one does not become dejected when
one gets the undesirable. Wha..., how is that? "sthira-buddhir". The
intelligence is fixed. And the person is "asammūḍho". So, "mūḍhaḥ" is a person
who g..., thinks that this is pleasurable. This is not pleasurable. This is
miserable. So, one does not think like this. That person is "asammūḍho". That
person has gone beyond the illusions of this world. And such a person is, you
know, "brahma-vid". And then, to make it more categ..., not just "brahma-vid",
that person "brahmaṇi sthitaḥ". "brahma-nid...", "brahma-vid" means knower of
Brahman. Such a person is not only the knower of Brahman. Person is also
situated in Brahman. "brahma-vid brahmaṇi sthitaḥ". So, in this way, the person
moves forward. So, this is Krishna telling that how can one come to the Brahman
platform? By the the practice of spiritual life, which involves the, you know,
sadhana, in which one becomes equipoised towards material things. And slowly
with steady intelligence situates oneself on the spiritual platform. So,
Prabhupada explains that Brahman realisation means we have to go from Brahman,
Paramatma, Bhagavan. When one comes to Bhagavan realisation. That is complete
realisation of, such a person is "brahma-vid brahmaṇi sthitaḥ". So, you know, to
be equipoised amidst happiness and distress, this is the theme which Krishna has
talked about repeatedly in the Bhagavad Gita. And that indicates basically
transcendence. Just like if a person is watching, you know, some people are
m..., say, mad after watching a particular sports. So, in India, it might be
cricket. In America, it might be soccer. You know, in America, it might be
rigby..., rugby. In Europe, it might be soccer. There are different sports like
that. Which people are completely infatuated with. Now, some person who is not
so cau..., not too, so emotionally involved in the sport. What happens is,
somebody wins. Somebody loses. You know, one team is in ecs..., a, ecstasy because
they have won. And the other team is in agony because they have lost. Or you can
see, we can see this duality in our tennis match. You know. You know. Once at
the end of the tennis match, one side is the, one par..., player is the winner.
And the person is jumping up and down. Jumping with hands raised high. And the
other person is sinking into the grass in misery. So, these are the dualities.
So, these are the dualities that characterise existence. You know, as long as
one is infatuated and attached. But say, a person is not emotionally involved in
the sports match. Then, that person is "na prahṛṣyet priyaṁ prāpya". "nodvijet
cāpri..", "pri...", "cāp", "prāpya cāpriyam". Yes, the match has happened. And
one side has won. One side has lost. But the person is not emotionally involved.
That person is not emotionally affected, also. So, like that, when one is
purified. One is no longer affected. And that is the test of spiritual
advancement. That is the test of authentic, you know, you know, growth in
spiritual life. What is the test? The test is that, one is able to steadily move
forward and attain, you know, the real life of spirit as contrasted with the
conditioned life which one is practicing in this world. This is called Brahman
realisation, Prabhupada say..., now, let us move forward. So, what is, what is
required for this kind of being:

        na prahṛṣyet priyaṁ prāpya
        nodvijet prāpya cāpriyam

That Krishna will describe in the next verse, is how one should be detached from
external things. But the point is let us look at this verse. So, 20 to 29
describe characteristics. These naturally possessed by siddhas. And they are
consciously cultivated by sadhakas. So, these are descriptive of the siddha.
Siddha means those who are perfected. Those who are perfected. They naturally
are detached like this. And those who are practioners. Those who are striving
for perfection, they will consciously cultivate this by sadhakas. So, they are
descriptive of those who already have those characteristics. And they are
prescriptive. Prescriptive, like a doctor use a prescription. Do this, this,
this. So, they are prescriptive. Act in this way. So, we may get excited.
Because of our attachment, certain things may make us very excited. But a
devotee thinks, ok, ultimately, as long as I came and keep serving Krishna,
nothing matters. Let me not get too excited about it. Let me not get too
excited. So, that way, we stay detached. We stay calm. We stay focused. And we
move forward in our spiritual life. So, consciously cultivated by sadhaka. So,
now, let us look at the next verse. So, these are all verses which are both
descriptive and prescriptive. So, this is talking about how one can come to the
level of being equipoised.

        bāhya-sparśeṣv asaktātmā
        vindaty ātmani yat sukham
        sa brahma-yoga-yuktātmā
        sukham akṣayam aśnute

So, "bāhya-sparśeṣv". "bāhya-sparśeṣv" is external contact. So, that external
contact may sometimes be pleasurable, sometimes is miserable. But either way,
the person is "asaktātmā". "asaktātmā" mean that person is detached. So,
"asakta" is attached. "asaktā" is detached. So, so, same prefix, when there is
emphasise, it can, emphasis can have a different meaning. When there is no
emphasis. 'o' and 'a' makes a world of difference over here. "asakta" is
attached. "asaktā" is detached. So, how, when that person is detached, everybody
has to get happiness somewhere. So, where does the happiness come from? "vindaty
ātmani yat sukham". "vindaty" means to delight. Delight in what? "ātmani yat
sukham". In the atma, one delights. So, inner happiness. And such a person, "sa
brahma-yoga-yuktātmā". Such a person is, now, "brahma-yoga" is not some other
part, other, some fo..., a different kind of yoga, like karma-yoga, or
jnana-yoga, or dhyana-yoga. There is no brahma-yoga. Here, the point is, such a
person is "sa brahma-yoga-yuktātmā". That person, yoga here refers to
connection. Which is not a separate p..., person, sadhana. Krishna is talking a
generic description over here. Such a person is connected with Brahma.
"yuktātmā",  is connected, well-situated. And that person eventually "sukham
akṣayam aśnute". "aś...", a, attains happiness. What kind of? "aśnute". "aśnute"
means to gain or to enjoy. So, it is significant. Krishna is using words for
enjoy twice over here. "vindaty" and "aśnute". So, a, "akṣayam". "suk...",
"akṣayam". "sukham akṣayam aśnute". "kṣayam" is that which ends. That which
deteriorates. That which is a, a, which is, you know, capable of being
exhausted. "akṣayam" is that which never gets exhausted. "sukham akṣayam
aśnute". "akṣayam aśnute". So, unlimited happiness. So:

        bāhya-sparśeṣv asaktātmā
        vindaty ātmani yat sukham

This verse has an interesting progression. Let us try to understand this
progression. So, each of the lines can be thought of as pointing to a
progression. So, first step is that we become detached from external stimuli.
We do not get too excited about sensual pleasures. Then, after that, what second
step? One turns inwards. And starts seeking happiness within. So, when one
starts seeking happiness within, then what happens? Then, we learn to
concentrate on the Supreme. See, by i..., if our vision is outwards, then we
cannot focus inwards. So, therefore, we need to turn inwards. Then, we
concentrate on the Supreme. Then, what happens last stage? Then, we relish
imperishable happiness. That is "sukham akṣayam". So, "sukh...", so Krishna is
there within our heart. And Krishna is an ocean of happiness. And it is not just
a finite ocean. It is an inf..., is infinite ocean of happiness. So, what
happens is when we turn inwards towards Krishna, we can connect with that ocean.
So, the first step is, ok, externally, there is nothing great to, you know,
experience in this world. So, I will not look outside. And gradually, I start
turning inwards. That means, we look, we start seeking pleasure in our inner
connection. So, now, initially, "vindaty" means there is little happiness. So,
we chant Hare Krishna. We remember Krishna. We are experiencing little bit
happiness. But what happens, as we move forward, we start conn..., you know, we
are able to, as we turn inwards. So, initially, when we chant Hare Krishna, we
are not able to concentrate. But as we start practicing spiritual life, we
start, we are able to concentrate more and more. And we start going deeper into
our inner connection, "vindaty". And then, what happens at that time? You know,
"brahma-yoga-yuktātmā". We become situated in our connection with Brahman. And
then, as we become strongly situated in that connection. Then, there is "sukham
akṣayam aśnute". One experiences "akṣayam", "sukham". Unlimited happiness. So,
that is how we come to the level of experiencing supreme happiness. Supreme
happiness. "sukham akṣayam". So, now, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport.
So, Prabhupada quotes about this, you know, "akṣayam", "sukham". He quotes the
verse of "Yāmunācārya" which he has quoted earlier. And h..., Prabhupada makes a
significant point that, actually, the whole world:

"The highest pleasure in terms of matter is sex pleasure. The whole world is
moving under its spell, and a materialist cannot work at all without this
motivation."

Cannot work at all, Prabhupada says. So, here, ultimately, people may do many
other things. But this is what it boils down to. This is what they are dreaming
and fantasising about.

"But a person engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness can work with greater vigor without
sex pleasure, which he avoids."

This:

"That is the test in spiritual realization."

This is:

"Spiritual realization and sex pleasure go ill together."

So, you know, go ill together. Why? Because sexual pleasure is physical. And
spiritual pleasure is, is transcendental, is, non-s..., non-physical. So, to the
extent we are identifying with the body, to that extent we cannot experience
spiritual happiness. And to the extent, we are identifying with the soul. We
will not be attracted to ph..., a, bodily happiness. So, there is a difference
between the two. Which makes them, you know, you know, antipodal. So, in
general, at the level of karma-kanda. At the level of karma-kanda, dharma,
artha, kama, moksha. So, it is considered that one when gets a, a pro..., a
happy family life. Fulfillment of kama. That is considered also to be a blessing
of God. So, that is true. Now, but that does not mean that one gets completely
caught in, you know, gratifying one's senses. You know, kama does not refer to
sense gratification. It refers to all-round material well-being. And artha does
refer just to the bank balanace in a person's accou..., accounts. Or the
person's cash available with the person. Ma..., it refers to all-round material
prosperity. So, ma..., prospe..., all-round material prosperity. And all-round
material satisfaction. You know, so, these are thr..., referred to by artha and
kama. So, in karma-kanda, these are also considered to be, you know, a, dharmic.
They are considered to be religious. You know. When a person becomes a serious
spiritual seeker. At that time, the person does not get caught up in these
things. The person understand that dharma, artha, kama are important. A, at one
level. But far far more important is moksha. And moksha ultimately means, you
know, you know, we discussed how:

        muktir hitvānyathā-rūpaṁ svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ

It means we become situated in our relationship with Krishna. So, when a devotee
becomes situated in the relationship with Krishna very strongly, the devotee
does not have, get so caught up in the pleasures of this world. And this will
happen gradually to us as we keep steading ourselves in our relationship with
Krishna. So, when Prabhupada says, this is the test of in spiritual realisation.
What does it mean? That means we may sometimes feel very good. Oh, I am making
spiritual advancement. I feel great pleasure when, you know, great ch...,
satisfaction when I take darshan of Krishna. When I chant the holy names. When I
come in the association of devotees. Sometimes, we feel like that. Sometimes, we
do not feel like that. So, these feelings will come and go. But if we are
following the regulative principles steadily. And when the regulative
principles, so, there is following at a gross level. And then, there is
following at a subtle level. So, as we move forward in the following of the
regulative principles. Then, we become, we are staying at a detached level. So,
as we keep experiencing inner happiness, we start giving up outer happiness. And
as we keep giving up outer happiness, we start experiencing inner happiness.
Now, we may wonder which starts first? You know, do I first give up outer
happiness? And then, experience inner happiness? Or do I first experience inner
happiness? Then, give up outer happiness? Actually, first comes hearing. So,
first comes hearing. "tac chṛṇu" as Krishna will tell in the start of Seventh
Chapter, 7.1. First, we hear and understand how outer happiness is temporary. It
ultimately leads to misery as Krishna will tell in the next verse. On the other
hand, inner happiness keeps growing and growing. "akṣayam", "sukham", it is. So,
it begins with hearing. And by hearing, we try to move away from outer
happiness. And we try to move towards inner happiness. And then, by both these
things, we experience an, inner happiness. And then, by that, we feel inspired.
Ok. Let me further move away from outer happiness. And then, by hearing, when,
even when we get outer, when we seek for outer pleasure and get a little outer
pleasure, we understand. This leads to so much misery. There is so much
agitation. So much irritation. And at the end of it, the pleasure, it is so
tiny. It is not worth it. So, therefore, that person feels, ok, I, let me know
get in it. Let me not pursue this pleasure. This, how, gradually, a person
becomes detached. So, first, we should always focus on hearing. We will see that
if we are not hearing regularly, you know, our Krishna Consciousness will become
weak. We will not be attentive in our chanting. We will not be serious in our
cultivation of bhakti. Then, we are not experiencing inner happiness. Naturally,
we will be dragged towards outer happiness. And then, we will collapse. So, we
will be, we will collapse in the sense that we will be dragged outwards and
outwards further away from Krishna. So, how far we will go away, we cannot say.
So, better not take that risk. So, therefore, hmm, we understand that, you know,
it all begins with hearing. Now, Krishna will talk about on what basis can a
person become "bāhya-sparśeṣv asaktātmā". Why should one give up outer
pleasures? Krishna says, because they lead to misery. This is the very
well-known verse from the Bhagavad Gita which Prabhupada would quote very often.
Let us look at this. 5.22. So:

        ye hi saṁsparśa-jā bhogā
        duḥkha-yonaya eva te
        ādy-antavantaḥ kaunteya
        na teṣu ramate budhaḥ

So, "ye hi saṁsparśa-jā". "saṁsparśa-jā" means by contact of the senses with the
sense objects. "bhogā". "bhogā" means the pl..., sense pleasure. "saṁsparśa-jā
bhogā". So, when there is contact with the senses, with the sense objects. The
tongue eats delicious food. The hands touch some soft objects. The eyes see
something beautiful. So, there is "bhogā". There is pleasure at that time. But
what happens, Krishna says, "duḥkha-yonaya eva te". There is "duḥkha". Why is
there "duḥkha"? Because it is temporary. See, when we seek sense pleasure, you
know, hmm, there are three possibilities. There i..., it is, it is not,
unattainable. You know, our eyes see so many good-looking forms. No human being
can satisfy, or, or can enjoy all the good-looking forms that the eye sees. So,
most of the pleasure that we look around, they are unattainable. So, that just
creates craving, craving, craving. I do not get anything at all. Then, if they
are not attainable. Then, even if they are attainable, then, also, we find out
they are not palatable. That means, hey, I get it. But after I get it, I find,
hey, this is not pleasurable at all. I had dreamed so much. You know. Somebody
thinks, oh, there is this new hotel. Where there is such a delicious food. I
want to go and eat over there. But then, I go and find out, it does not taste at
all good. So, we get it, but it does not live up to our expectations. It is not
palatable. And then, even if it is palatable. Then, we find, it is not
retainable. So, retainable means how long can we keep it? Even if we get the
most, you know, attractive sense object. How long can we enjoy? It, our body's
capacity is limited. Our body itself is time bound. You know, every sense object
is time bound. So, nothing is retainable. So, either way, if we look at these
three possibilities. A, not attainable. Not palatable. Not retainable. In all
three ways, ultimately, what we get is misery. Ultimately, what we get is
"duḥkha-yonaya eva te". So, there may be some pleasure. But when that pleasure
goes away, it will lead to misery. And you know, you know, a, bas..., sense
pleasure is like a sandwich. You know, imagine the sandwich, there are two thick
lao.., loaves. And in-between, there is some delicious item. There may be some
butter. There be some vegetable sandwich. Some m..., m..., some fried, something
fried. Or something spicy which taste really good. Now, imagine that there is
sandwich. And the, both the loaves, that are there. And the upper loaf and the
lower loaf. They are huge. And they are not only t..., they are not only
tasteless. They are m..., unpalatable entirely. They are, yeah, they taste
terrible. So, one wants to eat the sandwich. And one starts. Chew among. So,
now, first, a..., this sandwich, it does not taste good. But one thinks there is
a thin layer in-between. That I will enjoy. But then, if go to the sandwich, go
to the sandwich, and find, there is nothing layer in-be..., in-between. And
then, you find, oh, there is the next layer which is the a..., next loaf. That
is also dry and tasteless. So, what are these two loaves referring to? The upper
loaf is hankering. The lower loaf is lamentation. And then, in-between, there is
a little pleasure. The up..., and sometimes, what happens, it is, we, we get
cheated and then, the sandwich with no loaf, only, in-betw..., no, nothing
in-between, only. They are just two loaves together. So, like that, every sense
pleasure if we think of, first, there is hankering. Oh, I wanted. I wanted. When
will I get it? When will I get it? When will I get it? When? When? When? The
mind is wh..., whipping us. Come on. Get it. I want it. C..., I want it. Yeah.
Yeah. When will I get it? So, there is hankering. And it, hankering, people may
call it pl..., you know, pleasurable. But it is not pleasure. It is miserable.
Actually, when we start engaging in sense gratification or start fantasising about
sense gratification. You know. It is torture when the desire comes. C..., do it.
Do it. Do it. Do it. It is torture, actually. And then, as one is experiencing
the torment. The torment of hankering, of craving. And then, one gets the
enjoyment. And if there enjoyment is there. Yes, w..., actually, what we call
pleasure is largely a relief from the torment. That is all. A relief and a
release from the torment. And then, that tiny layer of the sandwich, the taste
that ends. And now, but oh, it got over. I wanted it to go on. But it got over.
I wanted to go on. It got over. Why? I want more. But I cannot get it. So, then,
there is lamentation. There is hankering. And there is lamentation. In-between,
there is tiny little pleasure.

So, "ādy-antavantaḥ kaunteya". What Krishna is telling, this sandwich example is
san..., san..., i..., good to go, keep in mind to understand this point. So,
"ādy-antavantaḥ". So, just like there is a sandwich, you know, the, the, the
tasty layer is only in-between. That is so tiny. You know, by it will barely
pass through, it will get over. So, pl..., sense pleasure is "ādy-antavantaḥ".
It has a beginning. It has an end. And therefore, a wise person, "na teṣu ramate
budhaḥ". The wise person does not delight in such a pleasure. "budhaḥ" is a wise
person. So, Krishna is contrasting this with what he used in the previous verse.
He used "asammūḍho". So, "asammūḍho" is a person who is not deluded. So, that
person is "budhaḥ". So, there is "bud...", "budhaḥ". And there is "mudhaḥ". So,
"budhaḥ" is a person who is not in..., infatuated by material pleasures.
"mudhaḥ" is a person who gets intoxicated and captivated by material pleasures.
"na teṣu ramate". "ramate" means does not delight. Such a person knows, that,
ok, these pleasures, they are nothing to look forward to. They are nothing to
dream about. Now, Krishna uses very precise word over here. Some, you know, you
know, "duḥkha-yonaya eva te". "yoni" means womb. So, "duḥkha-yonaya" means the
womb of misery. What Krishna is saying over here is sense pleasure is pregnant
with misery. Now, when there is pregnancy, there may, there may not seem to be
any immediate change over there. But eventually, once there is pregnancy, there
will be delivery. So, similarly, sense pleasure, you know, it is pregnant with
misery. And once the pregnancy is there. The delivery of the misery is going to
come. And this is such a delivery that no abortion is possible. Cannot avoid it.
Once when it is started, one, it will, one, it will, you know, just take off
its own, you know, momentum, like a Jagannath. One cannot stop it. It will
streamroll all of one's protests and, or, at..., attempts to stop. And it will
just, the, hi..., misery will hit us. We cannot avoid it. So, "duḥkha-yonaya eva
te". So, it is a womb of misery. So, you know, when one understands that,
actually, there is misery. That is bound to come. Sooner or later when I engage
in sense gratification. You know, person thinks, w..., I do not want to get
involved in this. "na teṣu ramate budhaḥ". Now, Prabhupada explains. You know.
Prabhupada takes the word "rama". "na teṣu ramate". And he use..., ex..., he
quote..., connects it with the Padma Purāṇa where describing what the word
"rama" means. So:

        ramante yogino ’nante
        satyānande cid-ātmani
        iti rāma-padenāsau
        paraṁ brahmābhidhīyate

So, "ramante yogino ’nante". "ramante yogino ’nante". That the yogi is "’nante",
"raman". They enjoy unlimitedly. In what? "satyānande cid-ātmani". "satyānande".
They experience real happiness. "cid-ātmani". It is spiritual happiness in the
atma. "satyānande". "nityānande" is what is there in this world. "iti
rāma-padenāsau". That Absolute Truth. That has been God, that has, that has been
given the name "rāma". "paraṁ brahmābhidhīyate". "ābhidhīyate" means it is known
as. So, that Absolute Truth which enables one to experience great happiness.
That is called as "rāma". The word "rāma", "ramate", "rāmayate", it is said. One
who delights. And one who gives delight. So, the Lord delights in Himself. And
He gives delights to other. "ramate". "rāmayate". "iti rāma". So, Pra..., there
is another explanation. So, the yogis. Now, not everybody can do "raman in
rāma". Materialistic people, you know, what is the story? What are these stories
you are talking about? What is so big deal about it? But then, they will want
some other stories. They will have stories of Mickey Mouse. And Harry Potter.
And they will have all kinds of fantasy novels which they will be reading. So,
why not read about the Supreme Lord? And develop a taste over there? So,
"ramante yogino ’nante". We all want something fantastic. Something wonderful.
Something extraordinary to think about. To study. To hear. So, if we get that
in the Supreme Lord, that is wonderful. So, "ramante yogino ’nante". So, "na
teṣu ramate budhaḥ". They do not resig..., a, th..., enjoy. The wise people do
not enjoy in this. What do the wise people do? They enjoy in relationship with
the Supreme Lord. And Prabhupada quotes from the Bhagavatam. Famous verse. Which
he would quote again, and a..., again, and again. 5.5.1. You know, at the start
of the Fifth Chapter, in 5.1, Prabhupada had quoted another section from this.
Which are pro..., 5.5.4-6. "asann api kleśa-da āsa dehaḥ". Hmm. Ṛṣabhadeva’s
teachings were, you know, something which Prabhupada quoted quite frequently.
So, here, he is quoting the verse which begins the instruction. So, "Ṛṣabhadeva"
is instructing his hundred sons headed by Bharata Mahārāja. And he starts by
telling that do not waste the human body in animal pleasures. So, let us look at
this verse.

        nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛ-loke
        kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye
        tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena sattvaṁ
        śuddhyed yasmād brahma-saukhyaṁ tv anantam

"nāyaṁ deho". That with this body, "deha-bhājāṁ nṛ-loke". "deha-bhājāṁ" means
one should not enjoy. "nṛ-loke". Especially in the human body. That which, that
pleasure which is born with the "deha". You know. "kaṣṭān kāmān arhate". So, one
should not do "kaṣṭān" to fulfill "kāmān". One does not have to do enormous hard
work. "kaṣṭān" means enormous hard work. "kāmān" to fulfill lust. Why?
"viḍ-bhujāṁ ye". So, here, this verse is like a slap on the face of the sense
enjoyer. You know. What is it being said over there? That what is the pleasure
that one is enjoying? That is the pleasure of "viḍ-bhujāṁ". "viḍ" is, stool.
So, those who enjoy the stool. That is their pleasure. What is the meaning of
that? The stool i..., the, the stool enjoyers are the hogs. So, what is the
pleasure of the hogs? The hogs are animals. And animals live for eating,
sleeping, mating, defending. So, even pigs, they unite. And they have their
piglets. And they also delight when, they also have their, hmm, th..., their
orgies when they enjoy sense pleasure. And if human beings also do that, then
there is a, what is so special about the human beings? So, "viḍ-bhujāṁ ye". So,
it is telling what is this standard of animal pleasure? Why should a human being
work hard for that pleasure that is enjoyed even by these low-class animals? So,
what should one do? "tapo divyaṁ". Divine austerity, one should perform. What
will happen by that austerity? "putrakā yena sattvaṁ". So, he is saying that my
dear sons, "putrakāḥ". "yena sattvaṁ śuddhyed". Your consciousness will become
purified. If you do austerity, your consciousness will become purified. And
then, what will happen by that? "yasmād brahma-saukhyaṁ tv anantam". You will
experience "brahma-sauk...", which is "anantam". So, these pleasures, Prabhupada
is correct..., co..., connecting this with, this as well as the previous verse.
This verse is saying, do not enjoy because it will lea..., lead to misery. The,
Prabhupada is saying, yes. That is what those scriptures say. That this is a low
class pleasure. Animal level pleasure. Do not enjoy it. But seek to become
purified by performing austerity. And then, one can have unlimited happiness.
So, there is, "brahma-saukhyaṁ tv anantam" is, you know, can be correlated with
5.21. You know, "sukham akṣayam aśnute". So, here, there is unlimited happiness.
There, also, you see, imperishable happiness. Same point. So, how does it work?
Wh..., why do we need to do austerity? Because in the transitional stage, when
we are put..., weaning ourselves away from material pleasure. And we are trying
to gain the spiritual pleasure. At that time, is there struggle. But if we
go through that struggle. If we weather that storm, then what happens is. We
move further. And we experience real spiritual happiness. So, "sukham akṣayam
aśnute". It is like a diseased condition. And in diseased condition, that person
cannot enjoy. So, the period of treatment is it period of austerity. Once one
follows the austerity. Then, one can experience real happiness. Once one is
healthy.

"The more one is addicted to material pleasures, the more he is entrapped by
material miseries."

So, the more pleasure we seek in material level. The more misery, also, we will
get. We cannot avoid that. Now, Arjuna gets the question at this point. Yeah.
I know. Ok. Even if I agree that yes, material enjoyment leads to misery. But
still, this, knowing this, my desires do not go away. The desires still stay.
So, what should I do? So, Krishna says, tolerate. He throws a challenge to
Arjuna. Tolerate.

        śaknotīhaiva yaḥ soḍhuṁ
        prāk śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt
        kāma-krodhodbhavaṁ vegaṁ
        sa yuktaḥ sa sukhī naraḥ

"śaknotīhaiva yaḥ soḍhuṁ". "śaknotīhaiva". Arjuna, if it is "śaknoti". If it is
possible for you. "soḍhuṁ". To tolerate. What? You know, tolerate f..., w...,
w..., what, this He will explain that in third line. "kāma-krodhodbhavaṁ vegaṁ".
So, by lust and the anger, certain urges come up. But tolerate them. And for how
long? You have to tolerate it. "prāk śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt". The, these, these urges
are born from the body. And because they are born from the body. They will be
there as long as we have the body. So, therefore, the, you have to tolerate them
as long as you have the body. Now, this can be sobering. At the same time, it
can also be, you know, hope-giving. Sobering means we know that we have a
struggle as long as we have a body. But actually, as we become purified. The
struggle becomes more and more manageable. The seg..., struggle becomes more and
more winnable for us. Doable. Winnable. So, "prāk śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt". What will
happen? "sa yuktaḥ". Such a person will be well-situated. Not only
well-situated, Krishna says. Such a person will be happy. "sa sukhī naraḥ". So,
it is interesting that what Krishna is telling over here is, s..., s..., that
the urges will come. But tolerate. Oh, Arjuna, if you, if you are, you are a
warrior, you can tolerate the onslaughts of the enemy when they hit physically,
still, you will keep fighting even if you are wounded. So, can you tolerate the
onslaughts of lust, of anger? When they attack and wound you, can you tolerate
those attacks? And still keep fighting? Counterattack? "śaknotī". Tolerate. So,
tolerance is the wall between temptation and transgression. Temptation is, we
feel, oh, this is so ni..., I want to enjoy it. This is, m..., let me just come
up, in our mind, some desires come up. We start feeling. Temptation. Now, all of
us will get temptations. But transgression means when we act on the temptation.
And we do something wrong. So, now, it is not that every time there is
temptation, there has to be transgression. No, that is not necessary. The
tolerance is the wall. So, f..., if there is something, you know, something
which is moving, so, a vehicle is moving from here to here. But suddenly, we
will find, there is a wall over here. It cannot move forward. So, tolerance is
the wall that prevents temptation from becoming transgression. So, yes,
temptation comes. But, you know, I will just let the temptation come. I will
tolerate it. It will go away. It is not going to be there forever. Just calm
down. Calm down. Do not get excited about it. So, "śaknotī". If it is possible
to tolerate. Now, actually, all of us tolerate. Various things in our life. You
know, for example. Hmm. If we are, hmm, hmm, working with somebody. Working with
the superior. And that superior, you know, you know, speaks harshly to us. Now,
some, most o..., most of us will not slap back at that person. There are so many
situations in our day-to-day life we have to tolerate using our good
intelligence. You know, This is not the way. If I, if I snap back over, hit, I
will make things worse. But I, later, I will communicate myself properly. You
know, so, my feelings and my concerns, I will communicate later. So, we all have
to use tolerance. Tolerance is not necessarily weakness. It is actually, often,
it is intolerance that can make us weak. Tolerance can help us to become strong.
So, we can help us to choose the right response. And make the right response.
So, tolerance is strength. The lack of tolerance is weakness. Because it makes
us "ś...", slave to our impulses. So, Krishna says, tolerate it. "śaknotī". Is
it possible for you, Arjuna? So, a, like that, a warrior, if it is thrown a
challenge. The warrior will say, yes, I will show it. I can do it. So, that is
how we should feel. Yes. So, when the temptations come, we should not think, oh,
temptations have come, now, I have to fall down. What can I do? These
temptations are coming. No. The temptations simply indicate that we have become
disconnected from Krishna. So, when the temptations come, that does not mean
that we have to become connected with sense gratification. You see, if there
are, in America and other places. Where there are long long roads. In many
places, the matter of security on the side of the roads. They have some sort of,
you know, speed breakers sort of things. There are bumps. So, when the person is
driving on the road. And suddenly, the person is inattentive. Maybe, because the
roads are long and clear, the person manages do..., a, dozes off to sleep or
something while driving. Sleeping on the wheel. Then, sudden, the vehicle
starts going off-track. When they start going off-track, what happens is, it
meets this speed breaker like structures which cause that person to be jolt. And
the vehicle jolts. And the person, oh, wakes up. And then, as soon as the person
wakes, hey, the vehicle is going off-track. Pull it back on track. So, when the
jolts come, when the jolts come, that does not necessarily mean that the vehicle
has to go off the road. And one has to meet and then accelerate. The jolts are
warning that one is going off-track. So, what should we do, one, when the jolt
come? Pull the vehicle back on track. So, similarly, when material desires start
making in our m..., you know, rising in our mind. That simply means that we are
going off-track. When temptations start coming in our mind. And they start a...,
a..., a..., c..., a..., agitating us. Then, that means our Krishna connection
has become weak. You know, we are meant to be going on straight road of Krishna
Consciousness. But we are straight off-track. So, when we are straight
off-track, what should we do? Pull back. Pull back and come on track. Not that
because the temptation has come, So, I have to act in it. That means, oh,
because the jolt has come, now, I have to hold unto the ditch and fall off. No.
It is not like that. So, at that time, pull back.

So, rather than saying the temp..., when the arrival of te..., seeing the
arrival of temptation as a cause for capitulation. Capitulation means giving up.
We should see the arrival of temptation as a cause for retaliation. Retaliation.
Yes, I, my mind let me off-track. I will fight. I will come back on track. So,
it, seat, we should see the tempt..., the arrival of temptation not as a cause
for capitulation. But as a cause for retaliation. You know, the mind took me
off-track. I will not be cheated. Come back. Yes. You know. It is, it is not
safe to fall asleep while we are driving. But if it happens, what do we do? It
is not that we have to become meet an accident. We can pull back on track. So,
the jolts that we experience inside, when we start getting tempted, that simply
indicates that we have s..., we have started steering off-track. We have started
going away from the path of Krishna Consciousness. You know, we come back on the
path. Chant Hare Krishna. Remember some philosophy. Pray to Krishna. Think of
some beautiful pictures of Him, deities. Sing some m..., melodious bhajans. Some
prayers. Whatever. All of us have to have our own ready stock of weapons.
Weapons means that these are the means by which we beat down the temptations.
So, all of us need to have that ready stock of weapons. And with them, when we
beat down temptation, then we become calm. We become steady. We become composed.
And then, we can come back on track. So, Krishna is saying tolerate. And "prāk
śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt". Till the moment of death. Actually, we should never let our
guard down. You know, th..., when as a, a f..., say, a firefighter becomes more
and more seasoned. More and more experienced. It is not that when the
firefighter has, has twenty years of experience. That does not mean that because
that firefighter has twenty years of experience, so, the fires that are going to
a, get, set in the city are going to become smaller. No. The fires will still be
as big. But the firefighter will be expert. You know, for the first time, when
the firefighter goes and sees. There is a fire. You know, that, what happens is
the firehoses, the, a..., a..., a..., you know, the firehose drops off the hand.
Such a big fire. What should I do? Then, somebody says, come on. Back up. Take
up this firehose. And shoot. Pour the water on it. So, at when he pours, pours
the water, and the fire start..., start getting extinguished. But if the f...,
sea..., the firefighter is a seasoned firefighter, twenty years down the link,
then what happens? Then, as soon as the fire is seen, immediately, the fire was
big erupt. The button is pressed. And exactly knows, ok, the fire is coming from
here. So, I should put more water on this side. Not on this side. And exactly
with intelligence. With the diligence. With speed. The person expertly
extinguishes the fire. So, it is not that the fires will not be set up just
because the firefighter has experience. S..., so, lust is like a fire. So, just
because I have practiced Krishna Consciousness for five years, ten years, twenty
years. That does not mean that the fires of lust will not be set off. Yes, there
will be provoking sense objects. And, of course, our provocation may be lesser.
It should be lesser. But it does not matter whether provocation is lesser or
not. The important thing is that we have the means. We have the knowledge to
extinguish it. So, rather than lamenting, oh, why are these fires of lust
getting set up? We should become more seasoned, more experienced. As soon as the
fires get set up, extinguish them. So, extinguish them. So, take on the, take on
the firehose. So, what is our firehose? Th..., our firehose is remembrance of
Krishna. So, when we take up the firehose, the remembrance of Krishna and start
extin..., dousing the fire. Then, fire dies off. So, what we should try, expect
is not that these, the desires do not come up. Actually, the desires will also
stop coming. But they will not stop coming just because we expect them to stop
coming. They will stop coming when we repeatedly and insistently say no to them.
You know, no. I, I, not. Nothing doing. Nothing doing. Nothing doing.

Every time, we indulge a little bit in the desire. The desire blazes forward.
And every time we say no to it, the desire goes away. Desire dies down. Dies
down. Sometimes, occasionally, it may appear that when, you know, we f..., say
no to a desire. Sometimes, it appears this desire is becoming stronger.
You know, we say no to the temptation. And we feel, this temptation, it is
troubling me all the more. Actually, it is not like that. Prabhupada gives the
example that when a, in a circus, the circus trainer is training a tiger. So,
initially, the tiger, you know, how the tiger is trained. Normally, it is
trained through eating. So, you know, when the tiger does what the circus
trainer want, the tiger is fed. Otherwise, the tiger is not fed. So, now, when
the tiger is not fed, at that time, the tiger's roar start becoming more
threatening, more menaking..., menacing. And, you know, it is in, as if it is
going to shake off and break off through the whole cage itself. The way it
roars. And an inexperienced observer may start trembling, yes, so, it becomes so
ferocious. Better fee..., feed the tiger something. But the experienced circus
trainer knows that tiger may be roaring louder. But it is becoming weaker. It is
roaring louder, externally. But b..., because it is not being fed, it is
becoming weaker. And if one can tolerate that. Tolerate that. Loud, loud roars.
No matter how much you intimated, I am not going to get threatened. That tiger
cannot come out of the cage. That cannot do anything. So, then, now, gradually,
it becomes docile. It understand my roaring is not going to get me anywhere.
Then, I, I have to simply do what this ti..., trainer is telling me. Then, I
will get food. Otherwise, I will not get food. So, then, the tiger become
docile. Becomes obedient. And then, even after it becomes obedient, still, the
tiger has to be dealt with caution. It cannot be trusted very easily. So, you
know, similarly, the m..., mind is like the tiger. When, when the mind says,
come on. Enjoy. And we says no. You know. Enjoy. The mind starts roaring like a
tiger. Roaring. Come on. Do it. Oh. Ok. Ok. Ok. Ok. Do not trouble me so much.
You know. We start becoming submissive to the mind. Instead of becoming
submissive to Krishna, we become submissive to the mind. We do not have to
become submissive to the mind. We do not have to become intimidated by its
caring technics. Actually, the mind may be screaming louder. But if we are not
fulfilling its impulses, it is becoming weak..., weaker. It is becoming weaker.
And, oh, initially, it may roar and roar, and scream. But gradually, if we do not
s..., fulfill its desire, then that roar will come down to a whimper. Phew. And
then, it will become silent. So, actually speaking, we have to stow the mind.

        prāk śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt

So, rather than expecting that the desires will go away on their own, what we
should do is, repeatedly and insistently, you know, consistently, we say no to
those desires. And not, not get intimidated by their threats. Then, they will
become weaker. They will become weaker. So, we have talked about two aspects
over here. First is that when we become s..., you know, spiritually seasoned, we
should not expect that the desires go away. Rather, we should become expert in
our responses. Yes. Just like an expert firefighter becomes quick in the
responses. You know. Quick and expert. You know, this is how I should douse this
fire when it has come. And secondly, when we should do is, when we are
practicing spiritual life, we do not get intimidated by the threats. And do
starve the mind. When we starve the mind, it will eventually become
exting..., it will become silenced. So, that is, you know, you know, Krishna is
telling, you are "śaknoti". Arjuna, is it possible for you? If it is possible,
then you will be able to move forward. And become "sukhī". "yuktaḥ" means
well-situated. "sukhī" means happy. Actually, we will have relief. We will have
happiness when we become detached. If we g..., are indulging, the desires will
keep blazing more and more. And we will never have happiness. So, Prabhupada
writes over here. Hmm. Yeah.

"It is the duty of the transcendentalist to try strenuously to control desire
and anger."

This is very significant usage. Try strenuously, Prabhupada says. So, most
people try strenuously to fulfill their desires. Try strenuously. You know.
Materialistic people want to fulfill some desire. But all they are ready to do
that. You know. You know. But all, you know. Say, when a, a m..., boy falls in
love with a girl. And then, they, the person is ready to do so much. And people
go and watch movies about it. And read novels about it. And person is ready to
risk one's life. And risk one's good name. Risk everything for the sake of love.
So, actually, most of that love is lust. But the point is, the people are ready
to be strenuously working for that. So, just as, you know, there are people who
are strenuous..., strenuously work to fulfill their desires. A devotee is
work..., h..., f..., strenuously to transcend their desires. They tolerate
first. And then, transcend. So, no doubt. Spiritual life is hard work. The work
is inner. The work is inward, not outward. But the work is no doubt there. And
when we do the work, the result is far better, far greater. You know, by
fulfilling our desires, the result is going to be temporary. If, at all, the
desires get fulfilled. We discussed how it is att..., not attainable. Not
palatable. Not retainable. One of these will, going to be fallen. "duḥkha-yonaya
eva te". But if we become purified. If we become student by the spiritual
platform, then it is going to be everrelishable. Everfresh. Everrelishable. That
is what we are going to get. Therefore, a devotee learns to tolerate. Devotee
becomes determined to tolerate. So, now, Krishna talks about, you know, turning
inwards. Once again. So, He has told how do we deal with outer desires? Know
that they lead to misery and tolerate. Then:

        yo ’ntaḥ-sukho ’ntar-ārāmas
        tathāntar-jyotir eva yaḥ
        sa yogī brahma-nirvāṇaṁ
        brahma-bhūto ’dhigacchati

So, Krishna says, now, this verse is similar to 3.17:

        yas tv ātma-ratir eva syād
        ātma-tṛptaś ca mānavaḥ
        ātmany eva ca santuṣṭas

Look for inner happiness. So, "’ntar". "’ntar" comes three times. "’ntar" comes
twice. Three times, actually. "yo ’ntaḥ-sukho". One whose happiness inwards. One
who delights inwards. And one whose light is inwards. "tathāntar-jyotir eva
yaḥ". So, Krishna is telling, emphasising, turn inwards. Look for happiness
inw..., so, what happens to such a person? "sa yogī brahma-nirvāṇaṁ". Such a
person attains spiritual happiness. And when person who is spirit..., spiritual
happiness? "brahma-bhūto ’dhigacchati". "brahma-bhū...". So, first, the person
will attain the spiritual happiness. And this person attains spiritual
existence. So, now, a..., a..., "brahma-nirvāṇaṁ", we may say it does not mean
spiritual happiness. What does it exactly mean? Actually, Prabhupada translate
"brahma-nirvāṇaṁ" as liberated in the Supreme. Let us look at this word
"brahma-nirvāṇaṁ" once again. You know, it is a significant word. Now, people
think that the word "brahma-nirvāṇaṁ" is a buddhistic word. So, g..., yeah. So,
what does buddhistic is about, "brahma-nirvāṇaṁ" mean? The materialistics
theme..., materialistic people think that life ends with death. The jnanis
understand that life begins after d..., jnanis think that life begins with
death. Because they say, oh, this material existence is an illusion. Reality is
when we come out of that illusion. Life begins with death. But bhaktis
understand that life begins whenever we start serving Krishna. Because
eternally, what are we going to do? We are forever going to serve Krishna. So,
the moment we start serving Krishna that is a time from which our real life
begins. And our real life continues. Continues. Continues. Continues. Eternally.
So, life begins whenever we start serving Krishna. That is "brahma-nirvāṇaṁ".
So, "nirvāṇaṁ" is often thought of as a buddhistic word. "nirvāṇaṁ" means
cessation. Termination. So, yes, there is cessation of material existence.
"nirvāṇaṁ" is there. But along with that, there is "brahma". "brahma" means that
there is higher spiritual realisation. There is life in brahman. So,
"brahma-nirvāṇaṁ" means ending of material existence. And beginning of existence
in spiritual realm. So, because Krishna is also saying after that, you know,
"brahma-bhūto ’dhigacchati". That person also attains "brahma-bhūtaḥ". That
person attains spiritual existence. So, this word, "brahma-nirvāṇaṁ" comes
several times in the Bhagavad Gita. Hmm. Let us look at its occurrences. So, it
has come in 2.72 earlier.

        eṣā brāhmī sthitiḥ pārtha
        naināṁ prāpya vimuhyati
        sthitvāsyām anta-kāle ’pi
        brahma-nirvāṇam ṛcchati

So, it has come once over there. That a person who is situated in the spiritual
life. And if he remains that way at the ti..., time of death the person attains
"brahma-nirvāṇam". And now, here, it has come in 5.24. It will come again in
5.25, also:

        labhante brahma-nirvāṇam
        ṛṣayaḥ kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ
        chinna-dvaidhā yatātmānaḥ
        sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ

So, it is, describes that the person who does all these things. One who is
purified. One who is f..., you know, w..., you know, free, free from purity.
One who works for the well-being of others. Such a person attains
"brahma-nirvāṇam". And then, once again, it will come in 6.15. Hmm. He ex...,
s..., point in 6.15, Krishna says that, th..., th..., the person who practices
yoga steadily, that person attains:

        yuñjann evaṁ sadātmānaṁ
        yogī niyata-mānasaḥ
        śāntiṁ nirvāṇa-paramāṁ
        mat-saṁsthām adhigacchati

So, there, He uses the word "nirvāṇa" again. So, "nirvāṇa" is cessation of
existence. So, now, what Krishna is telling over here is that, "nirvāṇa" is
there. But, so, "nirvāṇa" refers to end of material existence. But along with
that, there is, well, there is "brahma-nirvanam". That means that "nirvāṇa"
refers to the end of material existence. Ab..., but "brahma-nirvanam" and
"brahma-bhuto" refers to simultaneous revival of spiritual existence. So,
simultaneous revival of spiritual existence. So, what are, the mayavad..., so,
the brah..., buddhists, they give the example that the candle is lighting. Phew.
Then, the candle gets extinguished. Like that, our illusory existent end. And
then we enter into the void. But actually, even if the candle gets extinguished,
the energy that is there, which led to the lighting of the candle. That energy
does not get extinguished. You know, there is conservation of energy. So, the
energy will continue to exist. And that energy will simply get transferred, you
know, d..., in some other form. So, like that, yes, at the time of death, the
consciousness is no longer manifested in the material form. But that does not
mean the consciousness gets extinguished. The consciousness continues to exist.
The consciousness simp..., simply is expressed, is, you know, channelised to
some other level. Where one experiences deeper level of reality. One experiences
a higher consciousness. So, simultaneous revival of spiritual existence is
there. So, in this way, actually, Krishna says, one attains spiritual existence.
So, turn inwards. And by turning inwards, one will attain spiritual existence.
So, that is the goal of life. Now, Krishna will take further about how one can
experience the spiritual happiness. Now, Prabhupada explains that:

"A liberated person enjoys happiness by factual experience."

Now, factual, Prabhupada says. Actually, when a devotee is happy. That is
factual experience. It is not some, just sentimental imagination. People may
think, you know, when devo..., people, devotees chant. And dance. And sing. And
they look so bright-faced. Oh, why are these people so happy? You know, have
these people taken some drugs? What is it makes them so happy? Their faces are
so bright. So, what, what is that makes them happy? Because that is factual
experience of happiness. It is not just some sentimental imagination. The soul,
when it comes in contact with Krishna, through the sound of the holy name,
through these spiritual sounds, then what happens is the person experiences
higher happiness. So, Prabhupada explains, m..., what does factually being
ha..., happy, happiness mean?

"... factual experience. He can, therefore, sit silently at any place and enjoy
the activities of life from within."

What are the activities of life? What activities of devotional service? The
remembrance of Krishna. A devotee can sit in any place. And meditate on
Krishna's pastimes. Chant the holy names. And experience a deep fulfillment. A
devotee does not need anything external. Of course, the devotee comes out in the
external world. And acts in the external world, also. Because the devotee wants
to share the happiness, that has been relished internally, with others. So, the
devotee is not dependent on that. So, "’ntah-sukho ’ntar-aramas". So, we may not
experience this at all times. But all of us have our experiences. When we start
relishing inner happiness. Oh, this is so en..., relishable. This is so
wonderful. I wish I could en..., I, I wish, wish I could hold unto it more. We
can hold unto it. We all get occasional glimpses of spiritual happiness. You
know, we may go for some yatras. Or some days, we go for darshan. And the
darshan is very beautiful. Sometimes, there are very wonderful kirtans.
Sometimes, some classes are very memorable. So, all those are our spiritual
memories. They are our treasuries. So, we have to make our memories into a
treasury. We, what do we do? In our memory, we remember the times when we have
had these wonderful spiritual experiences. So, instead of letting our memory
become, you know, filled with, you know, the recollections of our past sense
gratification. Which will keep haunting us. Oh, you enjoyed like that. Come on.
Enjoy again. Enjoy again. Enjoy again. So, instead of letting those memories
stay, we replace those memories with our devotional m..., memories. So, you
know, unfortunately, our memory does not seem to adhere to these sort of, you
know, m..., a, recollections. You know, so, we have to consciously cultivate it.
Sometimes, we may have had accelerating spiritual experiences. But, some..., we
just completely forget them some time. Sometimes, we hear some classes. And such
brilliant insights. It is, insight is life-changing. You know. What a point. I
am going to change my, the way I live. What? Maybe, just one day, after that, we
forget that whole thing. You know, we have to cherish those memories. How do we
cherish? It can be my remembering, internally. Or maybe, it can be my noting
down, externally, in some personal diary. Making a small short diary, where we
just have the most important points. Most important experiences. Most
exporian..., most transforming realisations, insights that we have had. And keep
them in the treasury. So, of course, we have to internalise them. And our memory
has to become our treasury. But we have all had those experiences. And if we
keep perceiving in spiritual life, those ex..., experiences will become more
frequent. And more, you know, consistent. So, they will become more, a, they
will, more frequent and more persistent. When they c..., they will come more
frequently. And when they come, they will stay for longer time. So, and in that
way, you know, the, you know, we will c..., come to the spiritual state
eventually. Where we attain staibha. Staibha means testing in spiritual emotion.
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu talks about this. So, steady spiritual emotion, when we
have, then any material emotions will no longer trouble us. And that will be
our, the, you know, eventually, the pathway to, the steady pathway for our
spiritual perfection. You know, th..., so, Krishna says that such a person has
attained "brahma-nirvanam". Liberated from material existence. Reinstated in
spiritual existence.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
