Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QV2ozTQRfKw
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=QV2ozTQRfKw&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_086_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_06_Text_37_to_45_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=ujdPfixuSYcZZwYDty7KN9p0Kf58MTU0ODQ4ODM0OEAxNTQ4NDAxOTQ4

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now coming to the last part of this Sixth Chapter. Let us start our discussion
with 6.37 onwards. So, Arjuna has asked first a question that how does one deal
with the mind? The mind is so troublesome. And Krishna has told him, we deal
with it, with patience, with persistence, and detachment. So, "abhyāsena". And
"vairāgyeṇa". Now, Arjuna gets a question. Ok. It may be possible. But that may
take a very long time. And what if one starts a process and is not able to
complete it? What happens to a person who takes to the path of yoga. But then
later, gives it up. That will be talked about in the next verse. So, let us move
forward. We will discuss with, so, 37 to 45. This is the question-answer of
Krishna and Arjuna over here. 37:

        arjuna uvāca

        ayatiḥ śraddhayopeto
        yogāc calita-mānasaḥ
        aprāpya yoga-saṁsiddhiṁ
        kāṁ gatiṁ kṛṣṇa gacchati

So, "ayatiḥ śraddhayopeto". H..., so, "śraddhayopeto". One had "śraddha". And
one engages in the process. But then, "ayatiḥ". One is unsuccessful. "yatiḥ" can
mean renunciate. "yatiḥ" can mean transcendentalist. So, the, you know,
transcendentalist, "ayatiḥ". That means that does not persevere, does not
continue in the path of transcendence. Why? "yogāc calita-mānasaḥ". So, the mind
becomes deviated. So, this is the connecting link. The whole chapter has been
about the mind. In many ways. It is about, of course, ashtanga-yoga. But within
ashtanga-yoga, the essential thread of thought is how to control the mind. So,
"yogāc calita-mānasaḥ". Then, what happens to such a person? "aprāpya". Because
the mind gets deviated. So, "calita" is also related with the word "cañcalaṁ".
"calaṁ". So, m..., "calita". The mind goes off. So, "cañcalaṁ" refers to re...,
restlessness. The mind goes here. The mind goes there. It is restless. But
"calita-mānasaḥ" means, just goes off completely. And drags the person, also,
off from the path of yoga. On the path of yoga, sometimes, our mind may go to
some sensual activities. But if it does not, hmm, you know, take us off the
spiritual path entirely. Then, that is just a mental deviation. But here,
Krishna is talking about a person who leaves the path of yoga, entirely. "yogāc
calita-mānasaḥ". You know. Such a person, "aprāpya yoga-saṁsiddhiṁ". Such a
person does not attain "saṁsiddhiṁ". Perfection on the path of yoga. So, then,
"kāṁ gatiṁ kṛṣṇa gacchati". What will be the destination of such a person? So,
Krish..., you know, here, uses the sentiment form of address. Krishna. Krishna,
what will be their destination? "kāṁ gatiṁ". What will be the destination of
such a person who is unable to attain success on the path of yoga? "ayatiḥ
śraddhayopeto". So, one who is not successful. But one gets deviated. So,
Prabhupada explains that in the purport, He talk, quotes from 2.41 where, you
know, 2.40, rather. Where Arjuna has been assured earlier by Krishna that on the
transcendental path, there is no loss. Or diminution.

        nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti
        pratyavāyo na vidyate

That "nehābhikrama". Diminution. Or loss. One does not lose it. Nor does one,
one does not achieve it, get decreased? So, that is what is going to, but how
that happens? That is going to be the, a, question that will be discussed over
here. The preliminary, you know, characteristic of that that there is no loss
has been mentioned. But now, there will be more systematic elaboration. And hmm.
You know. Prabhupada talks about how, m..., this is, applies to the, so, he
says:

"Self-realization is sought by the path of knowledge, by the practice of the
eightfold system or by bhakti-yoga."

So, these are the various processes of transcendence, jnana-yoga, ashtanga-yoga,
bhakti-yoga. Now, either way, one has to realise oneself spiritually. So, how
does one do that? That is by, you know, by spiritual practice. So, in that, one
may not be able to, a, continue it. So, what happens if one is not able to
continue it? So, at that time, it is described in the next verse. He conti...,
Arjuna continues the question clarifying it. You know. So, he describes how such
a person, who is trying to progress in the transcendental path, you know, what
happens to such a person? So, the first most important point is that the person
gets deviated by the mind. And is unsuccessful on the path of yoga. But
thereafter, what is the nes..., net result of that sort of deviation? He, A...,
giv..., Arjuna gives the example to illustrate this. 

        kaccin nobhaya-vibhraṣṭaś
        chinnābhram iva naśyati
        apratiṣṭho mahā-bāho
        vimūḍho brahmaṇaḥ pathi

"kaccin nobhaya-vibhraṣṭaś". "ubhaya", "vibhraṣṭaḥ" means from both paths, one
is deviated. "chinnābhram iva naśyati". "chinnābhram". So, "ābhram" is like
cloud. "chinna". "chinna" is separated. Torn apart. Such a person becomes, just
as a torn apart cloud gets "naśyati". Gets destroyed. Similarly, m...,
"apratiṣṭho". "apratiṣṭho" means without any foundation. Without any base.
Without any position. "mahā-bāho". "vimūḍho brahmaṇaḥ pathi". Does not such a
person become "vimūḍhaḥ"? One who is in the path of Brahman. "pathi". "pathi" is
path. "brahmaṇaḥ" is the path of transcendence. So, you know, in the Bhagavad
Gita, there are many places where metaphors are drawn from nature. So, here,
this metaphor that is drawn. There are two clouds. Say. One cloud is moving in
one direction. Another cloud is moving in another direction. Both clouds are
moving in the sky. Now, within this, you know, array of clouds, say, one small
cloud breaks apart from that direction. And it wants to move from, so, these two
clouds are moving apart like this. And one array of cloud wants to, breaks apart
from this. And wants to come to this side. So, while this trying to move in this
direction, at that time, say, sudden gust of wind comes along. And blows the
cloud away. So, this tiny cloud, tiny g..., you know, part of a cloud, it has
broken away from one piece of, one cloud formation to go to another cloud
formation. But it has been blown away before it can reach from the first to the
second. So, like that, you know, if there is one group of people who are on the
path of karma. You know. And there are another group of people who are the path
of moksha. Who are, they are a part of, people who are living in the worldly
life. And there are, pur..., people who are pursuing the other worldly goal. So,
those who leave the worldly life. And seek the other wordly goal. You know. They
want to join from this group to that group. So, they are like this, you know,
r..., r..., riven cloud. A part of a cloud that has come, come out from the
remaining. Then, what happens to them? So, cer..., for cert..., if because of
some reason, "yogāc calita-mānasaḥ". They are enabled to continue on the path
through transcendence. Then, what happens to them? You know. Will they not
become "apratiṣṭhaḥ". No. Either, neither at home. H..., nor at some other
shelter. So, one is lost completely. So, will thus be their destination? Arjuna
is asking. So, "brahmaṇaḥ pathi". They are all on the path of transcendence. But
they become "vimūḍhaḥ". They become deluded on that path. And Krishna assures,
you know, Arjuna, h..., in..., intensely emo..., it is not just a theoretical
abstract question. It is a serious question. Because we are going to stake our
life. Our future on our spiritual practices. So, what is going to happen? So, he
asks in the next verse. 

        etan me saṁśayaṁ kṛṣṇa
        chettum arhasy aśeṣataḥ
        tvad-anyaḥ saṁśayasyāsya
        chettā na hy upapadyate

So, "etan me saṁśayaṁ kṛṣṇa". This is my "saṁśayaṁ". H..., this is my doubt. And
then, "chettum arhasy aśeṣataḥ". "chettum", m..., so "chettum" means to ri...,
break apart. To destroy. To dispel as Prabhupada translate. "arhasy". I request
you. In me who is you to do that. "aśeṣataḥ". Completely remove this doubt. And
then, he is saying, c..., somebody else can also remove this? But he says no.
You are the Supreme Absolute Truth. And you have the highest knowledge.
Therefore, "tvad-anyaḥ saṁśayasyāsya". Apart from you, this "saṁśaya". "chettā
na hy upapadyate". There is no one who can remove this "saṁśaya". You are the
only person who can remove it. Therefore, I beg you to remove it. So, now, this
is a three-verse sequence. Which is in a question format. In fact, this was the,
in many ways the longest question that Arjuna will ask Krishna. In the Tenth
Chapter, also, he requests, you know, Krishna to show His glories. That time,
also, he a..., there are several verses which come as a question. You know. But
among them, these are, you know, this, a three-verse sequence, sequence is the
longest in the Bhagavad Gita. M..., so, these three-verse seq..., se...,
similarly, three-verses sequence will come elsewhere, also. But it is
significant that Arjuna has a question. And he, that his question itself goes on
for three verses. So, now, after describing this. "etan me saṁśayaṁ". This is my
doubt. And, you know, you know, Krishna, you alone can remove it. So, just as it
is described by acharyas in 2.7, 2.8. You know, that, 2.7 when Arjuna surrenders.
That he says that, you know:

        pṛcchāmi tvāṁ dharma-sammūḍha-cetāḥ

I ask you forward this to. And then, he emphasises that, you know, in upses the
entry of that request. The intensity of that request. He raises it by saying,
actually, apart from you, you know, he says, nothing else from enlightenmen...,
apart from enlightenment will solve my problem.

        na hi prapaśyāmi mamāpanudyād

That is what describe in 2.8. Similarly, he says that, apart from you, no one
can remove this doubt. So, Prabhupada quotes how Krishna is omniscient. And
therefore, He is capable of answering all questions. So, now, A..., Krishna's
answer starts from 40. You know. And goes on till 45. And 46 and 47 is like the
conclusion of the chapter.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        pārtha naiveha nāmutra
        vināśas tasya vidyate
        na hi kalyāṇa-kṛt kaścid
        durgatiṁ tāta gacchati

So, "pārtha naiveha nāmutra". You know. So, Pṛ..., here, Arjuna, Krishna a...,
addresses Arjuna a very intimate way. Oh, "Pṛthā". Neither here, nor in the next
world. "iha". "amutra". "eha nāmutra" means in this world. "amutra" means the
nex..., other world. Next world. "vināśas tasya vidyate". Such a person will
never meet with destruction. "na hi kalyāṇa-kṛt kaścid". One who tries to do
good, oh, Arjuna. One who tries to work in the ausp..., one, work auspiciously
for others. "na hi kalyāṇa-kṛt kaścid". "durgatiṁ tāta gacchati". Such a person
will never meet with an inauspicious destination. "tāta". "tāta" refers to,
it is again a very intimate form of address. Very intimate form of address.
"tāta". "durgatiṁ tāta gacchati". So, dear Arjuna, who, that one who tries to
goo..., do good will never meet with evil from anyone else. One, that person
will never be overcome. This same theme of compassion, you know, of Krishna's
compassionate assurance. Compassionate and categorical assurance will be
repeated in Ninth Chapter. When Krishna will describe, especailly for the
bhaktas.

        kaunteya pratijānīhi
        na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

My devotee will never perish. So, of course, Krishna has not yet talked about
devotion very explicitly in this chapter. But He has talking about, in general,
transcendentalist. And He is saying that, "na hi kalyāṇa-kṛt kaścid". One who is
doing good, oh, my dear Arjuna. One, that will just, person will never meet with
or..., evil. It is a very heart-touching statement to this form. Assurance. And
to make the assurance, you know, more reassuring, Krishna uses the very
endearing form of address for Arjuna. "tāta". "tāta". "tāta" means oh, friend.
Or "tāta" is an intimate form of address in sanskrit. "durgatiṁ tāta gacchati".
You even know, "durgatiṁ". Such a pers..., such a person. So, you know, now,
before, see, when people are in anxiety, a, we can give them philosophy to help
them deal with the anxity. But along with that, philosophically he..., helping
them, we also have to emotionally solace them. So, before Krishna gives Arjuna a
clear philosophical answer. First thing that He does is, gives him emotional
assurance. So, things will be alright. And they will improve. Things will
become. Do not worry about it. So, when He gives an assurance. And that is what
enables Arjuna to calm down. And then, Arj..., that, once that Arj..., assurance
is gained, then Krishna goes forward and talks about further, you know,
philosophically explaning what will happen to such a person. So, Prabhupada is,
it is third time, Prabhupada is quoting in this Bhag..., Bhagavad Gita purport.
1.5.17. This verse, f..., in Nārada Muni's instructions to Vyāsadeva about how
one who gives up prescribed duties, for the sake of devotional service, does not
perish. On the other hand, just doing prescribed duties without taking to
devotional service, you know, is of no use. From the transcendental perspective.
So, Prabhupada here goes into elaborate clarifica..., you know, the
categorisation of human beings. And he says humans be treat..., can be
categorised in two section. The regulated, non-regulated. So, what is
regulated? Those who follow scriptural regulation. Non-regulated are those who
live simply for fulfilling the animal propensities. And then, he talks about,
among the regulated, there are the karma-kandis. And then, there are the
jnana-kand..., the karma-kandis want to enjoy material prosperity through
religion. And there are the jnana-kandis. Who to aspire for liberation. And
then, there are the bhaktas. So, karma-kandi. So, then, nishk..., sakama and
nishkama. And then, Prabhupada talks about how sakama is not auspicious. The
only auspicious activities are those which lead one to liberation. So, why is
Prabhupada giving this categorisation over here in this purport? Because he is
explaining what "kalyāṇa-kṛt" is. "kalyāṇa" means auspicious. So, what is
auspicious activity, actually? Actual auspicious activity is that which is aimed
for liberation. Hmm. Any auspicious activity which is not aimed for liberation
is not at all auspicious, Prabhupada writes. And Krishna has talked about this
earlier, also, in 2.49. Where He has said:

        dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma
        buddhi-yogād dhanañ-jaya
        buddhau śaranam anviccha
        kṛpaṇāḥ phala-hetavaḥ

So, in 2.49, He has stated that "dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma". "avaraṁ karma". Give
up inauspicious work. And what is the sin of auspicious work? He has explained
it to be the practice of, you know, karma-kanda. So, we would think inauspicious
work as sinful activities. Yes. That, that is definitely inauspicious. But even
the practice of dharma for the sake of artha, kama. That means karma-kanda. That
is also considered inauspicious. Because that is not aimed for liberation.
Material existence itself is unf..., ultimately inauspicious. And one needs to
come out of material existence. And that happens when one practices serious
devotional service. So, serious spiritual life in general. And devotional
service is the best am..., method of practicing spiritual life. So, give, give
up inauspicious work. And now, Krishna will go into specifics. So, first, He has
described the generic principle. Yes, they will not be the auspicious. Now, He
will describe the specific. Let us look at 41.

        prāpya puṇya-kṛtāṁ lokān
        uṣitvā śāśvatīḥ samāḥ
        śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe
        yoga-bhraṣṭo ’bhijāyate

So, "prāpya puṇya-kṛtāṁ lokān". Those who have done "puṇya". So, those "lokān".
The "lokān" for those people. Which are those "lokān"? This is the heavenly
planets. So, the abodes of the s..., pious people are the heavenly planets. So,
so, this is b..., bhaktas will attain that abode. "prāpya puṇya-kṛtāṁ lokān".
And then, "uṣitvā śāśvatīḥ samāḥ". They will stay there for a long time.
"śāśvatīḥ samāḥ". Long long time. From the point of view of earthly, earthly
beings, the lifespan of the, you know, heavenly residence is enormous. It
appears. It is so great as compared to that of earthly beings that it can, many
people considered to be m..., almost indestructible. Forever. And that is why in
that relative sense, the heavenly residence are considered "amara". They are
not actually "amara". They are not immortal. You know. There are, in the
scripture, there are, described as four, you know, categories of being. There is
"martyāḥ". There is "amara". There is "chiranjeeva". And there is "nitya". So,
only "nitya" are eternal. So, "martyāḥ" are the earthly living beings. Who have
a short lifespan. A hundred years at the most. Maybe, more in the earlier ages.
But it is not long. Then, there is "amara". Who, those who are the heavenly
residents. Who have a, such a long lifetime as compared to earthly, that to
many earthly people, it appears forever. But it is not forever. Then, there is
"chiranjeev". "chiranjeeva" is those who live for one lifetime of Brahma. You
know. One day of Brahma. Or in some cases, the words are not fixed. But
generally, it is one day of Brahma. In some case, it may be one lifetime of
Brahma, also. But that means that, point is that, it is categorically longer
than the heavenly lifetime, also. And beyond that is nitya. Nitya is eternal.
That is, those who live in the spiritual world, they live forever. So, Krishna
is telling that, "śāśvatīḥ samāḥ". Those who go to heavens, they live there for
a long time. And then, after that, "śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe". "śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ
gehe". A, "gehe" means in the houses. So, what kind of houses? "śucīnāṁ
śrīmatāṁ". So, what is "śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ". "śucī" is pure-hearted. And
"śrīmatāṁ" is wealthy. So, so, these are two advantageous families. Hmm. Hmm.
How are these advantageous? If one is born in a pure family. Of the pious
family. "śucīnāṁ". Then, one has samskaras which are favorable for
transcendence. And if one is born in a "śrīmatāṁ" family. "śrī" is the goddess
of fortune. "śrīmatāṁ" refers to that which is aristocratic. Wealthy family.
Then, one does not have to struggle much for material existence. And by that,
one can continue on in spiritual life steadily. "yoga-bhraṣṭo ’bhijāyate".
"’bhijāyate". Hmm. Hmm. They take birth. So, Krishna, Arjuna has used earlier
the word "yogāc calita-mānasaḥ". Krishna is using here "yoga-bhraṣṭo". So, same
point. Those who get deviated. "yoga-bhraṣṭo". So, what happens to the
"śucīnāṁ"? "śrīmatāṁ gehe". Normally, in this world, people get distracted from
spiritual life for many reasons. Among them, the primary are that either they
are brought up in such an upbringing. They are in such a circumstance that it is
very unconducive for spiritual life. It is very anti-spiritual. Their
upbringing. And things like that. Their culture is anti-spiritual.

Or otherwise, they may be in a spiritual culture. But because they are so caught
up in just struggling to maintain the body. That is difficult for them to
practice spiritual life. So, that is "śrīmatāṁ". So, that problem is, you know,
you know, that means either one can have so many internal, see, there is the
soul. And the soul has, can have mental obstacles for the practice of spiritual
life. Or can have s..., physical obstacles for the practice of spiritual life.
So, physical obstacles can refer to the problems that one faces, you know, you
know, in terms of maintaining the body. Eating, you know, making the
arrangements for the bodily necessities. And mental obstacles can be the
conditionings and the, you know, misconceptions that one has acquired, you know,
during one's upbringing. And because of one's cultural conventions and
conceptions. So, now, both of them can misdirect. So, "śr...", "śrīmatāṁ"
prevents one from getting too many misconception. And "śucīnāṁ" prevents one
from having too many struggles. And in this way, it is actually an advantage.
You know.

        śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe
        yoga-bhraṣṭo ’bhijāyate

So, now, we may wonder, sometimes, if a person is born in the wealthy family, a
well to do family. "śrīmatāṁ". Powerful. Prosperous family. Won't that lead to a
sort of, m..., infatuation by wealth? Which can distract one from spiritual
life? Yes, definitely. It can. And in fact, you know, it, Kuntī Maharani also
says in the, her, in her prayers, in the Eighth Chapter of the First Canto that:

        janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir

So, "aiśvarya". Wealth. It is one of the opulences that can intoxicate a person.
And make one feel that I do not need God. Well, that is true. But here, we are
talking about spiritualist who have already developed a spiritual inclination.
So, because of their spiritual inclination, even if they get prosperity,
materially, that will not del..., delude them. That will not distract them from
continued practice of spiritual life. They will continue on practicing spiritual
life.

        śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe
        yoga-bhraṣṭo ’bhijāyate

So, m..., m..., this way, the distractions are minimal. For these two classes.
Now, here, Krishna is talking about those who have made a little bit of
spiritual advancement. See, normally, when a person, why would Krishna, if
somebody is wanting liberation, why would send such a, Krishna send such a
person to heaven? The reason for that is, that person has also the desires to
enjoy heavenly pleasures. And because of the desire to enjoy heavenly pleasure,
that person gets distracted. By that desire. So, it, we have to understand that,
you know, ultimately, you know, we have to deal with our desires if we want
liberation. There are two ways to deal with our desires. One is to indulge in
them and get rid of them. And the second is to m..., you know, understand their
futility. And get rid of them. Both way, one has to get rid of one's material
desires in order to get rid o..., to move towards to liberation. So, of course,
it is not that indulgence in itself enables one to get rid of them. But
indulgence along with the practice of dharma, you know, indulgence within
dharmic environment. By, so, by the practice of dharma, one is getting a higher
taste. By indulgence, one is, experiences lower taste, also. And when both are
compared, one understands. This lower taste is insignificant. Let me focus on
the higher taste. And that is how one transcends. But when that does not
happen, that means, a person is indulging. But not, you know, doing dharma.
Then, the person just, the lust, and the greed, and the anarthas simply
aggravate. But if a person is having the higher taste, is having the lower
taste. And is still attracted to the lower taste. So much so that the person's
attraction for the lower taste make the person give up the lo..., higher taste.
Then, what happens to such a person? So, for such a person, Krishna says, ok,
this is what you wanted to enjoy. This is what had distracted you from spiritual
life. Fine. You take this. And enjoy it. Whatever you want. And, you know, far
better than enjoy..., enjoyments of this world are the heavenly pleasures. And
the heavenly pleasures are, you know, f..., m..., f..., m..., last also for a
long time. And their quality is much higher. Quality. Quantity. Longevity. All
are much higher. And because the person has also got some memory of the higher
taste by the practice of devotional service. While on earth as sadhaka. And
because that person is in heaven in an atmosphere, that is overall dharmic. One
gradually starts realising the futility of heavenly enjoyment. So, "uṣitvā
śāśvatīḥ samāḥ" means. So, person is aiming for liberation, but also has a
desire for enjoyment. So, then, the person is caugh..., taken to heaven. And
after that, that person goes to heaven. Enjoys over there. Then, comes back and
is born in a, an environment over here from which one can practice spiritual
life. So, it is interesting that Krishna does not say over here that from heaven
one can continue on. He says, after "uṣitvā śāśvatīḥ samāḥ". After staying in
heaven, then the person will come back to "śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe". Will come
back to the earthly planetary system. So, in general, the earthly planetary
system is the karma bhumi. This is the place where our destiny is shaped. H...,
the other arenas in the universe, you know, are primarily meant for, you know,
you know, exhausting the karma. Which we have acquired over here.

So, in heaven, you know, in lower planets, one is exhausting the karma. In
higher planets, one is exhausting the punya. In lower planets, one exhausting
the papa. But either way, one is exhausting the karma. Which one has acquired
while one was here on earth. And in this way, one moves on. So, the going to
heaven is to cater to the desire. So, somebody wants to practice spiritual life.
But also has a strong desire to enjoy the world. Then, that person is given the
facility to engage in heavenly enjoyment by going to heaven. And then, one comes
back and continues on one's spiritual practice. Either in "śucīnāṁ" or
"śrīmatāṁ". You know. Prosperous family. Or a pious family. So, now, Kri...,
this is the first possibility. That one who has practicing spiritual life. But
one had a lot of very strong desires to enjoy this world. So, that person is
taken to heaven. In, Krishna, v..., next c..., next verse, Krishna will describe
the other possibility. What is other possibility? That one has practiced
spiritual life f..., s..., substantially. One has made a significant amount of
spiritual advancement. But one is not able to complete the journey. So, that
means, that person does not comple.., a, become completely purified in order to
go back to the spiritual world. So, what happens to such a person?

        atha vā yoginām eva
        kule bhavati dhīmatām
        etad dhi durlabha-taraṁ
        loke janma yad īdṛśam

So, "atha vā". "atha vā" means alternatively. "yoginām eva". So, those who are
yogis. "kule bhavati dhīmatām". They are born in a "dhīmatām". So, "dhī" is
intelligence. "dhīmatām" is those who are endowed with intelligence. So,
Prabhupada explains this refers to very advanced, you know, devotees, you know,
in the family.

        kule bhavati dhīmatām
        etad dhi durlabha-taraṁ

"durlabha-taraṁ" is, they are very advanced devotees. And such is rare.
"durlabha". "loke janma yad īdṛśam". So, because such advanced devotee families
are rare. Therefore, birth in such devotee fam..., you know, birth in such
family is also rare. "etad dhi durlabha-taraṁ". Hmm. So, Krishna is pointing out
the good fortune of those who are born in such families. Because when a person
is born in a devotee family, then actually, the auspiciousness begins right from
the birth. From the garbhad..., you know, not even from the birth, from bef...,
from the mode of conception. From the Garbhadhan Sanskar onwards till even the,
the m..., food that the mother is taking, is all prasad. Therefore, the milk
that the infant is getting, that is also prasad that is converted. Even what is
embry..., in nourishing the embryo in the womb, that is also all prasad. So,
then, practically, the, speaking, the entire body of the infant is made of
prasad. So, that creates a very, you know, auspicious environment for the soul
inside to practice one's spiritual life. So, you know, "etad dhi
durlabha-taraṁ". This is extremely rare. M..., this kind of "janma". "loke
janma". Now, it is interesting that Prabhupada puts himself as well as his, you
know, disciples, as his spiritual master in this category.

"Fortunately, both our spiritual master, Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and our humble self had the opportunity to take
birth in such families, by the grace of the Lord,"

So, now, it is interesting that Prabhupada has told on some occasions that he
was in the spiritual world. And that he descended from the spiritual world on
the instruction of Krishna for writing the books. And for sharing Krishna
Consciousness with the world. Now, that being the case, if that is the case,
then why is Srila Prabhupada placing himself in the category of, a, this, those
who take birth in devotee families? And advanced "dhīmatām" families. There is a
reason for that. You know. First of all, Prabhupada is not saying that, you
know, Kri..., the explicitly saying that, he is saying that, I or my spiritual
master were deviated yogis. "yoga-bhraṣṭo". That is not the, Prabhupada is not
saying that anywhere at all. And, and he makes it very clear. He is also adding
by the grace of the Lord. So, he is not saying, by our past spiritual practices,
we were born in devotee families. He is saying, by the grace of the Lord. You
know. My spiritual master and I, we were born in, you know, devotee families.
Birth in such families. That is referring to advanced transcendental...,
"dhīmatām". So, you know, some, you know, sometimes, devotees would speculate.
You know. You know. You know. What was Srila Prabhupada's in his previous life?
Who was Srila Prabhupada in his previous life? Or what is Prabhupada's
svaru..., svarupa in the spiritual world? So, Prabhupada, generally, did not
encourage this kind of specula..., this kind of speculation. You know. When
Prabhupada was asked there, a, a:

        nikuñja-yūno rati-keli-siddhyai

That there is this verse in our guru, Gurv-astaka that we sing in Mangala Aarti.
H..., that, h..., we all, that a spiritual master, you know, assist
Radha-Krishna in their pastimes by performing confidential service. So, the
question may come up, you know, what does it mean? How does a spiritual master
assist? So, Prabhupada, when, when he was asked about this. Then, he simply
said, none of your business. That is none of your business. You know. Prabhupada
cut off. Prabhupada did not encourage this kind of speculation. There is one
letter which comes in, which Prabhupada wrote. Tamala Krishna Maharaja asked
him. You know, know. Does the spiritual master know who he was in his previous
life? Now, the devotees would ask thi... indirectly. They, they did not ask
Prabhupada, who were you in your spiritual life? So, they would ask indirectly.
But Prabhupada understood the question. Does the spiritual master know who he
is in spiritual life. So, Prabhupada never made any supernatural claims. And he
did not claim his authority, you know, came because of any supernatural visions
that he had. So, he has just said nonchalantly, you know, that, you, you know, I
do not know. But a, one astrologer said like this. One astrologer said, the,
Prabhupada would just sometimes quote some astrologer. Who did my horoscope, he
said like that. But Prabhupada said that, when he was asked about himself. M...,
he said, from the disciple's point of view, it does not matter. You know. Where
the spiritual master came from. Whether the spiritual master was
"sādhana-siddha" or "kṛpā-siddha". It does not matter. "sādhana-siddh...",
Prabhupada would use the example that if the father has now become a
millionaire. And he is ready to give million dollars, you know, as an
inheritance to the child. Then, child does not have to bother, s..., where the
million dollars came to the father. If I, his own hard work or they were just
given as an inheritance by his ancestors. You know. He got them someone. He has
got his inheri..., inheritance. Or, he would, got back his acquisition and
accumulation. It does not matter. So, same way, "kṛpā-siddha" means one who gets
it by mercy. "sādhana-siddha" means one who gets by "sādhana". And
"nitya-siddha" is of course people who are eternally realised. So, essentially,
there are two categories. There is "nitya-siddha". And there is the
"sādhana-siddha". "kṛpā-siddha" is also in this, you know, categ..., among the
three categories. "kṛpā-siddha" is extremely rare. You know. The point Srila
Prabhupada was making is that if our spiritual advance..., is, advan..., master
is more advanced than us, then he can guide us to spiritual success. Therefore,
there is no need for us to bother, hmm, how the spiritual master became so
advanced. Is it because of being an eternal associate? Or is it because of
been, ha.., having advanced to become purified and perfected? H..., so, one
time, a reporter had asked Srila Prabhupada. How many pure devotees are in your,
your movement? Prabhupada asked one of the devotees. How many devotees do we
have in our movement? That devotee gave him some figure. So, that many pure
devotees, he had. So, the devotees started looking at each other. Hmm. Pure
devotees?

That, at another time, some devotees told that, you know, Prabhupada told one
devotee. He says. You know. He told some of his disciples. He says, you are an,
you are eternal associates of Lord Caitanya. So, the devotees started thinking.
You know. You know. We used to do so many things in our previous life. We have
never heard of Lord Caitanya. So, we were eternal associates of Lord Caitanya. A
little bit puzzled. And then, one of them asked. Prabhupada, he said, true that
we are all eternal associate of Lord Caitanya? So, Prabhupada said, yes. And
then, he smiled and said. Everyone is. Prabhupada said, ultimately, everyone is
eternal associate of Lord Caitanya. In all of u..., of Lord Caitanya. Lord
Krishna. Lord Vishnu. Whatever is our svarupa in the spiritual world. You know.
We are eternal parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. So, m..., you know, our,
we should not, you know, you know, claim any spiritual status. Special spiritual
status because of our past spiritual advancement. You know. That is not the
point. You know. If we have made advancement, then that will b..., that should
be seen in our commitment to practice. In our depth of understanding. And in the
purity of our heart. So, rather than trying to go into these, you know,
speculations. You know. Who was Srila Prabhupada in previous life? Is this
Prabhupada's trying to say, imply over here that he was a, he was a pure, he was
a yogi. And he, that is why he was a yogi who could not complete his spiritual
life. And that is why he was born in next life? Or for that matter, what was
svarupa? Some people say that, because one time, Prabhupada said that, I, you
know, I was thinking, what does this Krishna have in His lunch box? Or I was
you know, imagining, playing with Krishna in the spiritual world as He enjoys
among the gopas. So, some people made the speculation that Prabhupada is in
sakya-rasa. And not in the madhurya-rasa. And because Prabhupada was in
sakya-rasa, that is why he also had a Krishna-Balaram temple made. Instead of a
Radha-Krishna temple. And then, because Prabhupada was in, you know, sakya-rasa.
And madhurya-rasa is highest. So, the next conclusion that comes away that we
need a guru who is in madhurya-rasa. So, this kind of fro..., propaganda had
come, some has come some time in ISKCON. It keeps coming. So, one should not
give much credence to such things. Because Srila Prabhupada himself did not make
any explicite statements. And Prabhupada told us why he made the
Krishna-Balarama temple was, if there might be somebody rather than trying to,
you know, you know, do a sort of, it is dangerous to try to do a postmortem hop,
pure devotee's words and heart. Trying to fin..., find out what the pure
devotee's intention was. You know. We have to look at his words. And try to
understand based on that. So, if we look at the words, we, Prabhupada say, did
say that. You know. That the place where we got the Krishna-Balaram, m..., m...,
m..., the place where we have nominated the Krishna-Balaram Mandir in Vrindavan.
That place was Raman Reti. Where Krishna performed pastimes with His gopas,
primarily. And so, it is appropriate that there should be a Krishna-Balaram
temple. Then, Prabhupada also said, you know, there is, in Vrindavan, there are
so many Radha-Krishna temples. You know. So, we want our temple to be
distinctive. And because it is in the land where, hmm, Kri..., the sakya
pastimes are performed. so, let us have a Krishna-Balaram temple over there. And
then, beyond that, it is not that Prabhupada did no have a Radha-Krishna temple.

You know, we have Krishna-Balaram. And we also have Radha Shyamsundar. And of
course, we have Gaura Nitai, also. So, the point is, there is sort of
speculation is not there. Prabhupada is simply illustrating through this purport
that birth in a devotional and a devotee family is advantageous for spiritual
advancement. You know. And that is what he is. That is what is the main point.
So, beyond that, one does not have to try to speculate. Prabhupada did not
encourage that speculation. So, we can definitely for ourselves see the
commitment of Srila Prabhupada. You know. In his advanced stages, he worked
tirelessly to practice spiritual life. And after that, also, he continued, you
know, till the last breath. And he has purity and potency. He transformed so
many people. So, that is what we should, we should focus on. So, now, after
describing this, this he has described those who have done little practice of
spiritual life. Those who have done a lot of practice of spiritual life. Either
way, what happens to them after that? Now, they have to continue on their
practice. So, let us look at the 43rd verse, now.

        tatra taṁ buddhi-saṁyogaṁ
        labhate paurva-dehikam
        yatate ca tato bhūyaḥ
        saṁsiddhau kuru-nandana

"tatra taṁ buddhi-saṁyogaṁ". So, "saṁyogaṁ" means connection. "yogaṁ" is
connection. "saṁyogaṁ" means reconnection. So, Prabhupada translates this as
revival. So, "buddhi" here refers, not just to the faculty of intelligence. You
know. In general. But it refers to the "buddhi" for practicing spiritual life.
"tatra" means in that life. Wherever a person is born next. "taṁ
buddhi-saṁyogaṁ". That "buddh...", the "buddhi" for practicing spiritual life.
One gets that. "labhate". And one when gets it, then what happens? Where has one
got that? "paurva-dehikam". What one had, you know, cultivated in one's previous
life, one gets it in the next life. And then, here, "tate ca", "yatate ca tato
bhūyaḥ". One starts endeavoring again. "saṁsiddhau kuru-nandana". Oh, Arjuna.
Such a person starts endeavoring. So, we may wonder, m..., if we practice
spiritual life, m..., where is our spiritual advancement stored? Where is it
stored? You know, we, obviously, it may store something in a bank. Or in a
treasury. That is not going to come with us in our next wo..., next life. Even
if somebody stores and, you know, somebody even believes in reincarnation. That,
ok. I am store..., keeping this, you know, portion of my energy does not s...,
form for my next incarnation. But we will not know where we will be born. And
even if so..., we came to know, others will not necessarily believe our
claims. For millionaires, born somewhere else. It is unlikely that that person,
when he takes birth. And goes back to the relatives. And the acquaintance says,
I was that millionaire. Now, all that money belongs to me. People do not accept
that. So, but that is not the way the spiritual advancement is stored. So,
"buddhi-saṁyogaṁ". So, actually, the attraction that we develop for Krishna, you
know, on the devotional path is in a sense a revival of the original propensity
of the soul. And because the same soul continues from one body to another. That
reactivated spiritual attraction also goes on from one life to another. And, you
know, in a sense, the subtle body also becomes purified. As the subtle body
becomes purified more and more, one makes further spiritual advancement. And the
subtle body also stayed the same from one life to another. So, our spiritual
credits, like our karmic credits, are not, you know, stored in a n..., physical
form. They are not stored. They are not connected with the physical body. They
are stored in, within, deep within. And "labhate paurva-dehikam". One gets it
from one's pure s..., body. Because it is revived. And then, one starts
endeavoring once again. Now, the important is that revival, Krishna will give
opportunity for that revival. But the soul, the sadhaka has to personally choose
to start that practice. "yatate". That is why it is, it is not that just because
one has gone to heavens and come back, then there is no more endeavor. Oh, now,
all temptations are gone. So, now, I can just straight away move ahead in
spiritual life. No. The temptations will always be there. And the battle will
also be the..., always be there. "yatate ca tato bhūyaḥ". Again, such a person
endeavors. And for what? "saṁsiddhau". For attaining success. And Prabhupada
gives several examples of moving, of pis..., spi..., spiritual advan..., an...,
advancement going over many lifetimes. And one example, he gives in the purport
is of Bharata Maharaja. Who became a deer. And then, became "Jaḍa Bharata". And
then, was liberated. So, "labhate paurva-dehikam". So, although, you know,
Bharata M..., the, j..., "Jaḍa Bharata" had been born in a brahmanical family.
And the brahmanas were engaged generally in karma-kanda. But "Jaḍa Bharata" had
an enormous spiritual advancement. Which had come from his previous life. Or
second last life. As the m..., Bharata Maharaja who had renounced the world. And
make lot of spiritual advancement. And, hmm, then, Krishna describes, ok, what
happens? You may wonder how such a per..., a, person gets that atmos...,
opportunity in the next life.

        pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva
        hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ
        jijñāsur api yogasya
        śabda-brahmātivartate

So, "pūrvābhyāsena". By the prac..., practi..., by the previous practice,
"tenaiva". Of that person. "hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ". The person is attracted
helplessly. "hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ". And then, "jijñāsur api yogasya". Such a
person who is a "jijñāsur". You know. That person becomes "jijñāsur".
Inquisitive or spiritual practices. And "śabda-brahmātivartate". Such a person
will go beyond the range of "śabda-brahma". Here, the word "brahma" refers to
Vedic scriptures. Especially, the Veda, which are in three modes. You know.
Krishna has talked earlier about:

        trai-guṇya-viṣayā vedā
        nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna

He has talked about it in 2.45. That, you know, the Vedas talk about three
modes. And one should go beyond the three modes. So, here, He is saying that
"śabda-brahmātivartate". The serious yogi will go beyond the range of Vedic
sound. So, the Vedas talk about dharma, artha, kama. And occasionally talk, you
know, moksha. But people do not f..., are not attracted much to moksha. They are
attracted to dharma, artha, kama, only. So, that is the "śabda-brahma". That is
the range of the Vedic sound. But the yogi, because of attraction to spiritual
principles, goes beyond the range of the Vedic sounds. "śabda-brahmātivartate".
Goes far beyond that. So, "pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva". Why the path, spiritual
practice? "pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva". "hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ". It is
interesting. Krishna is using the word "avaśaḥ". "avaśaḥ" is helpless. So,
"hriyate hy avaśo". "hriyate" is attracted. Attracted helplessly. "jijñāsur api
yogasya". The yogi who is "jijñāsur" rapidly moves over.
"śabda-brahmātivartate". So, "pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva". "pūrvābhyāsena" means via
the past practice. "labhate paurva-dehikam". It, the same point is being made
over here. So, actually, there are many people who have great attraction for
spirituality. And attraction which they themselves cannot explain. Where that
attraction come from? Why they have attraction? Or it is just there. You know.
Many of Srila Prabhupada's disciples, they had born in wealthy, prosperous
families. Well to do. But just tuck. They left everything to become attract...,
to try to devote themselves to the Supreme Lord. To the search for the Absolute
Truth. They did not know at that time they were going to devote themselves to
the Supreme Lord. But they were in search of the Absolute Truth. And then, you
know, actually, "hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ". You know. Some people who just leave
material life. And seek spiritual life. And they feel as if they are being
pulled. It is "hriyate hy avaśo", "avaśaḥ". It is a hea..., spontaneous
attraction that is helpl..., to which they are helplessly attracted. So,
actually, how does this happen? That is, because happens of, it is because of
s..., past spiritual practices. So, when we have practiced spiritual life in
the past. Then, we just not satisfied with material enjoyments. We want
something higher. Something greater. Something richer. And that higher, richer,
greater, that, what it is, one may not know, also. See, you know, in some cases,
like Gajendra. You know. He had been a king. And he had practiced spiritual life
in the past. And then, when he became an elephant. He lived like a typical
elephant. At a particular time, when he was in crisis. Then, he was suddenly
able to remember not just the, you know, existence of a Supreme Lord. But he
star..., even started offering prayers to the Supreme Lord. And eloquent,
profound, you know, and potent prayers he offered. So, how was that? You know.
That, that was "pūr...", "hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ". That was at that moment of
crisis, the attraction to the Lord suddenly awakened. And along with that, the
knowledge also came. So, in some cases, specific knowledge may come. In other
cases, specific knowledge may not come. But what may otherwise come is,
actually, "hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ". One just be attracted to the spiritual
world. Wha..., so, generally, even the soul of a "yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ", "iva", if that
soul, if that soul is very advanced devotee, also. That does not necessarily
mean that that the soul would be attracted specifically to Krishna.

It is possible to Krishna. Even if it is not specifically to Krishna. That
simply means that, person attracted to spirituality. And soon, one understands
what is that spirituality. One will inquire. And by the mysterious hand of the
Supersoul, one will be directed towards Krishna. And once one is directed
towards Krishna, one returns back to Krishna, gradually.
"śabda-brahmātivartate". So, Prabhupada quotes this interesting verse from the
Bhagavatam. Which we are discu..., we are, discussed the faith of a deviated
yogi in our Isopanishad verses. So, I will not go much into the detail of that.
But this verse says, Prabhupada quotes this verse for, hmm, m..., how even those
who are low-born, they may also go beyond the range of Vedic sounds. So, here,
"śabda-brahmātivartate". So, how they go beyond the Vedic, Vedic sound?
Prabhupada gives two examples. So, he says is:

        aho bata śva-paco ’to garīyān
        yaj-jihvāgre vartate nāma tubhyam
        tepus tapas te juhuvuḥ sasnur āryā
        brahmānūcur nāma gṛṇanti ye te

So, "aho bata śva-paco ’to garīyān". How am..., amazing it is. How amazing it
is. That "śva-paco". Those who are born in a dog-eating family. "’to garīyān".
But actually, those who have been born in, so, you know, so, the, you know, you
know, such low families. But they are chanting the names of the Supreme Lord.
"yaj-jihvāgre vartate nāma tubhyam". When your name is there on their lips.
"tepus tapas te juhuvuḥ sasnur āryā". So, they have actually done all other
religious activities. And, now, they have come to the spiritual level. So,
whether it is bathing in holy places. Performing austerities. Studying
scriptures. All these, they have done already. And because of having already
done this, they have come to the level of chanting the holy names of Krishna.
What this means is that if somebody is chanting the holy name, that is a great,
great fortune. You know. Now, it is possible to those, who are chanting, have
already done all the rituals in their previous lives. Another way of
understanding this is that the purpose of doing all other Vedic rituals, the
Vedic dharma has karma-marga. Then, there is jnana-marga. Then, there is
bhakti-marga. So, those who have actually done the karma-marga successfully.
Only after that, they will come to the bhakti-marga. "karma-marga",
"jnana-marga", and then they will come to "bhakti-marga". So, if somebody is in
the "bhakti-marga". Then, they have already transcended by inference. The karma
and jnana-marga. So, just like a person who has a million dollars. That means
that person automatically has five dollars. And ten dollars. That person does
not have to separately strive to acquire five and ten dollars. Because million
dollars already includes five and ten dollars. Similarly, actually, the practice
of bhakti-yoga is, you know, a superset that includes everything else as a
subset. That is why it is said, if somebody is chanting holy names, then
everything else is already there for such a person. Now, of course, as sadhakas,
we should not, you know, bha..., as bhakti-sadhakas, we should not become proud.
Oh, I have already done all these rituals. No. We should also try to live
according to principles of austerity if that is anukul to bhakti. And this is
not our matter of our pride. It is matter of our fortune. And our
responsibility. You know. If we have done all that, the other path, pi...,
seekers of other paths have already done. Then, that means, you know, we should
not get al..., allured by the things that allure other people. We should be able
to stay fixed in Krishna. On Krishna. And then, we will make spiritual
advancement steadily. And Prabhupada gives the example of "Haridāsa Ṭhākura",
also. Now, the point of "Haridāsa Ṭhākura"'s example is what again?
"śabda-brahmātivartate". So, there was a famous debate between a, you know,
Advaita Ācār..., between some smart brahmanas. Hmm. Gopal Chakravarthy and hmm,
"Haridāsa Ṭhākura". And "Haridāsa Ṭhākura" said that the holy name, you know,
the pious rituals can give liberation. But it is just a shadow of the holy name
can give liberation. And the holy name gives something far greater than
liberation. In fact, while chan..., chanting of the holy name is the fruit of
liberation is insignificant result. And he gives scriptural pramana for this.
And his opponents were so scornful and derisive.

That they said if this is true, then let our nose fall off. And if it is false
then let "Haridāsa Ṭhākura" nose fall off. And what happened was their own nose
fell off. And they were disgraced. You know. So, the point is that actually if
we have to recognise that those who are chanting the holy names, are very
special souls. And we d..., honor them, respect them. And then, we will move
forward onwards in our spiritual steadily. "śabda-brahmātivartate".
Spontaneously attracted. And this actually is very remarkable. You know. How
devotees in different parts of the world, whatever situations they were in. How
they became attracted to Krishna is itself a remarkable story. And that is why,
how I came to Krishna Consciousness. These all are very thrilling stories.
Because we see how Krishna's mercy reaches out to people in different parts of
the world. And people reach out to seek Krishna's mercy in different parts of
the world. And both of them indicate how this "śabda-brahmā". "pūr...", "ja...",
"hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ". Helpless attraction works out. So, now, Krishna will
tell, you know, in the next verse, eventually, how the yogi will attain perfection.

        prayatnād yatamānas tu
        yogī saṁśuddha-kilbiṣaḥ
        aneka-janma-saṁsiddhas
        tato yāti parāṁ gatim

So, "prayatnād". "prayatnāt" means endeavor. Rigid practice. "yatamānas tu". So,
one is endeavoring rigidly for a long time. "prayatnād yatamānas tu". Then,
"yogī saṁśuddha-kilbiṣaḥ". The yogi becomes freed from all contaminations. From
all impurities. Then, h..., "aneka-janma-saṁsiddhas". It may take several
lifetimes. The yogi's determination has to be such that, you know, determination
should goal for several lifetimes. The normal, you know, know, normal, casual,
religious prolong is that religion is a part of life. But one has to, the
serious sadhaka understand that life is a part of re..., my religion. That means
my religion will, may have to, my religious practice may have to go on for
lifetime, after lifetime, after lifetime. That, not that bhakti is a part of
life. But life is a part of bhakti. "aneka-janma-saṁsiddhas". So, it may take
many lifetimes. And then, finally, "tato yāti parāṁ gatim". Then, one will
attain perfection. You know. You know. You know. What is that perfection? That
will be described later. M..., Krishna has mentioned it briefly earlier. In
terms of, you know, "mat-saṁsthām adhigacchati". Coming and being next to me.
But it will be gradually described. The important point here is the
"aneka-janma-saṁsiddhas". It may take many lifetimes. So, it is sobering
conclusion to the section. But sobering as well as, hmm, as well as
illuminating. Sobering because one understand this is serious practice. One,
from which, one can get deviated. And it may take many lifetimes of practice for
one to attain eternal liberation. But, you know, it is also illuminating.
Because one understand that, actually, one is never lost. You know. When one
practices spiritual life. Even if one seems to be temporary lost. One will find
the way again. And our spiritual life, adva..., advancement will never be lost.
It will stay with us. And we will ret..., we will regain it. We will reclaim it
as soon as, you know, we are born in a new body. And some fortuitous sys..., of
a m..., circumstances come around through which our past spiritual inclinations
are activated again. So, in this way, the sadhaka understands that it is the
supreme fortune to be able to make spiritual advancement. And return back to
Krishna over, no matter how many lifetimes it takes. So, when one has that
determination. Then, that determination itself can accelerate one's spiritual
struggle and practice. You know. In Chaitanya Charitamrita, it is described how
Mukunda, you know, one of Caitanya Mahaprabhu's associate was punished by
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. And he said, you know, you will not be able to see me for
ten million lifetimes. And, you know, you know, actually, he was so jubilant. He
said, just after ten million lifetimes, I will be able to see Lord Caitanya. So,
and he started dancing next to the, see, only ten million lifetimes. So, when
Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw this very optimistic attitude. Only ten million
lifetime. He said oh. He is so optimistic. He has so much faith that that for
the sake of seeing me, he is saying ten million lifetime is nothing. Then,
Caitanya, bring him here. Caitanya Mahaprabhu brought him in his presence. And
gave him his mercy. So, when one has that determination, no matter how, whatever
price it takes. It is not too great. Actually, for the price of attaining
Krishna, you know, you know, anything and everything is worth it. Because that
glo..., attainment is so glorious. It is so e..., so wonderful. So fulfilling.
Nothing like it. It is, will be forever and ever with us. So, whatever the
price, it is worth it. When one has that attitude, you know, one makes rapid
spiritual advancement. And one does not have to take an agent of some siddhas.
Especially the mer..., mercy of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Srila Prabhupada, it
is possible even in one lifetime that by diligent practice, one can return back
to Krishna.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
