Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xDXUGagiF7g
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=xDXUGagiF7g&event=video_description&redir_token=_qAU2mPfivTcf5dWM0NNnn2J3it8MTU0ODQ4NzQ0N0AxNTQ4NDAxMDQ3&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_057_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_60_to_63_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        oḿ ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā
        cakṣur unmīlitaḿ yena tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita course. On the second chapter, we
are now moving to the end of the second answer and then to the third answer. Let
us start at once. So, second answer was, the four questions were. 
"sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā". "kiṁ prabhāṣeta". So, actually, "kā bhāṣā" and "kiṁ
prabhāṣeta", they are very related questions. So, "kā bhāṣā", the question is
answered in 55. Then, "kiṁ prabhāṣeta". What is his language? That is answered
in 56 and 57. So, actually, we are discussing third question now. That is
answered from 58 to 63. So, and then, after that, that was "kim āsīta". How does
that person control the senses? How does that person regulate the senses? And
then, "kim vrajeta" will be answered from 64 onwards. So, let us look at 59 now.
The, so, we discussed till 59, actually. So, let us start with 60 now.

        yatato hy api kaunteya
        puruṣasya vipaścitaḥ
        indriyāṇi pramāthīni
        haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ

"yatato". "yatato" is to endeavor. "hy api kaunteya". So, oh, K..., oh,
kaunteya, oh, Arjuna, even when a pen..., person is endeavoring, certainly
endeavoring. "puruṣasya vipaścitaḥ". Which kind of person? "vipaścitaḥ". Person
who has discrimination. Who has the capacity to know what is right and what is
wrong. And even for such a person, "indriyāṇi pramāthīni". "pramātha" is like
madness, storm. So, "indriyāṇi pramāthīni", the wild and impetuous senses.
"haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ". "haranti" means they drag away. They steal away.
"prasabhaṁ manaḥ". So, they drag away thoroughly by force, "prasabhaṁ manaḥ".
So, now, there are several important features of this verse. The, Krishna, here,
is not talking about or..., ordinary person who is controlled by the senses. So,
materialistic people think that the goal of their life is to enjoy their senses.
So, often, they let themselves be dragged by their senses. So, such people are,
who are interested in material sense gratification even if that material sense
gratification is by religious means. You know. Today, that means there are
vikarmis. There are karmis. And then, there are yogis. So, vikarmis are those
who chase after sense gratification, you know, and defy the principles of dharma
in the process. So, for example, say, people who have extramarital, premarital
relationships. And that sort of thing. Those people are vikarmis. Then, those
people, who are karmis, those are people who seek sense gratification, but by
religious means. So, Krishna has talked about them in the previous section in
2.42-43. He talks about the aspire for svarga. For what purpose? "kāmātmānaḥ
svarga-parā". And there, He has used for them the word "avipaścitaḥ".

        yām imāṁ puṣpitāṁ vācaṁ
        pravadanty avipaścitaḥ
        veda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha
        nānyad astīti vādinaḥ

So, those people think that, they are attrac..., be attracted by the flowery
words of the Vedas. They think that the sense gratification promised in the
Vedas is the ul..., in, in svarga, is the ultimate goal of life. And "nānyad
astīti vādinaḥ". They say there is nothing else. So, such people are
"avipaścitaḥ". So, the "avipaścitaḥ" are the people who do not understand that
there is a higher goal of life beyond sense gratification. That that sense
gratification ultimately comes, keeps one in bodily consciousness. And the
higher happiness is available by raising to spiritual consciousness. So, these
are "avipaścitaḥ". People are the karmis. Now, higher than them are the yogis.
The yogis are "vipaścitaḥ". They understand that material enjoyment leads to
suffering, leads to bondage. It perpetuates illusion. Therefore, I must break
free from it. You know, so su..., even such people, Krishna is saying, those who
are "vipaścitaḥ". Those who have discrimination. Those who can understand the
difference between matter and spirit. And based on that differentiation, they
try to pursue, you know, spiritual reality. Spiritu..., self-realisation. So,
even such people, so, they, e..., they have vision. They have discrimination.
And then "yatato". They are also striving. That means there are these two
aspects. There is "vipaścitaḥ". Internally, they have discrimination. And
internally, they also have it, they, they have that endeavoring. They are
trying to endeavor. But even such people, what happens to them? "haranti
prasabhaṁ manaḥ". What are they trying to do? They are trying to control their
senses. Sorry. They are trying to control themselves. But the senses are so
wild. Their senses drag away the mind. Now, it is interesting. Krishna is saying
senses drag away the mind. So, let us try to understand this point now. So,
first point is that these are not ordinary materialists Krishna is talking
about. They are not vikarmis. They are not karmis. They are yogis. Those who are
"vipaścitaḥ". And those who are "yatato". So, they have knowledge. And they are
striving to live according to knowledge. Even they are dragged away. So, most of
us, you know, fall in this category. Or actually, this category of people being
dragged away by the senses may be a little higher than what we are, also. You
know, we, often, pursue senses gratification, also, by, within, you know, the
precincts of dharma. You know, but here, K..., somebody is trying to break free
from sense gratification. What about such a person? Krishna says over here that
such a person. The s..., the, so, there is a hierarchy. There are the senses.
There are the sense objects. So, ok, ok, the sense objects are here. The senses
are here. And the mind is here. So, we, you know, connect with the sense objects
through the senses. You know, for example, that the eyes see some beautiful
form. The, you know, a, tongue wants to taste some deli..., delicious food item.
So, senses come in contact with sense objects. Now, the senses are internally
connected with the mind. In fact, the mind is a center of all the senses.

        śrotraṁ cakṣuḥ sparśanaṁ ca
        rasanaṁ ghrāṇam eva ca
        adhiṣṭhāya manaś cāyaṁ
        viṣayān upasevate

So, Krishna describes in 15.9 that the five senses, "śrotram", "cakṣuḥ",
"sparśa", "rasa", and "ghrāṇam". So, the ears, the, the sensation of s...,
sight, then touch, fragrance, smell, and taste. All these are centered around
the mind, just as, we could say that the five fingers are centered around the
palm. So, now, the senses are internally connected to the mind. And Krishna is
saying, so, if you consider this hierarchy, there are the sen..., ok, the sense
objects are here, outside. The senses are here. And the mind is inside. So, the
senses drag away the mind. That means the mind is, when we expose ourselves
externally to sense objects, then, the desires that are created by that, so
that, by that cr..., perception of the sense objects. By that, the mind is
forcefully drawn towards that. And when the mind is drawn towards that, then,
you know, our desires get further ignited, fueled. They become inflamed. And
then, we, just like, a motor, drawn towards fire, we are drawn towards the sense
objects. So, here, Krishna is giving a warning about if one just simply b...,
if, now, the, the 58 verse, He said that, one should withdraw the senses, just
like a, a tortoise withdraws the limbs. But here, Krishna is saying that, if one
f..., one is striving to do that. But somehow, if one, you know, the senses are
so powerful, that when senses perceive the sense objects, now, tuck. The senses
drag the mind outwards. "haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ". So, this is quite a sobering
verse to contemplate. Such is the power of the senses. That even when we want to
control, still, we are dragged away. And we have all experienced this as we
tri..., strive for sense control. We find our senses just dragging us,
forcefully, desperately. Often, they make seem, they make us helpless entirely.
So, Prabhupada gives in these purports the example of Viswamitra muni. You know,
he was a, in the forest, and trying to pros..., pro..., practice austerity. But
when he heard the ankle bells of Menaka. Then, just that thought agitated him.
And then, he just forgot everything else. And he got attracted. Now, we may
think, how is this? If somebody has renounced the world, somebody is pros...,
pro..., practicing austerity, how is it that just the, you know, the jingling of
some ankle bells can cause a person to get just dragged down like this? So,
actually it is not just jingling of the ankle bells. That is just a sound. But
that sound, when it enters the mind, it kindles the imagination. So, now, when
the mag..., imagination is triggered, it bursts forth. And then, when the
imagination bursts forth upwards, it just fills us with fantasies of pleasure.
And then, we are dragged away. So, often, this principle of sense control is
talked from the male perspective. That you know a male should not be attracted
to the female. But actually, the Bhagavatam also talks from the female
perspetive, also. You know that, a woman who is too attracted to a man. Then, it
is like, the woman is like a deer. And the man is like the hunter. Woman will be
shot. So, by, the deer. So, there are examples from both perspectives. Most of
the time, the scriptures, you know, talk from the male perspective. Because the
male body is considered to be more suitable for self-realisation. That is why we
have examples of, say, Viswamitra muni and Menaka. But in general, the principle
is that, you know, for a, even we see such things, we have to understand that
there is generic description about sense objects over here. So, what will be
sense objects, for males and females will be different. You know, but in
general, you know, the principle is that the sense objects will drag us down.
So, "haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ". Forcefully dragged the mind away. Then, after
describing this, then, Krishna, you know, when, now, Prabhupada, in this
purport, talks about, Prabhupada continues the, you know, process of Krishna
Conscious description. For what purpose?

You know, Srila Prabhupada is continuing from the previous verse, where he
talked about "paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate". That getting a higher taste. What is that
higher taste? Prabhupada continues that flow of thought in his purport. And he
gives an example how a devotee, an exalted can give such a higher taste that
everything else becomes forgotten. So, he quotes Yāmunācārya. This is a, this is
a well-known verse which Srila Prabhupada would often quote.

        yad-avadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-pādāravinde
        nava-nava-rasa-dhāmany udyataṁ rantum āsīt
        tad-avadhi bata nārī-saṅgame smaryamāne
        bhavati mukha-vikāraḥ suṣṭhu niṣṭhīvanaṁ ca

So, he is saying that from the time I have started relishing the joy of Krishna
Consciousness. So, "yad-avadhi". From that time. "mama cetaḥ". My consciousness.
"kṛṣṇa-pādāravinde". The lotus feet of Lord Krishna. When I remember it. What
happens? "nava-nava-rasa-dhāmany" I get new, new rasas. New, new mellows in
that. "udyataṁ rantum āsīt". So, "rantum". I am enjoying, relishing that.
"tad-avadhi". From that time onwards. "tad-avadhi bata nārī-saṅgame smaryamāne".
When I think of sex pleasure. "bhavati mukha-vikāraḥ". My mouth becomes twisted.
Say, generally, when we see something, which is very displeasing, very
irritating, even disgusting. Then, "mukha-vikāraḥ". The mouth becomes twisted.
"suṣṭhu niṣṭhīvanaṁ ca". And I spit it, the thought. So, there are several
important points in this verse. First of all, from the point of view of material
sense gratifiers, it is very jolty. You know, that which most people in the
world are dreaming and fantasising about. Somebody says I spit at it. It is very
jolting for people. How is this possible? What is this being talked about over
here? So, this indicates that the pleasure of Krishna Consciousness is so lofty
that as compared to that, everything else seems trivial, insignificant. And now,
even if that is such a higher pleasure, and this is such a, it is a, even
if the pleasure, this is a lower pleasure, why would one be disgusted at it? Why
would one the, why would, why is dis..., what is the reason for disgust and
spitting at it? Actually, for a devotee, anything that distracts one from
Krishna, is actually a, a source of, is, a source of danger, a source of
distress, a source of dismay. So, when a devotee thinks, oh, for so long, for
such a trivial pleasure, I have let myself become distracted from Krishna. So,
that is how the devotee feels revolted by that. And that is how the devotee
turns away from it. Now, another significant point in this verse is that,
Yāmunācārya says that, actually, since the time I started relishing the thoughts
of Krishna, since that time, when the "nārī-saṅgame smaryamāne". That when I get
the thought of sex pleasure. I, it is now, it is interesting that even when one
is relishing the joy of Krishna Consciousness, even at that time, one may get
the thought of sex pleasure. So, it is not that we should not mistake that just
because I am getting bad thoughts, that means I have to fall down. Actually,
because of the world that we live in. And, now Yāmunācārya was living thou...,
nearly a thousand years ago. So, at that time, the culture was much much purer.
But now, there is so much impurity. But even at that time, because we are living
in the material world, we may get exposed to things. You know, which provoke us.
Which inject thoughts of, you know, sensuality within us. And even from our own
past memories, sometimes, something may just come up. So, sometimes, when we
just get some bad thoughts. We start thinking, oh, I am so fallen. You know,
these bad thoughts are coming. What should I do? I have to succumb to them. No.
We do not have to. Actually, the, we see such a radical difference here. That
when the thoughts come in, nothing doing. So, that nothing doing is f..., is
spoken in the most assertive, forceful way by saying I spit at that. "bhavati
mukha-vikāraḥ suṣṭhu niṣṭhīvanaṁ ca". So, what changes between an advanced
devotee and a new devotee, is that, not necessarily that there will be no impure
thoughts coming. Impure thoughts may come. You know, but the advanced devotee's
response to those thoughts is radically different from that of the neophyte
devotee. You know, the sa..., struggling sadhaka, initial stages. So, generally
speaking, what happens is, you know, the serious devotee, when the thought
comes, he says, no, get lost. The materialistic person, when the thought comes,
welcome. I was just waiting for you. So, welcome. Welcome. So, yes. Yes.
Welcome. So, now, these are two extremes. The pure devotee and the materialist.
Now, sadhaka is somewhere in-between. Sometimes, the sadhaka says yes. Come.
Sometimes says no. No. And most of the time, sadhaka says wait. Wait. Not now.
Maybe later, we will see. When nobody is around. When nobody will find out what
I am doing. Then, we will see. So, that is how it happens. So, now, if we see,
everybody. So, there is a pure devotee here. There is the materialist here.
And the sadhaka, who is moving from material life towards pu..., towards
devotion, and ultimately pure devotion. So, now, the essential difference is,
both are exposed to the temptations. Of course, the materialist may be exposed
to temptations much much more. Because they are, they, that is what they want to
do. And that is why they search out temptations. The pure devotee avoids as much
as possible. But still, being in the material world, we will be, all be exposed
to temptations. So, the difference is, here, there is welcome. Here, there is
nothing doing. So, we have to make this journey from welcome to nothing doing.
So, essentially, even if we get wrong thoughts, that does not mean that we have
to fall down. What we have to do is, we have to drive out those wrong thoughts.
And how do we drive them out? By filling the mind with Krishna. When the mind
becomes filled with Krishna. Then, we become, you know, i..., the i..., immoral
thoughts, the sensual thoughts, they do not get any time over there. They are
driven away. They are driven out from the consciousness.

So, in this way, actually, a devotee moves from this stage of materialism to
the stage of pure devotion. It is a long journey. But it is not an impossible
journey. Every time, when the temptation comes and we says no. We say no to it.
We are growing stronger. We are moving upwards. And we are coming closer and
closer to Krishna each time. We turn away from the temptations. And we turn
towards Krishna. So, Prabhupada, you know, gives us the example of, there is a
lec..., le..., letter of Prabhupada, where he says, to get thoughts is not
wrong. But to act on the thoughts, that is wrong. And there, Prabhupada gives a
very striking definition of intelligence in that letter. He says, intelligence
means to kill the thoughts before they grow into actions. Intelligence means to
kill the thoughts before they grow into action. So, thoughts will come. So, we
will see in the next verse how thoughts can grow into, grow to disastrous
proportions if we are not careful about them. But essentially, if we do not let
the thoughts grow into actions. Then, the problem is far far lesser. So, that is
how we can move forward in our spiritual life. Now, Prabhupada explains in the
furpo..., purport. If, for the example of higher taste, what does he say here?
That:

"It is as if a hungry man had satisﬁed his hunger by a sufﬁcient quantity of
nutritious eatables."

So, you know, in the previous verse, the word was "nirāhārasya". One feels as if
I do not have any "āhār". But when we turn towards Krishna and fix our mind on
Krishna, then we get such a deeper, inner, richer happiness. That we feel, yes.
I got this. I do not need anything else. I am satisfied.

	bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir
	anyatra ca ...

The Bhagavatam says that, bhakti, when there is exp..., wh..., when, when
practices bhakti. Then, bhakti leads to the "pareśānubhavo", the experience of
the Supreme Lord. When that experience of the Supreme Lord is there,
"pareśānubhavo", then, there is "viraktir  anyatra ca", one becomes detached
from other external things. One does not feel the need for anything else.
Because one gets a deeper, richer, inner happiness. "viraktir  anyatra ca". So,
this is what a, you know, this is what Yāmunācārya is experiencing. And then,
Srila Prabhupada quotes Mahārāja Ambarīṣa here. And actually, Srila Prabhupada
just continues talking in his purports. So, in a sense, Prabhupada refers to
certain things in the verses. But Prabhupada is more concerned about telling us
how to apply those verses in our life. And, therefore, his purport just
continues. So, he has mentioned Ambarīṣa Mahārāja in this verse. And he will
ex..., elaborate on Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, his pastime in the next verse. So, now,
let us look at the next verse. So, now, a Kr..., here, this is the last part of
the, so, now, Krishna will describe, how a person may practice spiritual life.
How can one get the higher taste? So, till now, he has said that we should all
seek the higher taste. So, how does one get the higher taste? That we will
describe in the next verse.

        tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya
        yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ
        vaśe hi yasyendriyāṇi
        tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

So, "tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya". So, "tāni sarvāṇi". All these senses, "saṁyamya".
Controlling. "yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ". When one with this situates oneself. In
other word, "āsīta" is related to the question. "kim āsīta". That was there in
2.54. So, Krishna has said "yukta āsīta". So, when one engages the senses and
situates oneself of, thus. How does one engage the senses? "mat-paraḥ". Fixing
the mind on me. In the first place in the Bhagavad Gita, that Krishna is
referring to Himself. "mat-paraḥ". "mat-paraḥ". Krishna is saying over here that
fix the mind on me. Krish..., there is this, the first, the acharyas, who say,
this is the first drop of bhakti that Krishna has dropped in the Bhagavad Gita
till now. So, till now, Krishna has not referred to Himself directly. And even
He, till now, Krishna has been the teacher of sense control. That yes. We all
have to control our senses. But from here onwards, Krishna starts saying I am
the object of the controlled senses. I am the object on which the controlled
senses should be fixed. "tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya". Control all those senses.
"yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ". And then, you know, in, big, situated, thus, fix the
sense, fix "yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ". Fix the consciousness on me. When you do
this, "vaśe hi yasyendriyāṇi". Then, you will be able to bring the con...,
senses under your conquest. "yasyendriyāṇi". Such a person who can do it, it,
"tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā". So, in a sense, this verse is talking about three
stages. "tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya". So, "saṁyamya" means actually sort of restraint
or control. Now, when we need to control or restrain, when there is some
opposition force which prevents us from controlling, which is, which is opposing
us. That is why, you know, we need to control. So, at the, at this f..., Krishna
is talking here about the stage of struggle. In that stage of struggle, we have
to have some level of ba..., control. "tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya". And that alone is
not enough. After that, "yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ". One, after that, fixes the
consciousness on Krishna. And when one fixes the consciousness on Krishna, then
after that, "vaśe hi yasyendriyāṇi". One, after that, conquers the senses. So,
first, there is control. Then, there is concentration. And then, there is
conquest. So, control. Control is what? Control the senses. Just like when you
are practicing devotional service. When we want to say, we have to have some
basic level of co..., self-control. So, then, we start practicing. If you want
to chant Hare Krishna. If you want to go to a temple. Then, if, even in the
temple, our eyes are running here and there. Who has come? How are they dressed?
What are they doing? Then, where can we, how can we experience anything
spiritual in the temple? Even the temple, we will be just staying in bodily
consciousness. Looking at how, who is dressed? And who, what, o..., how one
looks? And what one is doing? So, if we want to experience Krishna in the
temple, at least, some level of sense control is required. Now, that is not
easy. But that is not impossible. That level of self-control, everybody can
have. So, "tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya". First, there is control. And then, there is
concentration. That one con..., concentrates the mind on Krishna. And after one
concentrates the mind on Krishna, then there is conquest. Control.
Concentration. Conquest. So, "vaśe". "vaśe" means, in this way, we conquer them.
So, that which was. So, like, the horse is, first, it has to be "saṁyamya". So,
if a horse is reighing widly, and you know, is, sorry, horse is neighing wildly,
and is completely berserk. So, at that time, a horse trainer has to first, the
horse is just thread, due to run here and there. And it is there, it is carol.
But it is, its staple, but in a fence. But it is running here, running there.
And if anybody goes near. Tuck. The horse knocks the person down. So, then,
initially, what the horse trainer has to do is, first get a grip on the saddle.
Guess on the, on the sa..., have a saddle. And have a rein. And try to get some
grip on the horse. So, that is "saṁyamya". So, the horse is running wild. But
there is some amount of restraint. And then, after that, then one trains the
horse. One gets the horse to understand. But actually, if it behaves itself.
Then, it will get food. It will get nourishment. It will get love. It will be
taken care of. And understand, then, after that, the horse becomes calm. And
then, there is "vaśe". Then, the horse is conquered. So, we begin with control.
And then, after that, you know, we, the horse, co..., focuses here and there. We
will focus on horse. Ok. You will get this gra.... You will get this hay. You
will get this grass. You will get this food. Just calm down. So, like that, when
the mind is restless, even when the Krishna is right in front of us as the
deity, as the holy name. Still, we just cannot focus. And we cannot see at,
there devata, nourishment available for me. Here, there is satisfaction
available for me. So, after control, there is concentration. And after
concentration, there is conquest. Then, after the senses become conquered. So,
Krishna says, one who does like this, such a person is "tasya prajñā
pratiṣṭhitā". Such a person is well-situated. The "prajñā" is "pratiṣṭhitā". The
intelligence is well-situated. Now, after describing this, Krishna will move
forward in the verse to answer the question of Arjuna about "kim vrajeta". So,
of course, before He goes to that, He tells, what will happen if one fails to do
this. So, Krishna does a very smooth transition. So, in "āsīta", He also uses
the word "yukta". "yukta" means connected or engaged. So, that eng..., what is
that engagement? Krishna will tell in 64. But here, he is continuing the point
that one has, if one fails to fix the mind on Krishna. And instead, one fixes
the mind on something else. But if one lets the mind prey on the sense objects,
then what happens? So, in this verse, the primary point is that, you know, that
control alo..., if we are just trying to control, control, control, that will
fail if we do not take it through the next steps. If we do not take it to
concentration and conquest, then control itself will fail. Because control, how
long can we continue it? You know, the, mind will go wild. And eventually, it
will lock us down. So, if we want to move forward from control to concentration,
then, then we have to actually fix the mind on Krishna. And when we fix on the
mind on Krishna, then gradually, there will be conquest. So, in the purport,
Srila Prabhupada talks about Durvāsā Mun..., or, so, or the conflict between
Durvāsā Muni and Ambarīṣa Mahārāja. And now, from the point of view, varnashram.
Varnashram, Durvāsā Muni, both in terms of varna and ashrama was higher than
Ambarīṣa Mahārāja. There are four varṇas. So, the ksatriyas are second. Brahmana
was first. So, brahmanas are higher than ksatriyas. Similarly, among the four
ashramas, th..., the, Durva..., Am..., Ambarīṣa Mahārāja was a grihasta. Durvāsā
Muni was sannyasi. So, both of the varṇa and the ashrama point of view, Durvāsā
Muni was higher. But he had not done mat-paraḥ. His mind was not fixed on
Krishna. His mind was fixed on, he was, he wa..., whatever kind of meditation he
was doing. But at least, within this pastime, he was focused more on the fact
that I am a renunciate. I am a great sage. And I deserve to be honored. So, his
consciousness was not on Krishna. On the other hand, Ambarīṣa Mahārāja was
"mat-paraḥ". And how was he "mat-paraḥ"? That, for that, Srila Prabhupada quotes
a series of verses from the Bhagavatam which describe how one can fix the mind
and senses on Krishna. So, let us look at these verses.

        sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor
         vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane
        karau harer mandira-mārjanādiṣu
         śrutiṁ cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye

So, first and foremost, it all begins with "manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor". One
fixes the mind on the lotus feet of Krishna. Now, we may say how can I fix the
mind on Krishna directly? Actually, at least, there has to be the intention to
fix the mind on Krishna. So, we need the senses. And the, when we engage the
senses, it becomes easier to fix the mind on Krishna. But at least, the
intention has to be there. Yes, I want to think about Krishna. I want to fix the
mind on Krishna. So, then, when that intention onwards, then one starts engaging
the senses, also. And when the senses become engaged. Then, naturally, the mind
also becomes engaged. So, let us see now how we engage the senses. "vacāṁsi
vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane". So, "vacāṁsi", with his speech, what did he do?
"vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane". He described the glories of Vaikuṇṭha. Now,
"vaikuṇṭha" get refered to the abode of the Lord. And "vaikuṇṭha" is also one of
the names of Lord Vishnu. Now, you know, in the Vishnu Sahasranama as well as in
the Eighth Canto, "vaikuṇṭha" is one of the incarnations of Vishnu who appears.
So, he describes the glories of "vaikuṇṭha". "karau harer mandira-mārjanādiṣu".
So, "karau" is the hands. With the hands, what did he do? "mandira-mārjanā". He
uses the hands to clean the temple. And then, "śrutiṁ" is hear. "śrutiṁ
cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye". So, "śrutiṁ", "cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye". That
Supreme Lord, who is all-attractive. Who is the essence of everything.
"sat-kathodaye". The auspicious. The eternal. The true kathā of Him. In this
world, we are hearing the kathā of so many people, in this world. You know, the
whole newspapers are actually filled with the "kathā" of people. There is
"kathā" of politicians, of cricketers, of, you know, of business people, of
business scamsters, of criminals. So, there are "kathā" of so many people. But
"sat-kathodaye". The true "kathā" is of the Supreme Lord. So, use the ears to
hear that. Then, "mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane dṛśau". So, with "darśane", "dṛśau".
With the eyes, what did you do? "mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane". So, "liṅgā" refers
to the form. "darśane". So, "liṅgālaya". Like we have Himalaya. So, Himalaya is
the abode of th..., Hima. That is hea..., abode of snow. So, pustakalaya is
the abode of books. That can be a book store. It can be a library. So,
"mukunda-liṅgālaya". That means "darśane" of the deity of Krishna. And not just
the deity of Krishna, but also the temple of Krishna. Even the temple reminds of
Krishna. So, that is why, if you see in the past, the temples would have
distinctive architecture. You know, the temples would have aspired which moves
right high up. And then, that reminds us of Krishna. We see Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
when he would come to Puri, you know, you know, whenever he would, after
traveling to Vidhasa, first time coming from Nabadwip or coming after returning
from South India, or from His Vrindavan, North India tours. When Caitanya
Mahāprabhu would come back. When he would first see the tall spire, the tall
tower at the top of, you know, Jagannath temple, and the chakron that f..., he
would just offer dandavats. Because that is just, so that, the externally seeing
the temple is also auspicious. And of course, we go inside and see the deities.
That is also auspicious. So, he used his eyes to see the beautiful form of, you
know, Shri C..., you know, of the Supreme Lord, Mukunda and his temple.

        tad-bhṛtya-gātra-sparśe ’ṅga-saṅgamam

So, what did he do with his body? "tad-bhṛtya". "tad-bhṛtya" is his devotees.
"gātra-sparśe ’ṅga-saṅgamam". So, he would touch when the great saints, great
devotees would come. He would touch their lotus feet and take the dust on their
head. So, he used his body to touch the, you know, to reverentially touch the
bodies of the devotees.

        ghrāṇaṁ ca tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe
         śrīmat-tulasyā rasanāṁ tad-arpite

So, "ghrāṇaṁ". So, now "ghrāṇaṁ" means to accept. "ca tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe".
So, what would you do? The "pā...". So, "pāda-saroja". The, you know, lotus that
was offered. The flowers that were offered to the Supreme Lord, he would
"ghrāṇaṁ". He would smell those. So, now, you know, "śrīmat-tulasyā rasanāṁ
tad-arpite". And that tulasī leaf, that was offered to the Supreme Lord, he
would relish them. "śrīmat-tulasyā". Then, beyond that, "pādau hareḥ
kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe". "pādau". So, he uses his feet for what? To go to "hareḥ
kṣetra". To "hareḥ kṣetra" is the temple. It can be the holy places.
"padānusarpaṇe". He would go around, circumambulate. And r..., r...,
reverentially use his feet in that service. "śiro hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane". And
what did he, would do with his head? "śiro hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane". He will use
his head to offer respects to the Lord. "hareḥ kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe". And after
that, after he offers this, so, he, he, so that means we go and offer obeisances
to the lotus feet. So, we are going to the deities and offer dandavat pranam.
And after describing this, what is he overall describing? Ultimately:

        kāmaṁ ca dāsye na tu kāma-kāmyayā
        yathottamaśloka-janāśrayā ratiḥ

So, "kāmaṁ ca dāsye". He made all the desires his servants. "na tu
kāma-kāmyayā". He did not become a desirer of desirers. He did not become the
servant of his desires. We will discuss about "kāma-kāmy" later on in 2.70 when
we come to that. Same phrase will come. "yathottamaśloka-janāśrayā ratiḥ". So,
in this way, you know, you know, in this way, "uttamaśloka". That supreme
Lord. So, "janāśrayā ratiḥ". Who is the shelter of all the people. You know, in
this way, Ambarīṣa Mahārāja developed his "ratiḥ". He had "ratiḥ" for the
Absolute Truth, for the "uttamaśloka". The Lord who is glorified by choice
poetry. Now, if we look at this verse, what do we find in it? Basically, he is
engaging all his sensory faculties. So, let us look at which all senses are
there. We have five karmendriyas. We have five jnanendriyas. So, samplings are
given to indicate how all of these use engaging. So, what are the five
karmendriyas? We have the two hands, the two legs. And we have the speech. There
are, of course, the extricate organs which we cannot use directly in the Lord's
service. They are impure. And they are basically meant to export the impurities
from within the body. So, he used the, the, you know, two karmen..., the
hands, and the legs, and the power of speech. All these karmendriyas, he used
by, to enter service to the Lord. To go to the temple. To clean the temple. And
to speak the glories of the Lord. So, it is significant, also, that Ambarīṣa
Mahārāja was not a brahmana. He was a ksatriya. And generally, ksatriyas are not
supposed to preach. You know, brahmanas would do the preaching. Ksatriyas create
the facilities for preaching. Now, it is not that ksatriyas do not preach
absolutely. Ksatriyas do give speeches. In fact, k..., kings are supposed to
give speeches. And we see Prithu Mahārāja. When he comes back after the 99-horse
sacrifices, you know, to his kingdom, in Fourth Canto, Twenty-First Chapter, he
does give instructions to his citizens. So, certainly, he is supposed to give
instructions and council. And that involves giving speeches. But a ksatriya,
because, he is, the ksatriya is caught up with the administration of the state,
the ksatriya may not, ksatriya generally does not have the resou..., the time to
systematically become a teacher of scripture lifelong. But still, that does not
mean that even if one's varṇa is not making, allowing one to systematically
steadily teach scripture. So, that does not mean that one should not glorify the
Supreme Lord. Everybody should glorify the Supreme Lord. The way one may glorify
may be different. You know, glorifying the Lord does not mean that we have to
sit on a Vyāsāsana and give classes. We can, you know, share Krishna
Consciousness in various ways. We can share it with our family members. We can
share with our neighbours, our relatives. We can distribute books. All this is
"vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane". And similarly, he uses "karmendriyas".
So, the "karmendriyas" are. Sorry. The, he uses the "jnanendriyas". So, he used
the eyes to see the deities. He used the ears to hear the Krishna "kathā". He
used the tongue to taste Krishna prasad. He used the nose to smell the flowers
offered to the Lord. And he used the, in this way, all the senses. He used the
tou..., s..., k..., sense of s..., k..., touch to touch the lotus feet of the
devotees. Now, what does this verse actually mean? You know, is it that this was
all that Ambarīṣa Mahārāja was doing all the time? No. He was a king. And he had
kingly responsibilities. But this is demonstrative of how we can all engage
ourselves and all our senses in devotional service. So, you know, he would do
all these activities. And say, so can we. That which i..., when, in, Rupa
Goswami gives the 64 items of devotional, it is not that one has to do only
these activities. These are important activities which we have to do. But along
with that, we can and we, w..., we can and should do our wordly duties, also. We
will discuss about how, you know, various levels, one can practice bhakti.
Krishna talks about it from 12.8 to 12.12 that we will discuss that. But here,
the point is, you know, this is an example of how we can all engage our senses
in Krishna's service. And it was this steady engagement throughout that, which
he was doing lifelong that enabled Ambarīṣa Mahārāja when the k..., the, to
respond maturely when the crisis came. When he was cursed by Durvāsā Muni. And
then, there is fearful demon came from the h..., blacked-out hair of, you know,
when the uttered curse of Durvāsā. At that time, Ambarīṣa Mahārāja neither ran
away, that means, he was not physically disturbed, nor did he become mentally
fearful. He just stayed calm and kept the mind on Krishna. So, because he was
doing it throughout his life, therefore he was able to do it this time. And it
is not that suddenly when the time of crisis comes, we will be able to remember
Krishna. We should not expect that. Sometimes, by the grace of Krishna, when the
greatest danger comes, we will realise that we are helpless. And we will call
out to Krishna. But oh, sometimes, it may not happen, also. If we have not
prepared our consciousness, then it may well happen that when the time of crisis
comes, at that time, instead of remembering Krishna, we may start thinking of
other things. We may start thinking of other shelters. And how all those
shelters have been devastated. And we may not be able to fix the mind on
Krishna. In fact, th..., what may happen is that we may become resentful. Why
has Krishna done this to me? So, therefore, you know, what is illustrated over
here is that Ambarīṣa Mahārāja had lifelong engagement in devotional service.
And that is how at the moment of crisis, also, he was able to think of Krishna.
So, this is the example, what, how is the connection, what is the connection of
this particular, you know, passage with the purpo..., with the verse? The verse
is basically talking about, you know, con..., control, concentration, conquest.
Such a person who can do this is "tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā". So, Prabhupada is
talking about how we can bring about the concentration. So, concentration
involves fixing the mind. But fixing the mind also involves engaging the senses.
So, now, after describing this, now, Krishna will describe how one can, if one
does not do this. If one does not attempt to regulate the senses in the right
way. Then, one can fall down disastrously. So, how may one fa..., one may fall
down? That is described in the next verse. Yeah.

        dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ
        saṅgas teṣūpajāyate
        saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ
        kāmāt krodho ’bhijāyate

So, here, Krishna is telling that when we contemplate. "dhyāyato viṣayān
puṁsaḥ". When we contemplate on the sense objects. Then, what happens? "saṅgas
teṣūpajāyate". "saṅgaḥ". At that time, we develop attachment. When we develop
attachments:

        saṅgas teṣūpajāyate
        saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ

You know, strong desire comes up. So, this "kāmaḥ" has lust. So, first, there is
contemplation. Then, there is, oh, that is nice. Then, there is strong desire. I
will explain this as we move forward. Then, after that, when there is "kāmāt".
When there is opposition. Then, "kāmāt krodho ’bhijāyate". One develops
"krodhaḥ". Fury. Who can stop me? Nobody can stop me from enjoying. I must
enjoy. And then, we will discuss both these verses together. Because then, a
flow, thought flow:

        krodhād bhavati sammohaḥ

Then, from "krodhāt", what happens? "sammohaḥ". Delusion comes. One forgets, you
know, one actually becomes so confused. One loses awareness of what is to be
done, what is not to be done. Now, when we lose awareness of what is to be done,
not, what is not to be done, what is, normally, we should refer to scripture to
understand what should I do in such a situation. But:

        sammohāt smṛti-vibhramaḥ

But when the "sammohaḥ" is way deluded. We do not think about scripture. We
forget scripture. So, "smṛti" here can refer to our memory. And "smṛti" can also
refer to the "smṛti" shastra. Which we are su..., meant to keep in our "smṛti".
"sammohāt smṛti-vibhramaḥ". Then, "smṛti-bhraṁśād buddhi-nāśo". When the "smṛti"
is "bhraṁśāt", then our memory is lost. Then, what happens? "buddhi-nāśaḥ".
Actually, our intelligence is based on our memory. To the extent, we lose our
memory, to that extent, we lose our intelligence. Then, "buddhi-nāśāt
praṇaśyati". When we lose our intelligence, then we fall away. Then, we fall
away from material consciousness. From spiritual consciousness, material
conscious. We fall back to the material pool. So, let us try to understand this
in, through a poin..., through examples. So, this is an article that I have
written. This is there on my website, also. So, we will discuss this in terms of
the three stages, in which, we may fall away. Yeah. So, what are these, these
different stages? Not three stages. Multiple stages. So, first stage is
"dhyāyato", contemplation. So, here, I have explained. All of them have used
words which all end in "ion", "tion", for the sake of rhyme, also. So, first is,
"dhyāyato" is contemplation. I start thinking about certain things. When I
contemplate on that, then I develop attraction. Oh, that is nice. That is nice.
"saṅgaḥ". And that is nice. Then, after that, there is obsession. I want it.
That is "kāma". And then, when there is "kāma", then what is happens? There is
irritation. Yes. Infuriation. He says, who can stop me from getting it? No. He
says, no, you cannot get it. You do not have the money. You know, you do not
have the. You know, you do not. It, it is immoral. You should not be doing it.
Because bondage. I do not care. There is irritation. Who can stop me? So, here,
normally speaking, we often say that when lust is unfulfilled, it leads to
greed. That i..., leads, leads to anger. That is definitely true. Now,
sometimes, when there is some, you know, you know, there is some love affair.
And if there is a love triangle. You know, two boys loving one girl. Then, the
two boys may fight with each other. And they may kill each other, also. One of
them may kill another, or say, if a boy loves a girl. And then, the girl sa...,
says no to the boy. The boy may go and in a swift of anger, anger, may ball,
throw asset on the face of the girl, and, you know, try to destroy her face. If
I cannot enjoy it, nobody cannot enjoy. So, all these things happen. What is
this? When lust is frustrated, then lust explodes as anger. So, now, here,
Krishna is talking about, He is not talking about that kind of actions. They may
be there. But here, He is talking, right now, of, in, fallen, or the sequence of
by which, one falls away. So, when we contemplate, we become infatuated. We
become attracted. And then, we become obsessed. And at this time of obsession,
whatever is there, which is pursued as the obstacle to the fulfillment of our
desire. Then, we feel anger towards that. Irritation, that is "krodhaḥ". And
when there is irritation. From that comes delusion. "sammohaḥ". So, when
"sammohaḥ" comes. "sammohaḥ" means one becomes confused. One does not know what
to do. What should I do? What should I not do? Then, after that, "sammohaḥ".
Then, there is oblivion. Oblivion means "smṛti-bhraṁśād". Now, oblivion is
forgetfulness. So, one does not know what should I do. So, delusion means one is
undecided. But oblivion means when normally, when we are undecided, we should be
able to turn towards scripture. But at this stage, one is not able to turn
towards scripture. When there is oblivion, then there is stupefaction. Stupe...
mean..., stupefaction means we will become stupid. Our "buddhi" is destroyed.
"buddhi-nāśāt". And then, after that, there is destruction. One, "praṇaśyati",
one falls away. So, in this way, this is the sequence by which one falls away
from the spiritual level of consciousness to the sensual level. One falls away
to sense gratification. So, when this happens, in this way, when we fall away.
So, what can we do at such a situ...? So, actually, th..., there is a process by
which we fall. And there is a process by which we can check ourselves. So, is
this irreversible? Is this unstoppable? From contemplation to destruction. Is it
unstoppable or irreversible? No. It is possible. It is, i..., we can stop it.
And we can reverse it, also.

So, to understand this, let us consider the example of a horse. You know, if a
person is on a horse. Or the more common example is, or, let us say, a chariot.
So, so, the, in ch..., in chariot, generally, there are several horses. Four,
five horses, same. So, like that, we are seated on the chariot of the body. We
have five senses. So, either way, if I take, now, an example of a horse, or of a
chariot. So, if I am on a horse, say. Then, I am riding on the horse. And I am,
I am keeping the horse to a f..., to a, I am guiding the horse to go in a s...,
particular direction, straight direction. But at that time, the horse catches
sight of something. So, there is something attractive. Now, with the, there,
some, some vegetable is there. Some juicy v..., vegetable is th..., something
nice to eat is there. And the horse starts looking at that direction. Now, when
the horse starts looking at that direction. Ah, that is nice. I want it. Then,
now, actually, in-between, there is a ditch. And if the horse goes into ditch,
the horse may throw me off. And the horse may still get injured. But the horse
is so caught by what it sees over there. It starts running in that direction.
So, when, when the horse catches speed, after the horse has caught speed, then,
you know, to bring it under control is much more difficult. Initially, when the
horse started looking in that direction, tuck. Just one pull with the reins, and
the horse's head is pulled away from that. And then, horse focuses. But when the
horse starts running in that direction, it has gained v..., some momentum, gains
some momentum and starts charging. At that time, to bring it back under control
is much more difficult. Then, the greater the momentum it has got, greater will
be the exertion required to bring the horse back under control. Now, the
important point is, even if the horse goes there. And fo..., and, you know, jump
and goes into the ditch to get that particular v..., you know, vegetable or
whatever is there. And then, phew, thrown off, maybe, it gets injured. Even
after all that, we can still get up. We can still raise the horse up. Then, if
the horse is not injured. We can still get it to mount, ge..., ge..., co...,
bring it out of the ditch, mount on it, and keep moving forward. The horse is
injuried, we may have to treat it. And then, we can move forward. So, even if
one, even if the horse actually goes out of control, s..., and it knocks us off,
still, we can get back. And still, we can keep moving forward. So, it is never
too late. We can always come back and make a fresh start. But how much more
trouble it is? If there is, the horse had been controlled earlier in the
beginning, then, it would have been so much easier. Just do not look, li...,
first of all, if, keep the horse fixed. You know, that is why they have, you
know, on the horse head, they also have coverings by which the horse cannot look
in too many directions. So, if we do not let the horse look away in too many
directions, that keeps its focused, also. So, and even if the horse looks, at
that time, bring it back under control. But if we let the horse go out of
control, then it is so much more trouble. That is why the earlier we bring the
horse under control, the better it is. So, like, from, from the stage of
contemplation, to the stage of destruction, it is, it becomes more and more
difficult to control. But at all stages, it is possible to control. All that we
need is some steady determination. And, you know, how, another example to
illustrate how this is difficult as it moves forward is that of a, how a
snowball is formed. You know, when a snowball is being formed, initially, there
may be just small pebble of snow. Small pebble of snow. It starts rolling on the
ground. And now, if somebody is there on the top of the moun..., or hill, from
which the snowball is rolling down. And that person may just kick it. Just offer
one kick to it. And tuck. It will just break off. It will be shattered. That is
the end of the snowball. But if that, if nobody does that at that time, the
snowball starts rolling down, down, down, down, down, down, down, down, down.
And as it rolls down, it, more and more snow sticks to it. And as more and more
snow sticks to it, it becomes bigger, and bigger, and bigger, and bigger. And by
the time the snowball comes down, you know, if somebody, you know, far from,
somebody kicking it. That same person who could have just kicked and broken it.
Now, that person may just steamrolled by it. Let me just crush the knock. That
person over, roll over it, and crush, and mangle the person some times. Now,
what has happened? You know, the same snow. At that place, it was so small. By
the time, it comes down, it has become so big. The same with our negative
thoughts. You know, when one desire comes in. At that time. No. Nothing doing.
Just say, I will not, I will not contemplate on it. Then, that is the end of it.
But once you start contemplating on it, then, what essentially happens by
contemplation is, our imagination gets triggered. See, Krishna, the Bhagavad
Gita, being the words of Krishna, every word is carefully chosen. The word is
"dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ". It is not "dhrsato viṣayān puṁsaḥ". Or "pasyato
viṣayān puṁsaḥ". It is, Krishna is not saying, you know, one, when we see the
sense objects. We cannot walk into the world with blindfolds. We cannot avoid
seeing the sense objects. The problem is not seeing the sense objects. The
problem is contemplating. What is the difference between seeing and
contemplating? When we see and we let our imagination run wild. That is where
contemplation begins. That is what contemplation essentially means. So, actually
speaking, we see so many things. Now, I see this table. Now, when I see the
table. It is not that when I see the table, I start imagining. Oh, you know, I
want a table like this. Why does this person have a table like this? That person
has a bigger table than me. I want a s..., I should have a bigger table.

Now, you know, if, if that imagi..., now, some person gets a whole set, set of
imagination like that. Somebody else does not get any imagination like that.
Now, who gets imagination? Who does not get imagination? That will depend on
past attachment. If a person, that, a drunkard, then as soon as one sees
alcohol, then immediately, f..., up, the mind just goes on a, like a, it is an
olympic medal sprint. You know, it starts running so fast at full speed.
Thinking of this, thinking of that. Thinking. It may run at the speed of light,
practically speaking. So, that is because there is attachment. So, now, you
know, now, when Krishna says:

        dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ
        saṅgas teṣūpajāyate

"saṅgaḥ", or, "saṅgaḥ", attachment is dev..., attachment developed. Now, that
attachment, this can be, if you are first temper see the sense objects, then
also, contemplation can develop, the, can lead t..., a..., lead to attachment.
Or otherwise, it can also refer to how, because we have not, you know, be...,
because we had previous attachments. But those attachments are dormant. And
then, when there is contemplation, those attachment become awakened. So, it can
be either way. But the important point is that the senses need to be, you know,
we need to avoid contemplation of the sense objects. So, we c..., we do not have
to squelch or suppress our imagination. We can spiritualise our imagination. You
know, we can think about the beautiful darshan of Krishna. We can think of a...,
the services that we can do for Krishna. We can think of how we can, you know,
how we can study the scriptures nicely. How we will chant nicely. How we will
share Krishna's message, you know, powerfully. So, we can think of such things.
We can spiritualise our imagination. Now, of, we may say, but isn't it that I am
thinking of my own glory? I think I will become a very good book distributor. I
will become a very good preacher. I will become the very good thing. No. But we
have to engage our imagination. And it is not wrong for a person to think that I
want to become a good devotee. You know, we all want to become good devotees.
And in, be..., and being a good devotee involves, may want to, if we may want
to come good, good sh..., you know, good teachers of Krishna Consciousness. We
want to become good singers. Good pujaris. Good cooks. Whatever ser..., good
managers. Whatever services we are doing. You know, it is perfectly ok to desire
to do, be good devotees. And be good in the services that we want to do. So,
that is not a, that is not an egositic imagination. Certainly, some element of
ego may be there. When I want to speak Krishna's message, you know, powerfully.
Now, I may think, I may also want that, you know, I want, people should praise
me. People should think how clever I am, how learned I am. So, that may be
there. But, now, but just because of the fear of that, we should not avoi...,
avoid thinking that I want to do service of, nicely for Krishna. What we should
do is, we should, we should do the services nicely. But we want to do them
nicely for Krishna's pleasure, not for our own praise. So, when the praise
comes, we basically accept it. Thank you. Thank you for encouraging me. Whatever
I am able to do, it is by Krishna's mercy. It is by devotees' mercy. So, that
way, when we have this cultured attitude towards Krishna Consciousness, you
know, towards our performance of devotional service, then we will stay without
being, you know, without being infatuated by pride. You know, but if we do not
use our imagination, spiritually, then, by default, the imagination will go
materially. So, actually, envisioning that, you know, yes, we want to have a
wonderful programme. If we are, if I am, if I am an organiser or a teacher in a
programme, you know, at that time, I may want to think, as, you know, this
pro..., hall is there. So, whole hall should be fulled..., filled. And if
somebody is doing follow-up. You know, if we are going to some hostel, for
college to run ce..., so, if we are going to some homes. You know, they will
not, he does not not just see buildings of concrete, and, you know, s...,
concrete and metal. A devotee sees, oh, these are all homes of potential
devotees. So, we have to. We develop that vision. And that is how. You know
then, we see a person, we think, oh, how wonderful this person would be if this
person also became a devotee. So, that way, we can spiritualise our imagination.
So, when we spiritualise our imagination, then we give some avenue for our
imagination to move forward. If we do not spiritualise our imagination, then
where will, what will our imagination do? Where will it go? It has to go
somewhere. If it does not go towards Krishna. You know, then it will,
imagination will go towards maya. And we will be thinking about sensual things.
So, therefore, we can spiritualise our imagination, and that way, dovetail the
imagination propensity of the mind, also.

But when we contemplate on the sense objects, then imagination, you know, c...,
develops, imagination leads to the development of attachment. And from that
point onwards, we start falling. Now, at any place, we can check ourselves. It
is not that we have to check ourselves only after we, you know, f..., fall.
Actually, even if the imagination, "dhyāyato viṣayān", "saṅgas teṣūpajāyate".
So, "saṅgaḥ" has developed. And "krodhaḥ" has also developed. Even after that,
also, we can check ourselves. So, at any stage, when we start feeling irritated.
Actually, when we start feeling irritated, you know, at whatever obstacles are
there, because of which, we are not able to enjoy the senses. You know, there
are certain rules which do not allow us to enjoy. You know, there are certain
other people in the room who do not allow me to do what I want to do. Or
whatever factors are there because of which, we cannot enjoy. At that time,
instead of becoming angry at those obstacles, which block our sense
gratification, we can redirect the anger towards the mind and the senses. You
know, why are you craving for such things? Which are not going to make me happy?
You know, these, we have d..., I have done these things so many times. And all
that I have got is just a little pleasure followed by guilt. Followed by
emptiness. Followed by frustration. Followed by lowered consciousness. Followed
by greater, you know, disconnection from Krishna. Why should I get into all
this? So, actually, our indulgence in sense gratification, what does it do? Yes,
i..., if it is immoral, it will lead to karmic consequences, also. But more
importantly, you know, from our immediate perspective, also, it steals away our
taste in Krishna Consciousness. You know, to the ea..., what happens is, when we
engage in sense gratification, at that time, we come down to material
consciousness. When we come down to material consciousness, and by coming down
to material consciousness. We cut ourselves off from spiritual consciousness.
And when we cut ourselves off from spiritual consciousness, then we cannot
perceive Krishna. When we cannot perceive Krishna, we cannot relish Krishna,
also, at that time. So, that is why it is important for us to recognise that I
have to redirect my anger from the sense objects, to the, from the obstacles for
sense gratification to that, the things which are creating the desire for sense
gratification. The mind and the senses. And that way, we can purify ourselves.
We can bring ourselves back under control. So, we will continue this discussion
in our next class.

Thank you very much. Srimad Bhagavad Gita ki jaya. Hare Krishna.
