Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s9in3s6eqYk
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=s9in3s6eqYk&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_084_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_06_Text_24_to_32_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=Jk6MiIndm7CIueTLubK1Jvtdc0p8MTU0ODQ4ODI5OEAxNTQ4NDAxODk4

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in 6.24. We discussed the samadhi verses. And now, Krishna will talk about
how one can attain the state of samadhi. So, the chapter, as I explained, has a
flow from sadhana to siddha. Then, again, from sadhana to siddha. And then
again, from sadhana to siddha. And as it moves forward, in the first
progression, it talks about Brahman realisation. That is from verses 10 to 15.
Then, from 16 to 23, it talks about Paramatma realisation. And 24 to 32, it
talks about Bhagavan realisation. That is how we are progressing. So, let us
start with the verse 24, now. So:

        sa niścayena yoktavyo
        yogo ’nirviṇṇa-cetasā
        saṅkalpa-prabhavān kāmāṁs
        tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥ

N..., so:

        manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ
        viniyamya samantataḥ

"sa niścayena yoktavyo". So, one starts practicing with determination. "sa
niścayena". "niścayena" means determination. We have discussed earlier in our
Upadesamrta about how "utsāhān", "niścayād", "dhairyāt". So, "sa niścayena
yoktavyo". With determination, one engages. "yogo ’nirviṇṇa-cetasā". "nirviṇṇa"
means dejected. And Prabhupada, deviated. So, "nirviṇṇa". One can deject...,
dejected, deviated. "nirviṇṇa-cetasā". One does not let oneself get deviated.
So, one engages in devotional service, you know, in, in the practice of
yoga in general. It can also refer to devotional service in the ultimate sense.
"sa niścayena". With determination. And determination. What does determination
means? That means, there is no deviation. So, actually, the nature of the mind,
and the nature of the world are such that they will us take off-track. But we
bring ourselves back on track. Again. And again. And yet again. That is the
essential process of bhakti-yoga. And of any yoga, in general. So, "yogo
’nirviṇṇa-cetasā". And what do we need to, to be able to do this?
"saṅkalpa-prabhavān kāmāṁs". There are mat..., many, many material desires which
come up. M..., "kāmāṁs" in material desire. And "saṅkalpa" is the resolution to
enjoy those material desires. There is "saṅkalpa". And there is "vikalpa". So,
"saṅkalpa" means I want this. "vikalpa" means I do not want this. "saṅkalpa"
manifests itself as the karma section in the Vedic scriptures. "karma-kanda".
Yes, this is, I, I wa..., want to enjoy this. And this is what I will do to
enjoy it. So, in a sense, the difference between "saṅkalpa" and kama is,
"saṅkalpa-prabhavān kāmāṁs". What does it mean is that, m..., because there is
kama, there is the desire to enjoy. And then, that leads to the resolution.
"saṅkalpa" means resolution. You know. Resolution to enjoy. So, one gives up the
resolution to enjoy. That is born of lust. So, it is significant. Krishna is not
saying over here one gives up lust. Because giv..., giving up lust will take a
long time. The lusty desires may come. And they may g..., you know, they may
stay in our mind. But we decide, not to act on their..., them. So, in the
Bhagavatam, also, you know, in the Seventh Canto, when it is talked about how
different anarthas can be overcommitted is: 

        asaṅkalpāj jayet kāmaṁ

"asaṅkalpāj jayet kāmaṁ" means that by making firm resolutions, one can break
free. One can get rid of the kama. So, one decides, just leave, so, the acharyas
give the example, Chakravarti Pada, and Srila Prabhupada, also, that, if one
decides on ekadashi, I am not going to eat grains. You know, that resolution,
once it is there, by making, a, by not making plans to eat on, a, eat grains on
ekadashi. One is able to, you know, a..., th..., at least save off that desire
for eating. For that particular day. You know. So, like that, h..., there is a
difference between desiring and planning. So, desiring is something which we may
not be able to avoid. But planning is something which we can avoid. So,
"saṅkalpa-prabhavān kāmāṁs". That mans with the, from kama, the "saṅkalpa" that
is born, one gives up. "tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥ". So, one gives them, a...,
"tyaktvā". So, Krishna is very emphatic over there. If you want to be
"’nirviṇṇa". If you want to be "sa niścayena yoktavyo". What do we have to do?
"tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥ". We give up all the material desires. "aśeṣataḥ". Do
not keep even one desire. You know. If there is a dham. Hmm. The dham may be
gigantic structure made of extremely strong stone or concrete. Or such other
material. But if there is one crack in it. That one crack is enough. Through
that one crack, what will go? Little. Then, little. Then, little more. And then,
more. And then, eventually, through that crack, the water will go through in
such a force, such a quanity, that, eventually, because of that, the whole
dhram..., dham can collapse. If that dha..., if that whole, that crack is not
fixed in time. So, a tiny crack can lead to a mighty crash. A tiny crack can
lead to a mighty crash. Therefore, the tiny crack should also be sealed. That is
where Krishna is telling over here, "tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥ". So, there is a
double emphasis over here. "sarvān" is one emphasis. All. And "aśeṣataḥ" is
another emphasis. Nothing remaining. That means, give it up completely. "tyaktvā
sarvān aśeṣataḥ". And then, "manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ". What does one do?
"manasā". "eva". "indriya-grāmam". That means, with the mind, and with the
senses. "viniyamya samantataḥ". "samantataḥ". With, with, so, one, with the mind
and the senses. One brings the, you know, brings oneself under control. So,
"manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ". So, Prabhupada says, control all the senses on all
sides by the mind. Now, sometimes, the question arises that does the mind drag
the senses? You know. There is this mind, you know, take the senses in the wrong
direction? Or the senses take the mind in wrong direction? Actually, it can
happen both ways. The mind can take the senses in wrong directions. Or the
senses can take the mind in wrong directions. How is, both is possible? It
depends on where is the trigger of temptation coming from. Sometimes, the
trigger for temptation comes from outside. That means we see something
externally which agitates us. And when it agitates us, then, from the senses,
the trigger comes in. And it triggers us internally. Then, the imagination, the
fascination, all that gets stimulated. And then, we act on it. So, when the
trigger of temptation is coming from outside to inside, that means the senses
are agitating the mind. And sometimes, the trigger of temptation can come from
inside. That means, we remember based on our past life. What do we remember
based on that? We remember that, oh, this is what went wrong. This is what I had
done in the past. Now, we do not think of it as wrong. You know. At that time.
We just remember, oh, this is what I had done. And, you know, we just remember,
oh, it was so enjoyable at that time. So, we get into that. And when we get into
that, the trigger of temptation, the mind gets agitated. And then, the mind
takes the senses towards sense gratification. That means, you know, th...,
first, we, we do not necessarily see some provocative object externally. But we
imagine something internally. And then, we ourselves go towards the sense
object. And then, we indulge in it. So:

        manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ
        viniyamya samantataḥ

Now, Krishna is telling over here, with the mind, control the senses. Now, the
significance of this is that the yogi who is practicing ashtanga-yoga has
already withdrawn away from the world of temptation. The yogi is no longer
situated in the materialistic c..., environment. The yogi has gone to the
jungle. And in that sense, in the environment of the forest, there are not many
external triggers of temptation. So, m..., m..., the triggers of temptation for
a yogi who has gone to the forest are primarily internal. And with the mind, one
control the senses. That means that one understand that the mind, you know, it
may come up with some memories. Oh, I had enjoyed like that. I had done like
that. I had done like that. And then, once those desires come up, then one
starts acting on the senses, also. But one controls at the level of the mind.
And then, one does not let the senses get active. So, with the mind, one
controls the senses. That means we do not go towards the sense objects. And do
not let the senses get in..., exposed to sense objects by placing us in that
environment. Where such contact would happen too much. So, for us, we cannot
avoid the contact. We live in a, a contaminated environment where there are
provocative stimuli all around us. So, how do we deal with them? We deal with
them by, you know, inner restraint. So:

        manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ
        viniyamya samantataḥ

So, the point is, externally, whether there are triggers or not, the real fall,
you know, actually happens internally first. That is why in, you know, 2.62,
also. Krishna talks about "dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ". As the beginning of the
fall. That is in it. "dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ". It is not seeing the sense
objects. It is contemplating on sense objects that begins the downward fall. So,
now, all material desires born of, one gives them up. And one fixes oneself on
the Supreme Lord. So, now, here, Krishna is not telling exactly what one should
fix on. He will tell it later on in the Bhagavad Gita. But we understand,
Bhagavad Gita ultimately recommends the process of bhakti-yoga. And in
bhakti-yoga, one is recommended to fix the mind on the Supreme Lord. Now, here,
the yogi is trying to learn, go inwards. And trying to, you know, fix the mind
on the at..., the dhy..., attma-tattva. That may be atma. It may Paramatma.
Depending on how evolved the yogi's understanding is. So, now, Prabhupada in
this purport gives the exam..., story of the sparrow. And the m..., ocean who
had taken the eggs of the sparrow. And a, the sparrow is determined to get the
eggs back. And when the eggs could not, you know, the ocean did not care. Then,
the sparrow became determined. I will dry up the ocean. The determination was
impossible. But the impossible determination attracted the unstoppable power of
Garuda. And when Garuda said, I would dry up the ocean. And the ocean took it
very seriously. And gave the eggs back. So, what does this illustration
illustra..., you know, you know, demonstrate, exemplify? Actually, our
conditionings are like an ocean. This material existence is itself consi...,
compared to an ocean sometimes. And within that, our conditionings are also
o..., oceanic. And deep within those conditionings is the love of God. Just like
the bird had its eggs. Which were taken away by the ocean. So, the, so, deep
with, under this vast ocean of conditionings, there is the potential love of
God. The love for God which has been misdirected now to other things. So, for
us, to remove all our conditionings is next to impossible. But if we just keep
practicing devotional service. So, every maha mantra that we chant is like
one, removing one drop from the ocean. It is one moment we are trying to live
purely. So, keep practicing. Keep practicing. Just by the, every moment that we
try to remember Krishna. Try to serve Krishna. It is like removing one drop from
the ocean. We can never dry up the ocean. But by our sincere endeavor, we can
attract the mercy of the Lord. And when we attract the mercy of the Lord, then
the Lord does miracles. And the Lord enables us to, the, it is actually the Lord
who manifests His miraculous potency through, you know, m..., the spiritual
master. The, Garuda represents the spiritual master over here. And then, one is
able to become free. One is able to become rescued. You know. Liberated from the
conditioning. And reinstated in our original pure love for Krishna. So,
Prabhupada ma..., says that, Prabhupada says in the purport that it:

"may appear to be a very difﬁcult job. But if anyone follows the principles with
great determination, the Lord will surely help, for God helps those who help
themselves."

So, now, this is a common saying among people to take God helps those who help
themselves. What is the Ve..., a, V..., Vedic understanding of this?
Prabhupada himself is quoting it. So, now, many times, when people,
materialistic people, or people who are not devotionally-minded quote this.
Actually, their emphasis is often on do not just sit and pray. Do not just do
this puja. Do not just jappa. Work. You know. Those who help your...,
themselves, God will help them. So, the idea is, so, often, for them, when they
speak, their emphasis is not on God helps. Their emphasis is on help themselves.
So, the emphasis what? You help yourself. Then, God will help you. So, the,
the, for them, God's help is like a sideshow. You know. Real thing is you help
yourself. Unless you endeavor, you are not going to get the results. So, you
know, do not, so, the, often people talk about in such a way do not waste your
time in praying. Do not waste your time in just doing all sort of nonsense.
It is just, actually, work. Help yourself. Then, God will help you. So, in
principle, the statement is true. But the emphasis has to be clearly understood.
Actually, when Prabhupada is speaking the story, the point is, it is God's help
which is decisive. So, it is God's help which brings about the result. And God's
help cannot be neglected. It should not be neglected just for the sake of
helping ourselves. In fact, the best way we can help ourselves is by taking
God's help. The best way we can help ourselves is by taking God's help. So, God
helps those who help themselves. That is true. But how do we help ourselves? By
taking God's help. So, in fact, we do not even have to take God's help. God is
already there in our heart. And He wants to help us. We simply have to stop
obstructing His help. Just like a doctor wants to treat the patient. And all
that the patient has to do is cooperate. You know. Stop interfering with the
treatment. And the doctor will cure. So, like that, we will be cured. You know.
We just have to stop interrupting. We just have to stop letting ourselves be
distracted. So, God will help us. So, there is a, there should not be a wrong
emphasis on this. The proper empha..., as devotees, we have to chant Hare
Krishna. No doubt. But it is not our chanting that will purify us. It is
Krishna's mercy that will purify us. Let us move forward. Now, Krishna will
start talking about the process of m..., pratyahara. As I said, we are going
from sadhana to siddha.

        śanaiḥ śanair uparamed
        buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā
        ātma-saṁsthaṁ manaḥ kṛtvā
        na kiñcid api cintayet

So, "śanaiḥ śanair". Slowly. Step by step. "uparamed". "uparamed" means to slow
down. To calm down. To silence. Slowly. Gradually. Step by step. The word
"śanaiḥ śanair" itself conveys slo..., slowly. Gradually. And how does one that,
do that? "buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā". "buddhyā". "buddhyā" means intelligence. And
how is this intelligence? "dhṛti-gṛhītayā". "dhṛti" is determined, is actually
determination or conviction. So, actually, our determination comes from our
conviction in many ways. If I am convinced about something, I will be determined
to do it. So, determination is internal. Conviction is external. Both of them
are related. So, now, Krishna is saying, "buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā". We should
not. We do not just need intelligence. We need intelligence sustained by
conviction. For example, when I am taking a treatment. If the treatment happ...,
involves, you know, you know, something m..., m..., some painful procedures.
Then, I may now understand with my intelligence. Oh, this treatment is going to
cure me. Oh, so, I should do it. But when I actually have started taking the
treatment. And initially, there is discomfort. But it also cured me. Then, after
that, when I take the treatment. Then, I will find and say, does really cure me.
So, that is why we need both. We need intelligence. And we need conviction. When
there is intelligence sustained by conviction, then there is cure. Otherwise,
there is no cure. So, that is why intelli..., you know, in the, no cure means in
the sense that the c..., curative potency is still there. But we do not
consistently practice. You know. That is why we do not get the cure. So,
"buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā". Intelligence sustained by conviction. "buddhyā
dhṛti-gṛhītayā". So, what should we do? Just like a child, a child, when he goes
to doctor. The child does not have intelligence to understand the doctor's
medicine will cure me. But "buddhyā". The mother understands. The child, once,
the child experiences, oh, this was so, irritative. This injection. But after
that, it f...,, it may be, feel much better. So, he says, then, I will do it.
Then, I will take it. "buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā". "dhṛti" means conviction.
"buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā". What should one do is, "ātma-saṁsthaṁ manaḥ kṛtvā".
Fix the mind on the soul. "manaḥ". "manaḥ" is mind. "ātma-saṁsthaṁ". Situated on
the soul.

        ātma-saṁsthaṁ manaḥ kṛtvā
        na kiñcid api cintayet

Do not think about anything else. Krishna is giving a very categorical
instruction over here. "na kiñcid api cintayet". Do not think about anything
else. How is it possible? For someone to not think about anything else? It is by
steady practice. So, once, one is convinced that actually, the material
realm, reality is all deceptive. It is treacherous. It will betray me. It will
promise pleasure. And it will give misery. Then, one will be able to focus. And
understand that, actually, I have to turn. I have to turn away from the material
reality towards the spiritual reality. And how I turn from the material reality
to spiritual reality is by conviction and practice. So, understand, there is
nothing, nothing substantial over here. So, let me move towards that. And let me
focus on that. And when we focus thus on that, we can move forward steadily
onwards. Onwards. Onwards. So, here, Krishna is talking about the stage of, you
know, m..., in one's own, prat..., in pratyahara, what happens? One shuts
out all the sense object. So, one turns inwards. And one puts out all the
stimula that outwards. So, we should not become impatient in our spiritual
practice. Sometimes, we will find that we want to fix the mind in one way. But
still, the mind goes of another way. But we fix it on one way. But still goes
another way. So, how do we deal with? "śanaiḥ śanair". Gradually. Step by step.
Nothing great in this world is achieved overnight. Everything great requires
effort. So, fixing the mind on Krishna. And learn, training ourselves to be
Krishna Conscious is not going to happen overnight. It will require steady
practice. Day after day. Month after month. "śanaiḥ śanair". Gradually. One of
the biggest obstacles in spiritual path can be too much impatience with oneself.
You know. We should not be impatient with ourselves. We should be impatient as
far as our endeavors are concerned. You know. If I am sleeping during chanting.
I must wake up and chant. But, you know, if my mind is wandering. If I am too
impatient with myself. Then, I will never be able to treat myself. Because, you
know, I will just get discouraged. I will give it up. We cannot be impatient. We
have to understand that, you know, the purification will take time. Just as, you
know, when we want to cook some food item. We will want it fast. But it takes
its own time. If we want to harvest crops. It takes its own time. So, nature has
its own course. So, one of the reasons for discouragement in spiritual life is
impatience. So, even if it takes time, no matter how long it takes, I will keep
practicing Krishna Consciousness. I started practicing. I was knocked on by
conditions. Again I get. Again I get. Knocked off. Again I get. So, if we have
become impatient with the fight, the only result will be that we will give up
the fight. One, you know, will give up the fight. But we patiently go on. No
longer, how, no matter how long it takes. We may say, actually, every time I am
coming in the same mistake, I am falling back to the same things. What is the
hope for me to become reformed? No. There is hope. Because every day that we are
practicing devotional service, we are becoming stronger. We are becoming purer.
And as we keep becoming stronger and purer, we will eventually, that purity will
manifest. So, hmm, when we are, say, fighting a box in my ha...., you know,
every time a person is doing exercise and taking in nutritious diet. That person
become strong. But still, the opponent may knock that person down. But the only
way that person is going to win the match is by keeping on persevering. So,
"śanaiḥ śanair". Gradually. Step by step. So, this is from the stage of, it is,
Prabhupada say that:

"By proper conviction and intelligence one should gradually cease sense
activities. This is called pratyāhāra."

"pratyāhāra" is the fifth stage in yoga. And then:

"The mind, being controlled by conviction, meditation and cessation from the
senses, should be situated in trance, or samādhi."

So, this is the perfection. So, "pratyāhāra" to "samādhi". This is the inner
progression. It is talked about. Now, we may wonder that what does it mean to
do this slowly? The mind keeps running here and there. So, what do we do about
it? There, Krishna describes in next verse.

        yato yato niścalati
        manaś cañcalam asthiram
        tatas tato niyamyaitad
        ātmany eva vaśaṁ nayet

"yato yato niścalati". Wherever and whenever the mind wanders. "yato yato".
You remember we discussed earlier, this sort of describers comes every times in
the Bhagavad Gita. There was:

        yadā yadā hi dharmasya
        glānir bhavati bhārata

"yadā yadā" means wherever and whenever. So, similarly, "yato yato" means
wherever and whenever the mind wanders. So, whenever means, sometimes, the mind
may wander the most inappropriate times. You know. We are, you know, in the
temple. Thinking of Krishna. And the mind wanders to sinful thoughts. You know.
If, you know, shamed of ourselves. Why? Why is the mind thinking like this?
Whenever. We, it may be early morning hours. Which are very conducive for
spiritual life. Still, the mind goes off to sense gratification. Does not
matter. Whenever and wherever the mind wanders, brings it back.

        yato yato niścalati
        manaś cañcalam asthiram

Recognise something to be the nature. "cañcalam asthiram". This is a nature of
the mind. So, we cannot change the nature of nature. We cannot change the nature
of nature. So, material nature means, it drags our consciousness down by
default. Only, when we are internally very spiritually attracted towards
Krishna, then when we see material nature. We start thinking about using in
Krishna's service. But till then, it is like gravity. If I leave an object, it
is going to fall. So, similarly, the mind is going to wander. It is a default
nature. Krishna says, "manaś cañcalam asthiram". Know that it is going to happen
like this. And what should you do? "tatas tato". So, wherever and whenever it
happens. "tatas tato niyamyaitad". "niyamyaitad". Regulate it. "ātmany eva vaśaṁ
nayet". Bring it under the "vaśaṁ". Bring it under control of the atma. In that
way, one when acts, one will become purified. One will become steady. One will
become advanced. "ātmany eva vaśaṁ nayet". Hmm. M..., so, Prabhupada talks about
the "go-dāsa". And the "gosvāmī". What is the difference the two? The "go-dāsa".
So:

"One who controls the mind (and therefore the senses as well) is called gosvāmī,
or svāmī, and one who is controlled by the mind is called go-dāsa, or the
servant of the senses."

So, now, Prabhupada is using interesting terminology over here. He is using
that, actually, both of them face the battle. But one who wins the battle. And
one who loses the battle. The person who wins the battle is the "gosvāmī". The
person who loses the battle is "go-dāsa". Now, it is not that this is a
permanent and unchangeable designation. You know. We ourselves may be
"go-dāsa" now. But as we just keep practicing Krishna Consciousness, we will
become "gosvāmī". And, you know, you know, the whole idea is changing our
responses. We cannot change our stimuli too much. The world will keep giving us
provocative stimuli. But we change our responses. So, the difference between the
"gosvāmī" and "go-dāsa" is not in the stimuli. Both will be exposed to ma...,
sensual stimuli. But there is no sensual response from the "gosvāmī". So,
generally, when temptations come, the "gos...", "go-dāsa" is, oh, yes. The
"gosvāmī" says no. The "go-d...", "go-dāsa" says welcome. I was waiting for you.
M..., "gosvāmī" says get out. There is no place for you here. So, the "go-dāsa"
says, you have not welcome. Wait. Later. The "gosvāmī" says nothing doing. So,
now, you know, in, this is the difference. Now, in some cases, we see that even
the goswami may say later. See, when the "go-dāsa" says later, the intention is
yes. Now is not a proper time. But in private, later on, we will enjoy. So, the
"go-dāsa"'s intention is to enjoy. Now, we see "go...", a, Haridasa Thakur,
also. When the por..., prostitute, you know, came to him at night. What did he
tell to her? Later. So, he told her later. But the difference was between him
and the "go-dāsa", at our stage, when we say later is that we have an intention
to enjoy. But we are just waiting for the right time. Haridasa Thakur had no
intention to enjoy. He is saying later was simply to purify her. So that when
she was purified, she would also become a devotee. Now, Krishna describes
further. When one lives like this, then what happens.

        praśānta-manasaṁ hy enaṁ
        yoginaṁ sukham uttamam
        upaiti śānta-rajasaṁ
        brahma-bhūtam akalmaṣam

So, "praśānta". This word has come third time in the Bhagavad Gita in this
chapter now. "praśānta". "śānta" is peaceful. "praśānta" is deeply peaceful.
"manasaṁ hy enaṁ". So, actually, we all feel that our mind is very restless. And
we want peace of the mind. But how will we get peace of the mind? We cannot have
peace, you know, without the battle. When there is an enemy, the enemy has to be
subdued. Then, only, we can have peace. So, the mind is filled with agitating
emotions. And that is what is making us restless. The way we will get peace is
by, you know, crushing those agitating emotions. So, when we say, we keep saying
no to lust, keep saying no to greed, keep saying no to anger. Then, gradually,
they go away. And then, "praśānta-manasaṁ". Then, the mind becomes peaceful. And
when the mind becomes peaceful, then the yogi turns inwards. And inwards, in the
contemplation on the Supreme Lord, at the Paramatma manifestation, or, which are
manifestationless. "yoginaṁ sukham uttamam". "sukham uttamam". One experiences
the ultimate happiness. And what is the nature of that ultimate happiness? One,
what is one contemplating on? "upaiti śānta-rajasaṁ". "śānta-rajasaṁ". One
becomes very peaceful. Very calm. "śānta-rajasaṁ". Becomes peaceful. And then,
"brahma-bhūtam akalmaṣam". The, one, who come, comes to the "brahma-bhūtam"
platform. And that "brahma-bhūtam" platform is "akalmaṣam". "kalmaṣam" is
contaminations. No contaminations. So, contaminations, you know, constrain and
constrict our consciousness to the realm of matter. Contaminations constrain.
Constrain means limit. They constrain and constrict. Our consciousness does not,
cannot expand to spirit. So, when a person is filled with lust. When a person
sees, you know, you know, s..., potentially sexually attractive person. You
know. Say. A potential partner. Then, the person cannot see that per..., you
know, that person as anything more than the body. That is nearly impossible.
Why? Because the contaminations constrain and constrict the flow of our
consciousness to the realm of matter. And they do not allow us to perceive a
higher reality. Hmm. Cons..., constrain means to limit. And constrict means to
choke, practically speaking. So, the, l..., when the contaminations are no
longer there, then the flow of consciousness becomes the, expanded in terms of
the area, o..., which it can cover. You know. If there is a pipeline. And if the
pipeline is choked at a particular place. Then, the water might have, have been,
ha..., c..., can have a forceful flow. But what comes out is just a trickle. So,
like that, the consciousness of the soul can expand over ma..., spiritual
reality. All of spiritual reality. But when the anarthas are there. And the
contaminations are there. The contaminations drag the consciousness down. And
keep it at the material level. So, when this "akalma", one, you know,
"akalmaṣam", when one is freed from contaminations. Then, one can be
"brahma-bhūtam". One situates oneself on the spiritual platform. And "upaiti".
Krishna says. This is, this is one of the, this is beautiful verse. So, very word
is so filled with profundity. "upaiti śānta-rajasaṁ". So, Krishna correlates,
you know, brings together in the same verse, "praśānta-manasaṁ" and
"śānta-rajasaṁ". So, when does the mind become peaceful? When the passion is
pacified. "rajasaṁ". "rajasaṁ" is passion. "śānta" is peaceful. "śānta-rajasaṁ".
When the passion is pacified, then the person becomes steady.

        upaiti śānta-rajasaṁ
        brahma-bhūtam akalmaṣam

"akalmaṣam" means there is no more contamination. There is no more suffering.
There is no more misdirection of consciousness. So, now, let us move forward.
And discuss how this happens. So, Krishna will describe this stage fu..., moving
further. This will happen, Krishna says, by regular practice.

        yuñjann evaṁ sadātmānaṁ
        yogī vigata-kalmaṣaḥ
        sukhena brahma-saṁsparśam
        atyantaṁ sukham aśnute

"yuñjann evaṁ". When one engages oneself. "sadā", "ātmānam". When one engages
oneself constantly in this way. "yogī vigata-kalmaṣaḥ". So, Krishna use a, in the
previous verse, Krishna has used the word "akalmaṣam". So, here, He uses the
word "yogī vigata-kalmaṣaḥ". So, when one engages oneself in this way, one
becomes "akalmaṣam". "yogī vigata-kalmaṣaḥ". And then, "sukhena
brahma-saṁsparśam". When one gets, one has contact with Brahma. "sukhena".
The "sukha" that comes from "sparśam". "saṁsparśam" is contact. You know.
The "sparśam". The word is often used for physical contact. But "sparśam"
essentially means contact of any form. "saṁsparśam". So, "brahma-saṁsparśam".
What does contact with Brahma mean? Actually, the soul is able to perceive
spiritual reality. And relish spiritual reality. There is, "brahma-saṁsparśam"
is not exactly that, say, if we go in the temple hall and touch the deities.
That is not "brahma-saṁsparśam". It is not just a physical contact. Yeah. If we
get the opportunity to touch the feet of the deities. And take their blessings.
You know. Very fortunate. We will get the opportunity to dress the deities. That
is also fortunate. But that is not primarily what is being talked about over
here. "sukhena brahma-saṁsparśam" means that we contact with Krishna through the
purification of our consciousness. And redirection of our consciousness to the
spiritual level of reality. "sukhena brahma-saṁsparśam". And what happens by
that? "atyantaṁ sukham". One gets the ultimate eter..., happiness. Supreme
happiness. "atyantaṁ sukham aśnute". One gets the highest happiness. So, Krishna
has used this verse:

        sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad
        buddhi-grāhyam atīndriyam

Krishna has used this word, ultimate happiness, earlier, once in the Bhagavad
Gita. In this section itself. In the verse section, from 6.20 to 23. He had said
that when the yogi turns inwards, "ātyanta". "sukham". "ant...", "ātyanta" is
superlative. The highest happiness. So, actually, these three verses, 28, 29 and
30. They, in one sense, we can say, they talk about progressive levels of
spiritual realisation. They talk about Brahman realisation. Then, Paramatma
realisation. And then, Bhagavan realisation. So, this can be re..., verse can be
said to refer to Brahman realisation. One comes to the Brahman platform. "sukham
ātyantikaṁ yat tad". So, this "atyantaṁ", "kum...", sukham aśnute". "atyantaṁ
sukham aś...". So, by "brahma-saṁsparśam". Now, when the yogi is moving forward.
When the yogi turns inward. The yogi first pursues the, you know, all-pervading
spiritual reality. The spiritual substance that attea..., that underlies the
material appearance. And then, as the yogi moves forward, the yogi fuels..., you
know, sees something higher. That with, the next verse will talk about the
Paramatma realisation. This verse talks about the, m..., Brahman realisation.
Then, the next verse talks about the Paramatma realisation. So, let us look at
the next verse. Prabhupada says:

"This transcendental contact with the Supreme is called brahma-saṁsparśa."

Now, the word "saṁsparśam" has come earlier in the Bhagavad Gita, in 5.22:

        ye hi saṁsparśa-jā bhogā

That the "bhogā" that comes by contact of the senses with the sense objects. But
Krishna is talking about an entirely different kind of enjoyment.
"brahma-saṁsparśam". So, now, He will talk about the next level of realisation.

        sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ
        sarva-bhūtāni cātmani
        īkṣate yoga-yuktātmā
        sarvatra sama-darśanaḥ

So, "sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ". One who is situated in all bodies.
"sarva-bhūta-stham". One who is situated in all living beings. "sarva-bhūtāni
cātmani". And one wh..., in whom all living beings are situated. "īkṣate
yoga-yuktātmā". "īkṣate" means to see. One, you know, "īkṣa". "īkṣa" is related
the "akṣa. "akṣa" is eyes. So, Krishna is using the word, one will actually see
with one's puri..., purified vision. One's spiritual vision. "yoga-yuktātmā".
"yoga-yuktātmā". One who is engaged in the process of yoga. "sarvatra
sama-darśanaḥ". One is "sama-darśanaḥ". One is equipoised in looking at all
things. "sarvatra sama-darśanaḥ". So, "sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ". The, what is
this referring to? This is referring to the all-pervading Supersoul aspect of
the Lord. Supersoul is situated in the heart of all living being. So, we see
that at one level, the Supersoul is inside everything. At another level,
everything is inside the Supersoul. How is that? Not exa..., you know, the
Supersoul is, as "Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu", inside of everything.

        aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ

You know. "paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ". Inside every atom. So:

        īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati

In 18.61, Krishna will say, situated in the hearts of all living beings. Then,
after that, He also says that this is referring to "sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ".
Hmm. The Lord, the, the, this particular Absolute Truth, whatever this being
pursued. He is in all living beings. And, also, we know, as "Mahā-viṣṇu", all
the universes are inside Him. We are inside Him. So, in that sense,
"sarva-bhūtāni cātmani". One inside whom, all living being. Who is inside all
living beings.  And one inside whom all living beings are. This is a paradox.
But it is a, you know, m..., m..., you know, you know, paradox. How can? If
something is inside, everything, that everything can be, cannot be inside it.
How is that possible?  That is the inconceivable potency of the Lord. And we
understand the inconceivable potency by looking at multiple manifestations of
the Lord. You know. That one manifestation refers to the "Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu"
who is inside everything. And then, the "Mahā-viṣṇu" is the manifestation inside
whom everything is. So, we know that there are three levels of "Mahā-viṣṇu".
Prabhupada will mention these in the purport of 7.4. "bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ".
That the four "puruṣa" avataras. So, first is "Mahā-viṣṇu" from whom all the
universes emanate. And then, "Garbhodaka-śāyī Viṣṇu", who expand into the
nature, universe. And from whom, the navel, a, from whose navel, the lotus
comes. On which Brahmaji is born. And then, the whole uni..., all the
universities are created. And then, that "Garbhodaka-śāyī Viṣṇu" expands further
into each of the m..., m..., hmm, a, living being's hearts from there. So, in
this way, the Lord is present inside everything. And He is pri..., resides in
everything. And, you know, and everything is inside Him. "sarvatra
sama-darśanaḥ". So, the important point is "sama-darśanaḥ". The yogi sees
everything equally. What is the basis of this equal vision? The basis of that
equal vision is the understanding that everything is connected with the Lord.
Everything is the, ultimately, hmm, different levels of manifestation of the
Supreme Lord's control and energy. This is referring to the Supersoul
manifestation. "sama-darśanaḥ". So, Krishna is telling Arjuna that, actually,
now, Krishna has earlier talked about "sama-darśanaḥ" in several places, also.

        paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ

He has talked about in 5.18. When He talks about how the wise person see all
living beings equally. So, that was talking about all living beings. Now, that
is, that could have well been atma-tattva. That could have been
Paramatva-tattva.

        vidyā-vinaya-sampanne
        brāhmaṇe gavi hastini
        śuni caiva śva-pāke ca
        paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ

That could have referred to both. But here Krishna is referring to, you know,
you know, that living being within whom, a..., everybody is present. So, that is
clearly different to the su..., Supreme Lord. The Supersoul manifestation. Now,
here, Srila Prabhupada translates it as me. Now, we will, we will not see any
"māṁ" in this verse. But "māṁ" comes immediately in the next verse. So, often,
Srila Prabhupada, to avoid ambiguity, you know, and to enhance clarity use
things which are given later, earlier. So, he is not, you know, necessarily
importing something which is not there in the Gita. He, it is there in the Gita.
But it is coming a little later section. We know that. When Prabhupada was asked
about this. And s..., verses like this. Swamiji, s..., some mayavadi, s...,
would come and ask. Swamiji, there is no Krishna. There is no "māṁ" in this
verse. How are you putting m..., "māṁ", a Kri...? How are you putting Krishna
over here? Prabhupada said, you know, where there is Krishna. In your
mistranslations, you remove Krishna from there. Therefore, where Krishna is not
there, I am putting Krishna there, also. So, of course, that was Prabhupada's,
you know, determination to glorify Krishna. And Prabhupada also, you know, gives
us the flow carefully in, when, his purports. So that we understand both ways.
Hmm. Now, Prabhupada quotes from the "smṛti" over here:

"In the smṛti this is conﬁrmed as follows: ātatatvāc ca mātṛtvāc ca ātmā hi
paramo hariḥ."

Hmm. So:

"The Lord, being the source of all beings, is like the mother and the
maintainer."

The Lord is present in all living beings. Prabhupada is making this point over
here. And when Prabhupada threw out his purport, he explained Krishna is talking
about the protection of yoga. But Prabhupada keeps talking about the perfection
of Krishna Consciousness. Which automatically includes these levels of
perfection. So, now, He will talk in the next verse about the direct perception
of Himself. Till now, He has talked about that being who is in, who contains
everyone. Now, He will make it clear. Who is that being? So, 28 was talking
about Brahm..., Brahman realisation. 29 is Paramatma realisation. 38 will be
clearly Bhagavan realisation.

        yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra
        sarvaṁ ca mayi paśyati
        tasyāhaṁ na praṇaśyāmi
        sa ca me na praṇaśyati

"yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra". One who sees m..., Me everywhere. And sees everything
in Me. "sarvaṁ ca mayi paśyati". "tasyāhaṁ". Such a person. "na praṇaśyāmi".
Such a person. I am never lost for such a person. Nor is that person ever lost
for Me.

        tasyāhaṁ na praṇaśyāmi
        sa ca me na praṇaśyati

So, Krishna will use the word "praṇaśyati" once again in the famous verse.

        kaunteya pratijānīhi
        na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

In 9.31. And Krishna is also u..., m..., used the word "praṇaśyati" earlier in
2.63D. When He has, says "buddhi-nāśāt praṇaśyati". "praṇaśyati" can b..., refer
to fall. "buddhi-nāśāt" can be, lead to loss. Bereavement. Destruction. So, you
know, so, here, Krishna is th..., you know, there, the word use, "buddhi-nāśāt
praṇaśyati" refers to fall down. You know. The intelligence is lost. Then, one
falls back. Then, here, also, it refers to fall. Such a person will never lost
to Me. And I am not lost to Me. That means there is no fall from the spiritual
relationship. So, if we can perceive Krishna everywhere. Then, we are connected
with Krishna. Even if we are in this world. So, actually, this can be understood
at various levels. Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to see Krishna everywhere.
And so were the gopis. Caitanya Mahaprabhu would see a Govardhan. An ordinary
mountain. Ordinary hill. Everything is. See, this is Gopal. So, whatever he saw,
it reminded him of Krishna. So, Prabhupada would ask. How can we see Krishna
everywhere? Prabhupada says that, when everything reminds us of Krishna. Just
like, when a mother loves a child, then whatever the mother sees, you know,
connected. Oh, these are my child's shoes. These are my child's stockings. These
are my child toys. And whatever she sees, because there is love, that, all t...,
reminds her of, he..., the child. That she loves. So, similarly, whatever
Krishna, whatever the devotee sees in this world, the devotee understands
everything is the energy of Krishna. So, based on that, devotee becomes
attracted to Krishna. So, we see this:

        yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra
        sarvaṁ ca mayi paśyati

In a most exalted stage. There can be multiple levels. You know. We can, in a,
in an abstract theoretical sense, think, ok, when I see the, when I see the sky.
When I see the mountains. When I see the rivers. I can think, oh, all this is
"bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ". When all this, Krishna's energy. When we see the
trees. Ok. All trees, Krishna's energy. That is one level of perception. The
gopis demonstrate a far deeper level of Krishna Consciousness. Where whatever
they see. When they, when Krishna left them, m..., then what happened? What,
what happened when Krishna, when they c..., they searching everywhere? And
whatever would, they would see. They would see in connection with Krishna. They
were seeing a deer, a she-deer. And they would think. Oh. They would ask some,
you know, some other living beings. Some b..., animals that are there. Have you
seen Krishna? Have you seen Krishna? Have you seen Krishna? Whoever they would
see, they would ask. And then, they would see, oh, this animal is an male. And
Krishna is a male. And males are hard-hearted. And one male will help another
male, only. One male will not help another female. So, that h..., male will not
do. They understand there is a she-deer. Oh. Then, they see tulsi. You know.
Tulsi a female. She will help us. You know. She will understand the plight of us
female. She will tell us where is Krishna. And they see the see-deer sitting
alone. Oh. Then, they start thinking that, oh, is it that you are also bereaved?
You know. Is it that the he-dear has left you? Just as, we have been left by
Krishna? So, whoever they see over there, they actually try to just, you know,
a..., ask. Where is Krishna? Please tell us. Where is Krishna? Where is Krishna?
The gopis demonstrate that level of "yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra". They are seeing
Krishna everywhere. And whatever they would see, they would think, oh, is this
Krishna's sound? So, when Krishna would go out in the forest, all day, they
would be waiting. When will Krishna come back? When will Krishna come back? And
they would just be longing. So, even when Krishna was not there, they were
thinking of Krishna all the time. "yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra". That is why Krishna
told them, eventually, when he sent the message through Uddhava that separation
from Me is impossible. You know. The gopis were separated from Krishna. Weren't
they? Yeah. They may have been separated in terms of, they were not having the
association of Krishna directly in terms of His personal form. But still,
Krishna was present very much in their heart. And everything and everyone, they
were seeing in connection with Krishna. This is a very exalted level of Krishna
Consciousness. And then, Prabhupada quotes the famous verse from the
"Brahma-saṁhitā", 5.38. Now, this is:

        premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
        santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti
        yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ
        govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

So, "premāñjana". Just like, we can have amrita anjana, you know, there is an
old ointment. Which people apply on the head. When the head is burning, then
a..., they apply something. So, the idea is "āñjana" is like ointment. So, that
is the claim of this particular ointment is that, ok, it will act like amrita.
It will make you peaceful. It will make you, it will be like nectar for you.
Nothing in this world is actually amrita. But, you know, the idea of "ā...",
"āñjana". So, when a person is having some eye disease. Then, the eyes are, if,
say, burning. And one is not able to see clearly because of that. Then, if
something cools the eyes. Something cleanses the eyes. Something heals the eyes.
They apply that. And then, that person starts seeing clearly. So, like that,
currently, our eyes are diseased. Diseased. They are diseased by material
desires. And because of that, we can see only material things right now. But
"premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena". So, when we apply the ointment of love.
So, it is interesting. Ointment of "premā". You know. Actually, there is, the,
we quo..., quote this verse. But this verse is profound. First, the verse says,
"bhakti-vilocanena". And then, it says, "premāñjana". So, the eyes of devotion.
And the ointment of love. So, we all may say that, I also have eyes of devotion.
You know. I am, I am trying to practice devotional service. And when I look at
Krishna, I think this is my Lord. I will, I want to offer my whole life to this
Lord. So, we may say we have "bhakti-vilocanena". But bhakti is a stage. Bhakti
is a stagewise progression. You know. The nine stages in bhakti. And the final
stage in this progression is "premā". So, we have to have devotional eyes. And
not only devotional eyes, we also have to have a loving disposition. So, you
know, when we have both, that means, we go through the process of devotional
advancement. And come to the level of "premā". Then, what? Then, this is the
vision that we get. "santaḥ sadaiva". The saintly people always see "sadaiva".
What? "hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti". They see within the heart. "vilokayanti". What do
they see? "yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ". They see "śyāmasundaram".
And what do? "acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ". They see the "śyāmasundaram" in the heart
of all living beings. In everyone's heart. You know. That hampers. And as
"acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ". Inconceivable qualities. And nature is also
inconceivable. The form is inconceivable. And that Lord, who is revealed through
love. "govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi". I offer my obeisances to that
person is described over here. So, now, Krishna has, now, there might be some
confusion. In 29th verse, Krishna has said that, ok, that living being is in
everyone. That absolute reality is not mentioned. What that absolute reality is.
29 is:

        sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ
        sarva-bhūtāni cātmani

Everything is situated in that Absolute Truth. And, you know, m..., that
Absolute Truth is situated in everyone. That, whatever it is. And now,
through twen..., 30, Krishna has said, every, is, one who sees Me everywhere.
And sees everything in Me. So, now, is there a difference between the two? Is
Krishna talking about two different seekers having two different visions? Wh...,
when the prev..., the previous verse is saying, there is, there is some,
something which one sees everywhere. "sama-darśanaḥ". And then, He has said over
here, it is one who sees Me. So, if there is any confusion, Krishna will make it
very clear in the next verse that the two are the same. That means the, you
know, the reality that is perceived in 29, which is the unnamed. And the reality
that is perceived in 30th. And which is named as "māṁ", as Krishna. 31st makes
it clear that both are referring to the same reality. So, one who sees the two
equally. That is the next verse. So, let us look at this verse.

        sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ yo māṁ
        bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥ
        sarvathā vartamāno ’pi
        sa yogī mayi vartate

So, "sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ yo māṁ". When one is situated. You know. That living
being who is situated in all. "sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ". So, this was referring to
"sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ". That was talked about 29th verse. And "māṁ" was
referred to in 30th, thirty-f..., 30th verse. So, "sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ" is 29th
verse. "māṁ" is 30th verse. And "bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥ". So, who worships,
understanding "ekatvam". That I and that Absolute Truth is situated in all
living beings is the same. "sarvathā vartamāno ’pi". In all situations, such a
yogi, "sa yogī mayi vartate". Such a yogi will be situated in Me. That means
Krishna is very clearly stating over here, you know, that there is an Absolute
Truth which is all-pervading. And then, I am there. One who sees both of them,
equally. Now, you know, what happens is, such a person become situated in Me.
The impersonalists say that, actually, you know, there is Bhagavan. But higher
than Bhagavan is Brahman. Hmm. The Vaishnavas understand that Brahman is there.
And higher than Brahman is Bhagavan. You know. Now, Krishna is very clearly
stating over here. One sees that, that all-pervading reality. That all-situated.
And the, and Me. One who sees both of them to be same. What does Krishna say? He
does not say that such a person becomes situated in Brahman. He says such a
person becomes situated in Me. So, mayavadis have the idea that once we go
beyond Bhagavan, then we will be, come to Brahman realisation. So, first, you
co..., meditate, meditate on some form. And then, you go beyond that form to the
formless reality. Then, you will become situated in formless reality. So, one
who, one, once we understand that, actually, form and formless are, you know,
same, only. But formless is lower. L..., form is lower level. Formless is higher
level. That is the mayavadi idea. And then, once you understand that the two are
one. Then, you will go beyond the form to the formless. But Krishna says nothing
doing. Not like that. Krishna says. Once with the, the all, now, of course,
Krishna is not necessarily talking about form, anything formless over here. He
is simply talking about all-pervading. And the impersonalism, you know, assume
that that which is all-pervading, has to be formless. But it is not necessary.
Something can be all-pervading. And it, still, it can have form. Because it can
manifested in multiple forms. So that it becomes all-pervading in multiple
forms. Like the Supersoul. Supersoul is all-pervading because it is in unlimited
forms. And it is present in each atom. in each soul. Like that. In each living
being. So, the point which Krishna is making over here, it is, first of all,
what He said is, 29 and 31, it is the same. The all-pervading reality and I are
the same. And one who understand this. "sarvathā vartamāno ’pi". In all times,
such a yogi become situated in Me. That means Krishna says that one who sees the
all-pervading and the transcendental person, Me. And Me to be the same. Such a
person becomes situated in Me. He is not saying that such a person becomes
situated in Brahman. Or in that all-pervasive reality. He says, he become
situated in Me. That means, Me is referring to the higher reality. The highest
reality among all. "sarvathā vartamāno ’pi". In all situations. Now, "sarvathā
vartamāno ’pi" will come once again in the eighteen chapter, also. M..., in
18.56, m..., hmm:

        sarva-karmāṇy api sadā
        kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ

Hmm. So, Krishna says over there, also. Something like "sarva...". "sarvathā
vartamāno ’pi". In all situations. The point is, Krishna is saying, in all
situations, such a person can be fixed in Me. And Prabhupada again quo...,
quotes the, in the purport, the "jīvan-muktaḥ" verse from
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". Just quoted already twice in the Bhagavad Gita. And
then, Prabhupada quotes several other Vishnu, verses over here. "Nārada
Pañcarātra". H...:

        dik-kālādy-anavacchinne
        kṛṣṇe ceto vidhāya ca
        tan-mayo bhavati kṣipraṁ
        jīvo brahmaṇi yojayet

So, "dik-kālādy-anavacchinne". "anavacchinne" means that who is not limited.
That Lord who is all-pervading. Who is not restricted by time and space. He is
beyond time and space. "kṛṣṇe ceto vidhāya ca". So, 56:00
