Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PSo8xEAH83Y
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_073_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_04_Text_34_to_38_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=PSo8xEAH83Y&redir_token=jnP21la_piw5VedC1_aWoDUwsrF8MTU0ODQ4Nzk2M0AxNTQ4NDAxNTYz

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri, Bhagavad Gita course. We are
in, you know, the concluding section of the Fourth Chapter. Krishna has talked
about various forms of "yajña" by which one can acquire knowledge. And now, He
will talk about how ultimately, you know, the knowledge gives us various and
glorious fruits. So, let us look at these fruits of knowledge. So, we will look
at this first. We will look at the overview of the Fourth Chapter. So, here, we
have, there are five sections in the Fourth Chapter. We have discussed four of
those sections. The first section is Kricha..., Krishna teaches and establishes
dharma. So, He teaches:

        imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

establishes, you know, pa...:

        dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya
        sambhavāmi yuge yuge

Then, you know, dharma involves various paths. So, Krishna is the goal of all
those paths. And He is the creator, of, also, those paths. Then, Krishna is
recommending that the dharma that Arjuna follow is karma-yoga. You know, because
karma-yoga will eventually lead to liberation as is in, done by many people in
the past. So, then, Krishna says, how while acting, one will get liberation.
That is because one acts in "yajña". So, even we act in sacrifice, that
sacrifice leads to development of knowledge, to "jñāna". So, the, it is actually
25 from 33 is achieving "jñāna" through sacrifices. So, connection between the
third and the fourth section is that, karma-yoga itself is one way to develop
"jñāna". And in general, there are various ways by which, various "ya...",
"yajña"s by which one can develop "jñāna". So, "yajñāyācarataḥ karma". Krishna
had told in 4.23rd verse that act for "yajña". So, now, after describing how
"jñāna" can be acquired in various ways. Now, in the last section, 34 to 42,
Krishna, which of these ways should one follow? That one has to inquire from a
spiritual master. So, by going to a spiritual master, we acquire transcendental
knowledge. So, now, this last section will talk about how to acquire
transcendental knowledge. And what the results of that transcendental knowledge
are. So, let us begin with the 34th verse which is a well-known verse. Which
Srila Prabhupada would frequently quote:

        tad viddhi praṇipātena
        paripraśnena sevayā
        upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ
        jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

So, "tad viddhi". That knowledge. "tad" refers to that. What is that? What was
talked about in the previous verse, 4.33 verse? "jñāne parisamāpyate". So, that,
all kn..., knowled..., all fo..., forms of "yajña". "sarva...":

        sarvaṁ karmākhilaṁ pārtha
        jñāne parisamāpyate

That all kind of work that is done. And all the sacrifices that are involved in
that work. They all culminate in knowledge. So, how one can acquire know...,
know..., knowledge? "tad viddhi", can know it by three things. "praṇi...",
"praṇipātena". "paripraśnena". "sevayā". "praṇipātena" is submission.
"paripraśnena" is inqui..., inquisitiveness. And "sevayā" is service my...,
service attitude, service. So, then, "upadekṣyanti". So, "upadekṣyanti" is
related with "upade", is, "upades" to give instruction. So, Prabhupada
translates it as they will initiate you. "te jñānaṁ". They will initiate you to
that knowledge. "upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ". "jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ".
"tattva-darśinaḥ" is those who are the seers of truth. So, because the focus
here is on "jñāna". So, Krishna does not talk about bhakta. He does not say
bhaktinaṁ. He says "jñāninas". Why? Because the, Krishna will later on say how
all "jñāna" culminates in bhakti. "jñānavān māṁ prapadyate". He will explain in
7.19. At this stage, Krishna has not introduced bhakti directly. So, He is
focusing on "jñāninas". He is focusing on how karma-yoga will lead to "jñāna".
And that "jñāna", when it is developed, it will lead to liberation. So, how one
gets that "jñāna"? By going to spiritual master. And if you want "jñāna". Then,
the spiritual master should have "jñāna". That is why "jñāninas". Now,
interestingly, if we remember from the Third Chapter when Krishna is talking
about how lust covers the living entity's intelligence. So, at that time, He
says in 3.39:

        āvṛtaṁ jñānam etena
        jñānino nitya-vairiṇā

So, He describes, all living entities to be "jñānina". So, all of us are
sat-cit-ananda as souls. All of us are "jñānis". We all have knowledge. But
currently, our knowledge is covered. The spiritual master is a person who has
been able to uncover that conditioning. Uncover, remove that conditioning that
is there. And therefore has become "jñāninas". The spiritual, so, the soul is by
nature "jñāni". But the, but because of the covering of lust, "āvṛtaṁ jñānam",
the soul, soul becomes like a "jñāni". But the spiritual master is one who has
removed the covering. "jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ". So, because, this, so, the
spiritual master is "jñāni", sp..., spiritual master has seen the truth.
"tattva-darśinaḥ". Has seen the truth. So, after seeing the truth, He can
explain the truth to us. Now, let us look at this verse a little bit more in
detail. Especially, three things that we have to do. "praṇipātena".
"paripraśnena". And "sevayā". So. Hmm. I write a, daily articles on the Bhagavad
Gita. There is a part of the Gita daily. So, here, there is an article on this,
you know, theme of 4.34. So, tap His grace by humbleness, inquisitiveness, and
service-mindedness. So, you know, so, His grace is Krishna's grace. And
humbleness is "praṇipātena". Inquisitiveness is "paripraśnena". And
service-mindedness is "sevayā". So:

        tad viddhi praṇipātena
        paripraśnena sevayā

So, the spiritual master is like a coach for us. The spiritual master is a
coach. Coach means that the spiritual master gives us guidance on how we can
advance in spiritual master. So, what is humbleness? Humbleness means to admit
that I do not know the way. "praṇipātena". Why should we go down in bow?
"praṇipāta" means to actually offer obeisances. To bow down. Fall down. So:

"As we can’t discern the internal landscape, we need indispensably an attitude
of humbleness: “I don’t know the way; you do. Please be my guide”."

So, actually, spiritual journey is essentially an inner journey. We want to move
inwards. You know. The soul is inside. We are the soul. But we are not aware
that we are the soul. So, redirect our consciousness inwards. And realise that
we are the soul. And then, after that, we have to realise that the soul is
eternally connected with Krishna. And in, case, Krishna in, said, also. So, we,
we have, make an inner journey. But we cannot see things inside. So, therefore,
we need to know the way. So, the spiritual master knows the way. And the
spiritual master provides us the way. So, humbleness. Just as when we, you know,
you know, go to a doctor. We are humble. You know. I am sick. I do not know what
is the cause of the sickness. You know. Please, I have come to tell you. So,
actually, if a patient, a, pro..., imagines that I know better than the doctor.
The patient cannot be treated by the doctor. So, humbleness is required.  And
humbleness alone is not enough. If we just k..., phew, fall in front of the
spiritual master. Yes. But have to inquire. Inquire. You know. What is wrong?
You know, so, as Sanatana Goswami inquired, he. You know. You know. What i...,
why am I?

         ‘ke āmi’, ‘kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya’

Why am I suffering from the threefold mise..., threefold miseries of material
existence? This, something, which is a vital inquiry for everyone. And that is
inquisitiveness. So:

"This injunction of the Gita indicates that it calls not for blind faith in the
name of humbleness, but for a development of our capacity for spiritual
perception. By this perception, we start seeing for ourselves what the guru is
seeing."

This means we, when we inquire from the spiritual master, we d..., gradually, by
inquire, we develop jnana chakshu. We develop our capacity for spiritual
perception. We start perceiving the spiritual realm. Does not mean suddenly, we
start seeing sat-cit-ananda atma everywhere. That will happen eventually when we
develop spiritual version, also. But we develop, you know, you know, the
capacity for deep thinking. And deep thinking also leads to deeper observations.
So, we can see this world, how the promises of this world are false. And how, we
can see basically in the world that the truth of the Gita being demonstrated.
And we start seeing for ourselves what the guru is seeing. So, h..., hu...,
after humbleness, there is inquisitiveness. So, the spiritual master tells, this
world is a place of misery. But then, I see, there is so many advertisements.
In the advertisements, all people are smiling. All people are laughing. In the
movies, people are laughing. And all the novels have happy endings. So, yes.
This world is a place of happiness. But, so, the world seems to tell us. And
when gradually, we start seeing beyond the surface. I look in the roads. We
see, the advertisement, people are, are smiling. But look down on the road,
everybody is sulking, frowning, scowling. So, where are actually people happy?
In real life, few people are, few people, if any, are happy. And even if they
are happy, that is for short time. This world is actually "duḥkhālayam". So,
we start seeing for ourselves what the guru is seeing. That happens by
inquisitiveness. So, humbleness is definitely important. So that we can learn.
But humbleness alone is not enough. Humbleness is a launching pad for learning.
For developing our own spiritual vision. And, now, it is good to, you know,
admit that we do not know. And then, to get to know. Doctor, I do not know what
is wrong with me. You know. Doc..., please tell me what is my sickness. After
that, the important thing is to take the medicine. If we do not take the
medicine even if we know in exhaustive detail the diagnosis that we are, of
the disease that we are suffering from. Still, just knowledge does not cure us.
There has to be, you know, taking of the prescription. Application. So, that is.
That application essentially is "sevayā", service-mindedness.

"The destination of our spiritual journey is the realization that loving service
to Krishna is our only source of lasting fulfillment. We progress towards that
realization by serving Krishna as per the guru’s instructions."

So, when we, you know, what is the ultimate realisation that we need? That I am
not the body. I am the soul. That Krishna has got. Yes, all these are important
realisations. The most transformational realisation of our live will be that
Krishna and Krishna alone is the source of the best enjoyment. Everything else
that promises enjoyment will ultimately lead to suffering. Service to Krishna
will grant me greater and better fulfillment than anything else in this world.
Once we get this realisation, once we get this conviction, then, the temptations
of this world will no longer allure us. And how do we get this? By actually
living according to it. So, we may not feel so much satisfaction in loving
Krishna right now. But if we keep serving Krishna. Keep serving Krishna. You
know, with a, as much of an affection and attitude, devotional attitude that we
can have. Then, gradually, by this, you know, we will develop our affection for
Krishna. And we will get realisation, also. That we get getter happi..., better
happiness in serving Krishna than in anything else. So, so, now, a, to
summarise.

"Thus, HIS grace works in three progressive steps:"

What is?

"humbleness enables the guru to show us the way, inquisitiveness enables us to
start seeing the way ourselves and service-mindedness enables us to move along
the way."

There are three steps. By humbleness. If I am not humble, then the guru cannot
show me, only, what is the way. So, I am humble. I do not know. Please tell me.
Humbleness enables the guru to show us the way. Inquisitiveness enables to start
seeing the way ourselves. To internalise what the guru is telling us. And
service-mindedness, we actually start moving. So, guru tells us. You are not the
body. You are the soul. Soul is servant of Krishna. Inquisitiveness helps us to
understand this more. And then, acting on this devot..., spiritual devotional
platform of serving Krishna moves us towards retu..., re..., becoming reinstated
in our eternal spiritual position. So, in this way, Krishna:

        tad viddhi praṇipātena
        paripraśnena sevayā

By these three, we get the spiritual knowledge. So, let us look at, you know,
Srila Prabhupada's purport, also. So, Prabhupada starts by telling:

"The path of spiritual realization is undoubtedly difﬁcult."

Undoubtedly difficult. Why? Now, we will say bhakti is easy to perform. Yes.
But in general, bhakti i..., i..., is the easiest among the various spiritual
paths. And the spiritual paths in general are difficult. So, why are they
difficult? Because we have to fight our inner demons. We have to fight against
lust, anger, greed, envy, pride, and illusion. And they are formidable forces
which want to keep us enslaved. So that we keep serving them life after life
after life. So, therefore, we need the guidance of a guru. And Prabhupada
explains that mental speculation, a:

"mental speculation or dry arguments cannot help lead one to the right path. Nor
by independent study of books of knowledge can one progress in spiritual life."

So, these can give us some preliminary knowledge. But ul..., these can give us
some preliminary knowledge. We can read books. We can think for ourselves. All
this is, you know, it can be a, a slight movement along the right path. But if
one wants serious progress on the right path, that we need a spiritual master.
Now, a, what exactly, so Prabhupada, now, significantly makes the point that,
actually, the spiritual master tests the disciple to see if the spiri...,
disciple is sincere, disciple is serious. And when the disciple is serious, then
the spiritual master accepts a, in Krishna Consciousness, the, the testing is
standardised in terms of, say, having, you know, of chanting 16 rounds, following
four regulative principles for one year or whatever. You know, the period may be
depending on one's spiritual master. But one year is generally the standard,
minimum. And then, like that, the spiritual master is testing the disciple. And
the disciple also needs to test the spiritual master. You know, in today's
society, there are so many people who claim to be spiritual masters. And one has
to be able to test, you know, who is the bonafide spiritual master. And by that,
one moves forward. Then, now, what exactly is the spiritual master's role? The
spiritual master actually is th..., you know, is enabling us to turn towards
Krishna. How? Through his own example. And through his connection with Krishna.
So, the parampara. The spiritual master has to come in parampara. The m..., we
are not going to go into all the qualifications. But this chapter itself talked
earlier in 4.2 of:

        evaṁ paramparā-prāptam

The spiritual master's, you know, very defining qualification is that, he is in,
he is in parampara. So, now, parampara, is not just a link of head. You know, a
link not just of head. But a link of hearts. What does it mean? You know. What
does it mean link of hearts? Actually, it is not that, if we look at Srila
Prabhupada's books. And we look at Bhak..., Bhaktisiddhanta Saravasti's books.
If we, we will see that, there is a world of difference. Not in content. But in
presentation. In style. In, you know, in m..., manner of approach. Prabhupada
was a distinct individual. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura was a distinct
individual. So, it is not that, the ci..., disciple is going to repeat verbatim
as it is. Like a robo. Or like a recorder. Whatever one has heard. Just repeats
it. That can also be done in situations where it is required. But the important
point is that, that is not what defines a spiritual master. The spiritual master
lives the principles that are taught in scriptures. And there have been, the
disciple sees how the spiritual master is living according to principles of
selfless sacrifice. Then, the spiri..., the disciple gets inspired. When the
disciple gets inspired to live according to those same s..., principles. Then,
what happens? The principle of selfless devotion, that is present in the heart
of the spiritual master. That gets transferred to the heart of the disciple. And
when it gets transferred to the heart of the disciple, then their hearts get
linked. So, the, the parampara is a link of hearts. Hearts linked together in
the principle of selfless devotion. So, then, when the disciple becomes this
inspired and exalted, then this disciple will become a spiritual master. And
that spiritual master example will inspire prospective disciples. Who will also
become inspired, and transformed, and elevated by the principle of selfless
devotion. Selfless devotion here is bhakti devi, bhakti, you know. So, bhakti
what links the disciplic succession. The parampara is a link of heart. It is a
link of hearts based on the principle of bhakti, selfless devotion. And then,
what does the parampara do? Actually, the connection with parampara, piety
transforms into spirituality when there is a connection to the guru and a
commitment to the process. So, many people may have piety. Piety means they may
have some belief in being good, do good. We should not be sinful. We should not
be immoral. We should not be,  do illegal, illicit activities. So, that piety
is there. Piety is good. But piety in and of itself is not spirituality. Piety
is in goodness. Impiety can be in the lower modes. Passion, ignorance. Piety is
in goodness. But spirituality is above. It is transcendental. So, piety
transforms into spirituality when there is a connection to the guru. Connection
to the guru and a commitment to the process. There is a connection to the guru
and a commitment to the process. One becomes connected with the spiritual
master. And after that connection, one commits oneself. Yes, I am going to serve
my spiritual master. And that commitment is to:

        tad viddhi praṇipātena
        paripraśnena sevayā

Then, by that, one becomes purified. And one becomes, you know, spiritually
conscious, spiritually advanced. So, now, some people say that, actually, you
know, I have a direct relationship with God. I want to have a direct
relationship with God. Why I have to, why should a guru come in-between me and
God? I do not want him be in-between me and God. So, actually, what is the
guru's role? The guru does not come in-between us and God. But he removes what
is between us and God. That is the wall of our own false ego. The law of our,
the wall of our own misconceptions and misconceived desires. You know. So, what
is this? You know, actually, th..., th..., the soul is here. Krishna is here.
The two are neighbors. That there is the famous verse which talks about two
birds in the tree. So, the soul and Supersoul are right next to each other in
the heart. But there is a wall. The wall is of misconceptions. The soul thinks
that I am indepen..., I am independent living being. I am the body. And I can
enjoy at the bodily level. And based on that misconceptions, there are
misconceived desires. Misdirected desires. And those misdirected desires take
the soul's consciousne..., away from Krishna. So, what does the spiritual master
do? Spiritual master gives the disciple the knowledge and the process by which
that wall can be broken down. Gives knowledge by which those misconceptions are
shattered. Yes, I am a part of Krishna. I meant to love and serve Krishna. And
also, the misdirected desires which take the soul's consciousness away from
Krishna. That ch..., you know, guru gives the prin..., you know, principle of,
you know, chanting of the holy names. And remembrance of Krishna which purifies
and redirects our desires away from the world and back towards Krishna. In this
way, the wall breaks. The guru does not come between us and, you know, the,
disci..., you know, kind..., Krishna. He removes what is bin..., between us and
Krishna. And not only that. What does the spiritual master do? The spiritual
master ultimately connects us with Krishna. So, without the spiritual master, we
will not know what is authentic bhakti. Therefore, spiritual master is
essential. And some people say that, you know, I do not need a guru. Hmm. I am
my own guru. So, hmm, he, who is his own guru has a fool as his disciple. So,
he, who is his own guru. If I am my own guru. Then, who is my disciple? That is
a fool. So, I am my own disciple, also. Then, I am a fool basically if I.
Because we cannot, you know, change ourselves. We cannot cure ourselves by our
own efforts. So, Krishna is there in our heart. But Krishna loves us devotees.
Somebody may ask, cannot Krishna make Himself accessible directly? If Krishna
loves me, why does Krishna want me to go to a guru? you know. Krishna can
gi..., reveal Himself to me directly. Who is? Who, who are we? Who? Why cannot
Krishna do that? So, Krishna can do anything. This is not a matter of question
of what Krishna can do. This is a matter of what Krishna wants us to do. Krishna
is telling us in the Bhagavad Gita here itself a very categorical one. "tad
viddhi". Know this by going to a spiritual master. So, now, Krishna loves tho...,
love, first, Krishna loves all living beings. But at the same time, Krishna is
reciprocal. So, Krishna loves all the more. Krishna loves especially those who
love Him. So, now, Krishna wants to glorify those devotees who have sacrificed
everything in this world for His sake. Those who have focused on pure devotion
to Him. Those who sacrificed the things of this world for His sake. So, when
Krishna wants to do this. He wants to offer the things of this world to Kri...,
a, give up the, so, Krishna wants to reward these devotees. Of course, the
ultimate reward that He is going to give them is the inner reward. The f..., the
flood of love of Krishna that He is going to give them. And then, ultimately,
the spiritual reward. Taking them back to the spiritual world. But along with
that, Krishna wants them, to reward them in this world, also. But the devotees
do not want anything of this world. The devotees are actually free from
attachment through things of this world. When the devotees do not want anything
of this world, then may f..., they, then, they are free from the attachment
to anythi..., things of this world. How can Krishna glorify them in this world,
also? How can Kli..., Krishna reward them in this world, also? Krishna rewards
them by granting them a, granting them the authority over the way out of this
world. The world is a place of misery. And the most precious thing in this world
is the way out of this world. Just like in a jail, what is the most precious
thing? You know, jail, there is no secret, a, treasure buried somewhere.
You know, jail actually, that has not got anything precious. The most precious
thing in the jail is the key for the door. Out of the jail, isn't it? So, this
material world is like a jail. It is called durga. Durga is a prison. And Durga
Devi is the, you know, presiding deity of this prison. So, she, you know, she
keeps the living entities trapped in material existence and have three prongs.
Three vidakap. They are, they inflict the conditioned souls with the threefold
miseries. And the purpose of these threefold miseries is, they are telling.
Krishna. Go back to Krishna. Go back Krishna. Go back Krishna. Go back to
Krishna. So, the purpose of these threefold miseries is not to make the person
suffer. But to make the person reform. So, the idea is, so, in this world, which
is like a prison. The most important thing is how to get out of the world. And
that knowledge c..., is the most precious thing. And Krishna gives those
devotees who have offered their everything to Him. A..., he gives them authority
over this. He says, you, my, my devotees, you will become the distributors of
this knowledge to everyone. So, without sel..., without becoming submissive to
the devotees, you know, k..., this knowledge does not raise in our heart. We may
theoretically understanding it, understand it. But we will not
transformationally understanding it. That theoretical knowledge will not lead to
transformation. It will not lead to redirection of our heart's love with the
things of this world to Krishna. For that to happen, we need to serve a
spiritual master. And get bhakti from that spiritual master. So, essentially,
when Krishna, you know, is saying that, go to a spiritual master. Krishna can do
anything. Krishna can give, reveal Himself to us directly, also. But Kr..., we
have to understand that Krishna is in loving reciprocation with His devotees.
And He wants to glorify His devotees in this world, also. So, those who want to
come out of this world, Krishna gives them, K..., tells those devotees, you
glorify, those prospective devotees. You surrender to my exalted devotees. You
become submissive to them. And by doing submissive to them, you will be able to
find your way out of this material existence. You know, so, you will understand.
So, we will get this knowledge by surrendering to the spiritual master. And the
spiritual master is very compassionate, is very kind, is very caring. And the
spiritual master helps the soul to come out of material existence. So, some
people say that, so when they say that there is no need to go to any guru. Those
who say like this, basically, th..., they are saying I am a guru. And I am
telling you do not go to any guru. So, even when we, you know, say, everybody
says, do not go to any guru. Basically, even if we follow them, what are we
doing? We are accepting that person as a guru. So, we have to follow someone.
Ra..., we just cannot live by rejecting everyone. Even if say, say, I reject
everyone. Somebody told us reject everyone. So, we are following that person who
told us reject everyone. So, we have to follow someone. The Vedic scriptures say
rather than resenting and rejecting the principle of following someone, rather,
r..., r..., re..., redirect that principle based on knowledge. So, understand
whom we should follow. Choose the right authority. And then, by that, we will be
able to become purified, enlightened, and liberated. So, that is, now, next verse
will talk about what is the effect of knowing about guru. So, when we cannot
know about the guru, what happens? We become, you know, when we come to know
about the spiritual master, that knowledge liberates us. So, first, Krishna will
describe in the next verse, what are the, what are the results of this
knowledge. So, we will look at this.

        yaj jñātvā na punar moham
        evaṁ yāsyasi pāṇḍava
        yena bhūtāny aśeṣāṇi
        drakṣyasy ātmany atho mayi

So, "yaj jñātvā". After you know this. "na punar moham". Again no more illusion.
"evaṁ yāsyasi pāṇḍava". "pāṇḍava" is, oh, Arjuna. "evaṁ yāsyasi". That means, as
you are in illusion, right now. You will not go into illusion again. Ok. "na
punar moham". You will not go into illusion. What will happen? "yena bhūtāny
aśeṣāṇi". By this knowledge. So, what is the characteristic of when free from
illusion? "bhūtāny aśeṣāṇi". All living beings. All, without exception. "śeṣā"
is remaining. "aśeṣā" means nothing remaining. "bhūtāny aśeṣāṇi". All living
beings without exception. What will see? What will, by, happen to, about them?
"drakṣyasy". "drakṣyasy" means to see. How will we see them? "ātmany atho mayi".
So, you will see them as spiritual. In fact, you will see them as mine. So, this
is the first verse in the Bhagavad Gita where Krishna talks about His
relationship with the living entities. In the first, in the second chapter when
Krishna talks about the soul. He does not explicitly tell what is the
relationship of the soul with the Supreme soul. And He does mention that fix the
mind on Me. Offer your work to Me. He has told that in 2.61. And He has told
in 3.30. He has said that, have faith in Me. But till now, He has not explicitly
stated what is our relationship with Him eternally. You know, so, Krishna says
that what do the, those people who are free from illusion? They see, they see
all living beings "ātmany". As spiritual. As, a, si..., situated on the
spiritual platform. And what is spiritual? Their "ma any". They belong to Me.
So, what is the meaning of this verse in the Bhagavad Gita's context? Krishna is
telling Arjuna that do not think that you alone are considered in the po...,
Bhishma. And Droṇa. And all the warriors assembled on this battlefield. I am
concerned about them. They are all Mine. They are all My parts and parcels. They
are all My children. Now, I am concerned about them. Whatever I am telling you
to do. That is ultimate for their best. So, do not see them with this illusory
vision that these are my, that these are my rela..., my, this is my grandfather.
This is my uncle. This is my cousine. This is my brother. Do not see this way.
You know, this is one way of seeing it. But actually, this is, these are
temporary relationships. They are all eternally souls. And the souls have
eternal relationship with Krishna. So, they are Mine. So, Krishna, so what
happens by this, you know, when Krishna is telling, when we acquire knowledge,
there is first freedom from illusion. So, the two results of "jñāna" are there
is no more illusion again. "na punar moham", Krishna says. And we see all living
beings, you know, as in Krishna and Krishna's. So, freedom from illusion. And
acquisition of spiritual vision. These two are the results of acquiring "jñāna".
So, now, many people may say, I have gone to this pa..., I, I have my own guru.
But we have to see what is the result. What is the life actually. I have, are
they free from illusion? Are they still, are, are caught, you know, in the
attachments of this world? Hoping that worldly things will make them happy?
They, are they still filled with the men..., mentality of m..., "janasya moho
’yam ahaṁ mameti"? I and mine. If that is the case, then they have actually not
been, they have not, you know, g..., internalised the knowledge the spiritual
master has given. So, of course, this is progression. And m..., most disciples,
they are still seekers. So, they may not have internalised this very high
degree. But at least, some change should be there. You know, Pra..., Pra...,
devotee who is initiated by a spiritual master and is seriously practicing. That
devotee's life will be significantly different from the life of general
people. Even general pious people. Devotee's life will be different. Because the
devotee's life is centered on Krishna. Now, after describing this. This ultimate
result, freedom from illusion. And, you know, acquisition of spiritual vision.
You know, Krishna will describe how this happens. Here, He will desc..., give
some examples to illustrate how this change takes place. So, Prabhupa..., now,
you know, Prabhupada explains interestingly that, here, "ātmany atho mayi". He
explains that. Actually:

"The sense of an existence separate from Kṛṣṇa is called māyā"

So, when we see mayi, then that means we are becoming free from maya. When we
see everything else connected with Krishna, then we become free from maya. So,
actually, Prabhupada says:

"Even the millions of incarnations are only His different expansions."

So, not only, we, should we not see the things of this world separate from
Krishna. But even the various incarnations. They should not be seen separate
from Krishna. They are also parts of Krishna. So, this unified vision of all of
reality as being connected to Krishna. That is the result of spiritual
knowledge. And then, now, Prabhupada explains further. That:

"Such bodily differences arise from forgetfulness of the transcendental service
of the Lord."

Bodily differences means, I am this. I am, I am man. I am a woman. I am this. I
am that. They arise from forgetfulness. And:

"when one is engaged in transcendental service through Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one
becomes at once liberated from this illusion."

And what is that ultimate liberation? This is a well-known verse that Srila
Prabhupada would quote that he would say that, this is Bhāgavatam, 2.10.6:

        muktir hitvānyathā-rūpaṁ svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ

"muktir" means "hitvānyathā-rūpaṁ". Whatever form is there, one gives it up. And,
so, "ānyathā-rūpaṁ" versus "svarūpa". "ānyathā-rūpaṁ" means other forms.
"svarūpa" is our eternal form. Original form. Our own form. "sva" means my. Our.
So, "svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ". "vyavasthitiḥ" means to be situated. So,
currently, different living beings have forms of males, females, Indians,
Americans, human beings, demigods. You know. Non-human beings. These are
"hitvānyathā-rūpaṁ". So, one gives up all these other forms. And one attains
"muktir". What happens? "svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ". One becomes situated in one's
"svarūpa". So, that is actually liberation. So, now, Krishna will describe the
process by which this happens. So, He will give, you know, the, He says that
this is such an exalted process. That anybody and everybody can become purified
and liberated. No matter how sinful the person is.

        api ced asi pāpebhyaḥ
        sarvebhyaḥ pāpa-kṛt-tamaḥ
        sarvaṁ jñāna-plavenaiva
        vṛjinaṁ santariṣyasi

So, "api ced asi pāpebhyaḥ". So, "pāpebhyaḥ" means, so, among the sinners. Among
the sinners, "sarvebhyaḥ pāpa-kṛt-tamaḥ". Among all the sinners, so, "kṛt-tamaḥ"
is the, it is supelative degree. It is the highest superlative degree. So, it
refers to the most sinful person. "pāpa-kṛt-tamaḥ". So, "sarvaṁ". If all such
people. "jñāna-plavenaiva". "plavena" means boat. If somebody becomes situated
in the boat. Which boat? The boat of transcendental knowledge. "vṛjinaṁ
santariṣyasi". "vṛjinaṁ" refers to the ocean of miseries. Which is material
existence. "santariṣyasi". One will cross completely. One will go beyond this.
So, what Krishna is telling essentially is that this knowledge can purify anyone
and everyone. So, how does it work? How does this knowledge work? Now, actually,
what is important is not, you know, where we are. What is important is where we
are looking. What is the difference between the two? Where we are and where we
are looking. So, that means, hey, this is ignorance, passion, goodness. And this
is transcendence. Now, if we see, many Indians at the time of Srila Prabhupada,
you know, they, they still, the traditional pious culture was still there. So,
many Indians were living lives in goodness. So, they were, in that sense, they
were close to Krishna. From goodness to Krishna is relative closer as compared
to ignorance. But they were looking away. They were looking towards the west.
The west was largely in passion, ignorance. So, they were in goodness. But they
were, you know, you know, they were looking away. So, where we are is not as
important as where we are looking. If we are looking towards materialism.
Towards sensuality. Towards the hope and the hype of enjoyment in this world.
Then, that is where we will go. And we will be dragged away from Krishna. So,
now, on the other hand, if we look at the, you know, early disciple of Srila
Prabhupada. Many of them were hippies. So, those hippies, they were actually in
the mode of ignorance. You know. They were breaking the regulative principles.
A..., a..., as we discussed. Their only regulative principle was to break all
the regulative principles. And then, they were also, you know, having no, o...,
knowledge of spiritual life. But still, they were done with material enjoyment.
And they were looking for something higher in life. So, they had been, they
were, they were born and brought up in a passionate culture. And they had got
fed up with that passionate culture. And they were g..., in the hope of rising
higher. They had been misled into drugs. And they were going downwards. But
although they were going downwards, they were looking upwards. They were hoping
that through drugs, they will go up. They were not going up. They were hoping
to go up. So, they were in ignorance. But where were they looking? They were
looking towards spirituality. And because of many spiritual teachers who in the
past had gone from India to America. They had, they were in..., f..., intrigued
by Indian spirituality. And when Srila Prabhupada presented Krishna
Consciousness. They became fascinated by it. And they took it up. And they
became very ex..., you know, prog..., you know, f..., rapidly, swiftly, they
progressed. And they became exalted devotees. So, the point here is that,
actually, you know, if somebody becomes, deci..., decides to become situated in
the mode of transcendental knowledge. No matter how sinful that person is, that
person can get elevated. So, now, this verse presents a logical paradox. E...,
the principle we understand that anybody can get elevated. And if that person
wants to get elevated. But the logical paradox is that if somebody is sinful,
how can that person be knowledgeable? I mean. How can that person b..., a, b...,
get aboard of the boat of transcendental knowledge. So, normally speaking, if
we, p..., say, a person is knowledgeable. That person will not be sinful. That
person is sinful. That person will not be knowledgeable. Here, Krishna is
talking about a person who is the most sinful among all sinful people. So, how
can such a person ever board the boat of transcendental knowledge? That, so, the
acharayas explain that at one level, we understand this is rhetorical. It is not
that the sinful people will be knowledgeable. Or knowledgeable people will be
sinful. But it is a rhetorical glorification that, actually, this knowledge is
so powerful that even if a person be sinful, that person will get elevated. That
person just chooses to live according to kno..., understand this knowledge and
live according to it. So, from the practical point of view, that rhetorical
glorification actually becomes real, also. How? By the mercy, with the
intervening mercy of the spiritual master. So, the spiritual master mercy, mercy
goes to conditioned souls. Even if they are sinful. You know. You know. And they
somehow become attracted to the, you know, process of Krishna Consciousness.
Then, that can elevate them. So, from the point of kar..., karma-yoga. And
"jñāna" being acquired by karma-yogi. This is a rhetorical verse. But from the
point of view of bhakti-yoga, which is what Krish..., Bhagavad Gita is
ultimately leading to. So, any person can get elevated. That is the glory of the
boat of transcendental knowledge. So, the boat re..., Krishna is using the word
boat for knowledge over here. Normally, we use the word boat for many cases. We
sometimes use it for the boat of the lotus feet of Krishna. Or we use the boat
of the human body, also. So, these are all true. The important point is that the
boat enables us to go out of the ocean. And just having the human body alone is
not necess..., enough to go out of the ocean. We have to direct the human body,
you know, you know, use the human body for the right purpose. That is direct the
boat in the right direction. And that directing of the boat in the right
direction happens with the transcendental knowledge. So, for different con...,
in different contexts, the, the boat may be referred to as different things. It
may be referred to human body. Or it may refer here to transcendental knowledge.
The point is that the boat is essential when we want to come out of the ocean.
So, the first level is, we need to have a human form to understand spirituality.
But after human form, we have, then we need transcendental knowledge in that
human form. So, Krishna is talking about that over here.

So, you know, Prabhupada writes in the purport that if somebody is trapped in
the ocean. That person may keep swimming, swimming. How long can the person
swim? But if a boat comes along. And somebody comes and places the person in the
boat. Then, that person can cross through that ocean. So, the Kri...,
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, you know, the, is the boat that
Srila Prabhupada has brought in our lives. And all of us can come aboard that
boat. And by coming aboard that boat, we can march back towards. We can go back
towards Krishna. So, all that we have to do is, now, we are coming in the boat,
not jumping out of the boat. Even if there are difficulties. Even if there are
conflicts. Even if there are, you know, disasters. Actually, being in the boat
is always safer than being in the ocean. So, like that, being in the association
of devotees and practicing Krishna Consciousness is the safest way for us to
return back to Krishna. And you know, Krishna. So, this is what Krishna is
telling that this boat can liberate anyone. Now, Krishna gives one more example
to illustrate how this transcendental knowledge purifies and liberates.

        yathaidhāṁsi samiddho ’gnir
        bhasma-sāt kurute ’rjuna
        jñānāgniḥ sarva-karmāṇi
        bhasma-sāt kurute tathā

So, "yathaidhāṁsi samiddho ’gnir". So, "edhāṁsi". "edhāṁsi" refers to firewood.
"samiddhaḥ" is burning. "agniḥ" is fire. So, when firewood is com..., comes in
contact with burning fire. Then, what happens? "bhasma-sāt kurute ’rjuna".
Arjuna, it all becomes, burn to ashes. Similarly, "jñānāgniḥ". The fire of
knowledge. "sarva-karmāṇi". All kinds of work that one is doing. "bhasma-sāt
kurute tathā". It all gets burnt down. So, here, Krishna is referring to, a...,
a..., how a person does not get karmically bound. Of, or we discussed earlier,
the, Krishna has talked about it, m..., in this, Krishna has used the word
"jñānāgni" earlier in the same chapter, in 4.19. He has said:

        yasya sarve samārambhāḥ
        kāma-saṅkalpa-varjitāḥ
        jñānāgni-dagdha-karmāṇaṁ
        tam āhuḥ paṇḍitaṁ budhāḥ

So, He has said that "jñānāgni-dagdha-karmāṇaṁ". The person whose karma is
burnt down by the fire of knowledge. So, same point Krishna is telling over
here. But here, the point is that, you know, the, this person who acquires
"jñāna" from the spiritual master. That "jñāna" becomes like a knowled..., a
fire, inner fire. And that fire burns everything away. Burns everything away.

        jñānāgniḥ sarva-karmāṇi
        bhasma-sāt ...

It burns all the sinful reactions. So, the, all the karma that we do is like
seed. You know, a seed is burnt. Then, it does not give any results. So, now,
the two examples convey two points progressively. The first is that, ok, there
is an ocean. But we get out of the ocean. So, like that, there are, this, o...,
material world is a place of ex..., material world, world is a place of misery.
And spiritual knowledge offers us a way to go out. Out of the material
exis..., second one talks about how, what is inside us. That is, our own
sanarthas are there. Our own bad karma is there. Its reactions are stored, also,
in beej and other forms. So, Krishna, t..., they also get burnt out. So, when
one goes out of the ocean. The water still remains in the ocean. But we come
out. But the example of this wooden fire, it conveys that actually the firewood
itself gets burnt completely. So, like that, the karma gets destroyed. And when
the karma gets destroyed, that is supremely auspicious. So, a, now, there are,
Prabhupada talks about the stages of karmic reactions. That we will discuss in
the Ninth Chapter. But the point is that they are all burnt away. As Prabhupada
quotes over here. He quotes from the "Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad":

        ubhe uhaivaiṣa ete taraty amṛtaḥ sādhv-asādhūnī

So, "taraty" is crosses over. Overcomes. You know. What? "sādhv-asādhūnī". One
overcomes the good and the bad reaction, also. "sādhv" is good. "asādhū" is
bad. So, all, you know, i..., auspicious and inauspicious activities, whatever
we have done. They all, we become free from them. That means, there is no good
karmic bondage, also. That means one does not have to come back in goodness.
Spiritual knowledge takes us beyond to transcendence. Now, Krishna will conclude
this glorification of knowledge by talking about it, you know, its purity and
its potency.

        na hi jñānena sadṛśaṁ
        pavitram iha vidyate
        tat svayaṁ yoga-saṁsiddhaḥ
        kālenātmani vindati

So, He is saying here, "na hi jñānena sadṛśaṁ". "sadṛśaṁ" means like, there is
nothing like a, knowledge. "pavitram iha vidyate". There is nothing as
purifying as trancendental knowledge. And "tat svayaṁ yoga-saṁsiddhaḥ". So, when
one becomes situated in yoga, when one becomes mature. "saṁsiddhaḥ" means
perfected or mature in yoga. Then, what happens? "kālenātmani vindati". One,
actually, over a period of time, "kālena". "ātmani vindati". One delights in
oneself. One delights in oneself. So, hmm, Krishna is telling over here. He gave
two, two examples. First is of the boat. And the second is of fire. Now, He is
giving it, a general princ..., generic principles over here after the specific
examples. He is telling. There is nothing as pure as transcendental knowledge.
"na hi jñānena sadṛśaṁ". So, what this is, this knowledge referring to? This
knowledge is a knowledge of the atma. And ultimate, the connection of the atma
with the Paramatma. So, what this knowledge is, that that Krishna has not
explicitly told. He has told what is, knowledge is in term..., terms of its
result. He has told that one becomes free from illusion. One sees all living
beating, beings connected with Him. Krishna will talk about this knowledge more
in Seventh Chapter, in Ninth Chapter. Seventh Chapter is His "Knowledge of the
Absolute". Then, Ninth Chapter is hmm, "The Most Conﬁdential Knowledge". So,
Krishna will talk about this more and more. So, this knowledge, Krishna is
glorifying in general the knowledge that one acquires by the practice of
spirituality. By practicing the process that one, the spiritual master gives us.
But He is telling over here the principle that "pavitram iha vidyate". Nothing
as pure as this. Krishna will talk about this again in the Ninth Chapter. This
is, He says, Ninth Chapter glorifies this knowledge is, "rāja-vidyā
rāja-guhyaṁ". This is a king among all knowledge. You know. So, here, also,
Krishna is telling. Superlative. Nothing as pure as this. And the second part is
significant. "tat svayaṁ yoga-saṁsiddhaḥ". That when one becomes, you know,
accomplished in this, then "ātmani vindati". One delights within oneself.
"kālena". Over a period of time, one starts delighting within oneself. So, how
does this delighting in self happen? It happens because the atm..., the soul is
by nature joyful. And the soul's joyfulness can, you know, naturally be
experienced when one is connected with Krishna. So, "kālena". Over a period
of time as we keep practicing devotional service, we start becoming, you know,
s..., aware of our own spiritual identity and of our devotional activity in
connection with Krishna. And as we become more and more connected with Krishna,
naturally, we feel joyful. So, Prabhupada explains in the world that, in the
word that:

"when one is situated in transcendental knowledge, he need not search for peace
elsewhere, for he enjoys peace within himself."

He enjoys peace within himself. Normally, you know, if we look within our mind,
is just an agitated mess. I want this. I want that. I want that. But when we
discuss how internal does not means mental. Internal means spiritual. So, when
we can calm the mind down. The, then, we can see deeper inside. Just like, you
know, there is a river. And below the river, there is a riverbed. So, when the
river is restle..., and then, not the river, say, a pond. When the pond is
restless. So, at that time, we cannot see what are the surface, at, at the
bottom of the pond. But when the pond becomes calm. Then, we can see what is at
the bottom. Similarly, when we are, you know, you know, you know, in an impure
stage. So, at that time, our mind is restless. And because the mind is restless.
The, so, the, we are l..., we are like the person outside. That is the gross
bodily consciousness. And then, the, you know, the water in the pond is like the
subtle material level. The mental level. And below that is the spiritual level.
That is the bottom of the pond. So, when the mind is agitated, then it is like
the surfa..., the water on the, in the pond is shaking, is restless. There are
ripples in it. Then, we cannot see what is below. But by the process of yoga,
what happens is, "tat svayaṁ yoga-saṁsiddhaḥ". By the practice of yoga, you
know, when, when we gradully become accomplished, then the mind becomes calm.
The mind becomes calm. It is like the water becomes steady. When the water
becomes steady. Then, we can see within. And then, "ātmani vindati". We start
ex..., equi..., relishing happiness within. "kālenātmani vindati". Now, the word
"kālena" is significant. Prabhupada translates that in due course of time. Now,
why does he wor..., use the word due course of time? Because, you know, things
happen according to their own course of time. We cannot artificially accelerate
things. When a flower is in the bud form. The flower will go from the bud form
to the fully blossomed form in its own course. You know. It is not that if I put
more water on it, the flower will go faster. So, it will take its own time.
Nature has its own time. So, we may have an intense desire. I want to become a
pure devotee, today, itself. You know. And from today, I will chant 64 rounds.
And I expect, by the time I complete the 64 rounds, I will be a pure devotee.
No, it is not going to work like that. Things take, things take time. But every
single maha mantra that we are chanting, it is purifying us. Every single
service that we are rendering, that is purifying us. So, we have to be patient.
You know, because we are caught up in an age of instant things. Instant. Yes, I
want this. So, instant tea. Instant coffee. Instant food. You know. Instant
control. So, we think that, I also want instant spirituality. Instant
spirituality means what? Just like I press a button. And then, the environment
is cool, it becomes hot. If it is hot, become cool. So, like that, I think, I
press a button, and immediately, my consciousness should become devotional.
Consciousness does not work like that. You know, it requires purification. It
will happen gradually. So, "kālenātmani vindati". It will take time. But Krishna
is assuring that there is, this will definitely happen. That we will start
relishing within oneself. You know, sometimes, devotees feel that, you know, and
I have not been practicing Krishna Consciousness for so long. I am not able to
give up my sense gratificatory desires. They are still there. What should I
do? And it is not only that they are there. We do not feel like giving them up,
also. So, thing is, certainly, if, the, those, it can be, des..., desires
involve breaking the regulative principles. We have to be very rigid about, you
know, doing whatever is required to give them up. But if they are not directly
involved in, con..., contravening the regulative principles in a gross way, then
we can know that w..., we will gradually become purified. They should not become
too much problem conscious. So, if I find that I am eating too much. Or I am
doing this too much. I am doing that too much. You know. It, it does not ma..,
we do not have to get too worked up about this. See, as we advance in spiritual
life, we will find that, naturally, we will become satisfied with, we will find
satisfaction in simple things. We will not need complex things to be satisfied.
We will not need a big show, be satisfied. That will naturally happen. So, you
know, you know, do we have to bother too much about it? No. we have to bother
about remembering Krishna. If we keep remembering Krishna. And we keep getting
connected with Krishna. We will get a higher satisfaction. And over a period of
time, we will find, hey, maybe, you know, three years ago, if this thing had
happened, I would have gotten, if somebody had spoken like this to me, I would
have gotten wild. But now, I am irrita..., I am annoyed. But I ave not gone
wild. How this happen? Because, you know, our connection with Krishna has given
us inner stability. It has given us an inner strength. And this way, we do not
get shaken by these things. Same way with respect to pleasures, also. So, as
devotees, our focus should be on Krishna. Our focus should not be on our
shortcomings. We, we need to be aware of our shortcomings so that, you know, we
do not unnecessarily p..., you know, provoke those situations whi..., in which
those shortcomings will catch us. And knock us down.

You know, for that purpose, we need to be aware. But we should not be focused on
them. "kālena". Over period of time, purification will happen. Sometimes, if we
just, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura would say that, you cannot c..., gate
crash into the kingdom of God. Gate crash means some..., the, sometimes at
places, door is closed. And somebody say, I want to come in. And the door is
not closed. So, what people come, the person comes in a big truck. Boom. The
truck bangs against the door. Breaks the door, open and comes inside. That is
called gate crashing. So, we cannot gate crash into the kingdom of God. That
means that we cannot just force our way to ahead in spiritual life. So, this
does not mean of course, by no means does this mean that we should just see
complacent. Hey, whenever Krishna wants, He, purify me. Now, I feel like
sleeping in chanting. Let me sleep. Now, I do not feel like fasting. I will not
fast. Today, I do not feel like going to temple. I will not go to temple. When
Krishna makes me feel that I should study scripture, then I will study
scripture. No. We are not talking about that over here. Now, we practi..., we
are talking here about, you know, our inner feelings, you know, despite our
diligent practice of devotional service. We keep practicing devotional service
diligently. That is definitely required. But after we practice that devotional
service diligently, then after that, what happens? Sometimes, we may feel
satisfied. Sometimes, we may not feel satisfied. Sometimes, our mind may be
pure. Sometimes, it may not be pure. So, we should not get too caught up in
these things. We are following the process of purification. And the purification
will definitely result over a period of time. At this stage, we just stay
steadily committed in the practice of ser..., devotional service. And when we do
this, gradually, the higher taste will start coming in more, and more, and more.
And we will start relishing that higher taste. And then, other taste, they will
become not so relevant for us. They will become gradually irrelevant,
insignificant and then non-existent. So, irrelevant means, it is not very
important for me. Insignificant means, not worth attention, only. And
non-existent means, they will completely go away. So, that will happen
gradually. So, we focus on being Krishna Conscious. And with faith that Krishna.
That the process of bhakti-yoga will definitely purify us. "kālenātmani
vindati". So, after this glorification, spiritual knowledge, in the next two
verses, Krishna will talk about faith. You know, how we should have faith. And
what happens for those who do not have faith. That we will discuss in our next
class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
