Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ICQVJAVZJY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=7ICQVJAVZJY&event=video_description&redir_token=pGfuLq4304TxvQW0SPhDLjqB7iZ8MTU0ODQ4ODM4MEAxNTQ4NDAxOTgw&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_087_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_06_Text_46_to_Chapter_07_text_01_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now to complete the Sixth Chapter. Last verses. And then, we will start with the
Seventh Chapter. Sixth Chapter has 47 verses. So, let us start with the 46th
verse. So, 37 to 46 answered Arjuna's six question. So, Arjuna's second
question, rather. First one, and 33, 34, Arjuna asked a question that the mind
is difficult to control. And the second question he asked from thirty, you know,
you know, 37 to 39, is what happens to a person who is not able to, who succeed
in the path of yoga? In the path of transcendence in general. And that Krishna
answered from 40 to 45. And now, Krishna gives the conclusion of this chapter in
46 and 47. Let us look at the verses.

        tapasvibhyo ’dhiko yogī
        jñānibhyo ’pi mato ’dhikaḥ
        karmibhyaś cādhiko yogī
        tasmād yogī bhavārjuna

So, "tapasvi". "tapasvi" is a person who performs austerities. So, better than a
person who performs austerities is the person who does yoga. "’dhiko yogī".
Better than a person who is a jnani. "jñānibhyo ’pi mato ’dhikaḥ". Greater than
a jnani is a person who is a yogi. You know. Yogi. And greater than a karmi is
also a person who is yogi. And therefore, Arjuna should be a yogi. So, in this
chapter, Krishna seems to be offering a very strong endorsement of yoga. So,
naturally, the chapter is about yoga. So, naturally, Krishna will talk about
yoga. At the same time, He will see in the next verse that He is talking about
a, a yoga which leads to a particular perfection. So, here, the word yoga
primarily focuses on the concept of a connection with the Absolute Truth. So,
having a connection with the Absolute Truth through yoga. Whichever form of
yoga, a, that one might follow. Having a connection is more important than just
doing austerities. Than just cultivating knowledge. Or just doing work. So, the
point here is, connection with the Absolute Truth is preferable to, you know,
the, any, any other things which may be considered spiritual by others. So, the
point is the connection. Yoga means, as we know, connection. So, now, in the
purport, Srila Prabhupada, you know, you know, emphasises this point very
clearly.

"When we speak of yoga we refer to linking our consciousness with the Supreme
Absolute Truth."

Hmm. And then, it is possible by various processes. So, when Prabhupada explains
here, you know, what are the problems with other processes? So, tapa...,
ascetic:

"Asceticism without self-knowledge is imperfect."

Hmm. So, that means one is, you, doing austerity. But one is not actually
connecting with one's inner se..., reality. One is not conn..., connecting with
the supreme inner reality. That is Krishna. Then, self-knowledge actually refers
not just to s..., you know, the knowledge of atma. But also, it refers to
knowledge of atma as a part of the supreme. So, you know, mere asceticism is not
of much use. It may be used in terms of for improving one's health. But from the
transcendental perspective, it is not of much use. 

        medas-cheda-phalāni
        auga hanani jagad snanum

So, in Kulashekhar Maharaja's Mukunda Mala Stotra, he says that, you know,
without remembrance of Krishna, you know, fasting is simply an exercise for fat
removal. It is not made, it, "medas-cheda-phalāni". "meda" is fat. It, actually,
it is "cheda". To get rid of it. "medas-cheda-phalāni". So, it is not actually
going to lead to any spiritual advancement in and of itself. You know. There are
people who fast for health benefits. In fact, you know, just like we have japa
retreats. Yoga retreats. There are doctors who specialise in what they call as
fasting retreats. So, what are these fasting retreats? The idea is that, you
know, it is based, it is a, it is a derivate from naturo therap..., na..., a,
nature therapy. The idea is the body has healing capacity within itself. And if
we just allow the body free reign, then the body will heal whatever damaging,
you know, m..., stimuli are there coming externally. So, then, the idea is that
as long as we are, div..., eating new food, then the body's energy gets di...,
diverted to digesting that food. So, for, if we fast, then under the doctor's
supervision, then the body's energy is no longer, you know, caught up in
digesting new food. The body's energy is available for healing itself. Cleansing
itself. And healing itself. Repearing itself, basically. So, you know, the point
is, this may be popular among some people. And it may work, also, at the
physical level. There are ex..., instances where people had, you know, diseases.
Which were incurable by normal means. Which got cured just by fasting for a
substantial amount of time. So, m..., you know, people may fast for, you know,
health reasons. And that has got nothing to do with spiritual realisation.
Similarly, people may fast, you know, just to negate the drives of the body.
Just to prove that, you know, ah, I can control myself. So, of course, the most
popular reason people may fast nowadays is just to get down weight. You know.
Our society is a society where, you know, you know, where obese people. You
know. People who are fat are almost treated like untouchables. Not just
untouchable. Unseeables. You know. People who are too fat. You know. People
just, you know, even if they do not spree diretly. The wave f..., people look
down at, you know, it is quite mortifying. You know. And actually, people are
caught in a catch-22 situation. Because on one side, we have so many
advertisements which are glamorising. And, you know, propositioning. And
tempting. Eat this. Eat that. Eat that. And most of the food that are
advertised nowadays. They are all very tempting food which are, you know, not
just tempting. But which are also fat-inducing. So, on one side, that is the
pressure. Enjoy. Enjoy. Enjoy this. And eat this. Eat that. And enjoy. Fast food
is there. But fast food is also mostly fat food. Fat-inducing food. So, anyway,
people may fast to get rid of their extra fat. And that is not considered
spiritual. At all. So:

"Asceticism without self-knowledge is imperfect."

Prabhupada says. Yes, the capacity to do asceticism may be useful. M..., on the
spiritual path. Prabhupada would recommend us to do tapasya in terms of fasting
on ekadashi. And also, you know, fasting on holy days. Fasting as a tool for
health can be u..., adopted by devotees, also. Just as, you know, devotees can
use yoga as a tool for health. But the important point is, the devotee is not
get caught up in that alone. And they do not divorce it from its spiritual
purpose. So, we understand that, fasting or yoga, our primary goal is Krishna.
And we want to make spiritual advancement. And return towards Krishna. And along
the way, whatever is required to keep our body healthy, we may do that. Then,
Prabhupada makes the next point.

"Empiric knowledge without surrender to the Supreme Lord is also imperfect."

So, empiric knowledge, Prabhupada is referring here, he is using the word for
"jñānibhyaḥ". So, you know, one who is a jnani. That person, generally, jnana
leads to the conception that, you know, I am God. Aham Brahmasmi. So, the
conception of Brahma may be different among different people. But quite often,
the conception is that, I, it is I who am the Absolute Truth. Hmm. So, then,
that is definitely not correct. That is imperfect. Prabhu..., so, Prabhupada is
use..., is mildly critical of this. He is not saying it is useless. It is a
waste of time. It is imperfect. He uses the stronger critique, you know, in the
next. So, for "karmibhyaś". He says:

"And fruitive work without Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a waste of time."

"śrama eva hi kevalam" as the Bhagavatam says. "śrama" is, you know, labor.
K..., "kevalam". "kevalam" means only "śrama". Generally, we do labor for some
fruit. But if there is only labor. And there is no fruit. Then, that is useless.
So, that is why Prabhupada translates "śrama eva hi kevalam" as waste of time.
Fruitive activities. So, now, after describing this, you know, giving this
endorsement to the path of yoga. Now, yoga, there may be yoga which involves
different conceptions. Some yogis are impersonalists. Some yogis are
personalists. You know. So, different yogis may have different conceptions. So,
is Kri..., you know, Krishna giving a blanket endorsement for yoga in general?
No. He recommends yoga. But then, what He is implying by yoga to understand
that, we have to look at the next verse. Hmm. There are many yoga teachers. Who
actually when they want to prove that Bhagavad Gita recommends yoga. Endorses
yoga. Glorifies yoga. They could, Bhagavad Gita, and they quote only 6.46. They
do not quote 6.47. 6.47 says, they say, yoga is the best path. Why? Krishna says
that. Better than tapasvi is a yogi. Better than a jnana is a yogi. Better than
a karmi is a yogi. So, therefore, yoga is the best path. And we should all
follow yoga. So, that is what they say. But actually, Krishna says, what kind of
yogi one should be? And then, if we look at the next verse, it was clear that
Krishna is referring to a bhakti-yoga, bhakti-yogi. So, this is an example of
quoting out of context. Krishna is definitely recommending yoga. But we, if we
look at what He is recommending in the context. Then, He is not just
recommending a yoga, as a sadhana process centered on ashtanga-yoga. He is using
a few, yoga as a c..., method of connection. And that connection should be with
the personal Absolute Truth. That is what will become clear in the next verse.
So, that is 6.47. This is one of almost oft-quoted verses from the Gita by Srila
Prabhupada. And, you know, you know, especially, whenever Prabhupada would ask
any question about yoga, then Prabhupada would take, quote this verse to an...,
and a, underscore the point. That yoga should culminate in bhakti. In Bhagavan.
So, 6.47:

        yoginām api sarveṣāṁ
        mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā
        śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ
        sa me yukta-tamo mataḥ

So, "yoginām api sarveṣāṁ". Among all kinds of yogi. "mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā".
That "āntar-ātmanā". Within oneself. Within oneself. What should we?
"mad-gaten". One thinks about Me. Makes me the "gate". Hmm. Makes one, Me, the
goal. "śraddhāvān". With faith. What does one do with faith? "bhajate yo māṁ".
One who worships. "sa me yukta-tamo mataḥ". Such a person is the most intimately
united with me. "yukta-tamaḥ". So, there are many significant words in this. Let
us move from downward. There is "yukta-tamaḥ". It, so, generally, you know,
there are degrees of endorsement. So, there can be good. There can be better.
And there is our best. So, you know, best is the highest endorsement. It is
superlative. Good. Better. Best. So, similarly, in sanskrit, there are
superlatives. "yukta". "yukta" is good. It is a good, well-situated.
Well-connected. Krishna has used the word r..., repeatedly in the Bhagavad
Gita. In this chapter, itself, as well as elsewhere. In this chapter itself,
such a person is called yogi. Krishna has used twice. Once, He has used in 6.8.
And again, He has used in 6.18. So, let us look at these two uses to understand.
When Krishna says something is good. And that something is, He says, it is good.
Better. And best. So, if you have no frame of reference, something is good. You
know. That is very nice. He says, it is good. But then, when Krishna says, oh,
this is the best. Somebody says, this is the best. Oh. That means. Ok. This is
good. But this is the best. So, we will look at what Krishna has called "yukta".
And then, we will once, he look, what he has called as "yukta-tamaḥ". So, in
sanskrit, there is, "yukta" is like good. "yukta-taraḥ" is better. And
"yukta-tamaḥ" is like the best. So, the word yukta has been used many times in
the Bhagavad Gita. But this is called as "yukta". Such a person is "yukta".
That, in that specific way. In this particular chapter. Let us look at the
places where it is used. So, 6.8 is:

        jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā
        kūṭa-stho vijitendriyaḥ
        yukta ity ucyate yogī
        sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ

So, wha..., r..., here, Krishna is talking about who is "yukta"? One who is
detached. One who is disconnected from material things. That person has
knowledge. That person has realisation. And because of knowledge and
realisation, that person is satisfied. "tṛptātmā". And because that person is
"tṛptātmā".

        jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā
        kūṭa-stho ...

Is well-situated. Highly-situated. High above the material, you know, things.
And "vijitendriyaḥ". That person has conquered the senses. And such a person is
"yukta ity ucyate yogī". Such a person is called "yukta". And then, what is the
nature of the "yukta" person? "sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ". Such a person is, sees
everything material equally. Whether it be stones. Or pebbles. Or gold. Such
person sees all of them equally. You know. And then, in the next time, when He
uses the word "yukta". Now, there are many places He is using "yukta". We are
just looking in this chapter. Earlier, also, Krishna has used "yukta" in 5.24,
also. 5.24, there, also, He says, one who controls material desires. You know.
You know. A:

        śaknotīhaiva yaḥ soḍhuṁ
        prāk śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt

This is 5.23, actually. You know.

        prāk śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt
        kāma-krodhodbhavaṁ vegaṁ
        sa yuktaḥ sa sukhī naraḥ

So, one who can tolerate the forces of desire and anger. Such a person is
"yuktaḥ". Well-situated. Now, then, you know, in this chapter, also, He uses:

        yadā viniyataṁ cittam
        ātmany evāvatiṣṭhate
        nispṛhaḥ sarva-kāmebhyo
        yukta ity ucyate tadā

So, again, the point is negative. Negative means the point is disconnection. So,
when a person has, is disconnected. "yadā viniyataṁ cittam". When one has
reached, controlled one's consciousness, one's mind. "ātmany evāvatiṣṭhate".
Fixed it on the self. "nispṛhaḥ sarva-kāmebhyo". One is free from all desires.
Then, "yukta ity ucyate tadā". Such a person is "yukta". Well-situated. So,
Krishna has used the word "yukta" over there. Now, let us see where he has used
"yukta-tamaḥ". So, here, He is using the word "yukta-tamaḥ". That means that was
good. But this is the best. So, disconnection from matter is good. Krishna
recommends that. Such a person is well-situated. At least, the person will not
become more entangled. But connection with the Absolute Truth is best. So, that
is good. But this is the best. "yukta-tamaḥ". "sa me yukta-tamo mataḥ". Such a
person is best among all liv..., b..., well-connected persons. So, what is the,
what is it that makes it best? Krishna has not talking here in terms of
disconnection. He is talking in terms of connection. Not in terms of
disconnection with matter. But in terms of connection with him. "yoginām". What
is He saying? Among all the kinds of yogis. So, those who are disconnected from
matter, they are "yukta". But among all such yogis:

        yoginām api sarveṣāṁ
        mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

They live in Me. "mad-gate". So, Prabhupada interestingly, the transla..., word
to word translation, "mat-gatena", he says, abiding in Me. And always thinking
of Me. So, abide means to live in Me. You know, know. To live in harmony with
Him. So, by thinking of Krishna, we will live in Krishna.
"mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā". Within oneself. You know. "śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ".
So, with faith, one worships the Supreme Lord. "bhajate". One engages in
transcendental service to the Lord. Prabhupada translates "bhajate" as over
here. So, now, you know, Krishna is there in the heart of everyone. But, you
know, there can be many f..., a levels of understanding. At the faithless level,
one may think, oh, I do not know whether Krishna exists in the heart. At an...,
another level, one may say. Yes, Krishna exists in the heart. But Krishna is
just a conception. That means, yes, it is good to think about God. But
ultimately, one has to go beyond God. So, Prabhupada wi..., you know, sees with
a facade. And they say that, maya..., mayavadis are also atheistic. Because they
ultimately want to reject God. The atheists reject God by saying God does not
exist. The mayavadis also reject God by saying that God does not exist. Because
we have to go beyond God to a higher reality. So, they say God is just a
transitional reality. Not an ultimate reality. So, they may c..., say, claim
themselves to be, we are not atheistic. We are transtheistic. Their idea is we
go beyond belief and God. Well. Whatever the terminology. But the point is, they
are rejecting the personal God. And Krishna is saying that sort of conception is
not proper "śraddhāvān". A person should be faithful. And what should be the
faith? Yes. The Lord who is s..., you know, conceiving in the heart. That is the
ultimate truth. That is the object of my service. And worship. And surrender.
And devotion. So, "bhajate". With faith, one worships. So, the yogis, you know,
the many peo..., yogis or impersonalists, they say, yes, we have to conceive of
the impersonal, conceive of the personal Vishnu in the heart. But then, after
that, we have to go beyond. No. There is no going beyond. Krishna is saying that
one who con..., thinks about Me is the highest. "mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā". One who
thinks about Me is the high..., "śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ". One who worships
Me. Such a person is the highest. "sa me yukta-tamo mataḥ". Now, Srila
Prabhupada's purport has many sections. So, Prabhupada initially focuses on the
third. "bhajate". So, Prabhupada says "bhajate" does not just mean worship.
"bhajate" means service. So, we can worship many people. But we have to serve
the Absolute Truth. And he use, connects this word, "bhajate", with another
verse from the Bhagavatam. In the Eleventh Canto. 11.5.3. So:

        ya eṣāṁ puruṣaṁ sākṣād
        ātma-prabhavam īśvaram
        na bhajanty avajānanti
        sthānād bhraṣṭāḥ patanty adhaḥ

So, "ya eṣāṁ puruṣaṁ sākṣād". So, the, this is the inwar..., glorification of the
Supreme Lord. And this is the Absolute Truth. "puruṣaṁ sākṣād". He is the
original person. Prabhupada translates it primeval Lord. "ātma-prabhavam
īśvaram". So, He is the, He is the controller. He is the "īśvaram". And He is
"ātma-prabhavam". "ātma-prabhavam" means the source of all living beings. So, if
one does not worship such a person. "na bhajanty". One does not worship. Then,
what does one do? Defies. Because of ignorance. Not just ignorance. But
misunderstanding. "avajānanti". So, one misunderstands. One defies the Supreme
Lord. And then, what happens? "sthānād bhraṣṭāḥ". "sthānād bhraṣṭāḥ" means, you
know, to fall away. So, "yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ" was a word which was used in this
chapter, also. One who is deviated from the path of yoga. One who falls from the
path of yoga. One who becomes corrupted. So, "sthānād bhraṣṭāḥ" means one who
becomes corrupted. And falls away. "patanty adhaḥ". "patanty adhaḥ" means one
falls down. So, now, will Prabhupada translate. And certainly fall down. So,
"bhajanty" refers to the, you know, worship. Prabhupada says. Not just worship.
That is, that "bhajanty" refers to worship as what common people think. But
"bhajanty" refers to service. So, one can worship some devata. One may choose
not to worship some devata. That is up to a person. But when we understand that
we are intrinsically connected with the Supreme Lord. And we are forever meant
for love and service. So, if you do not love and serve the Supreme Lord. Then,
we fall away from our spiritual possession. And we fall back to the material
world of temptations. And then, Prabhupada explains how ultimately, all yogas
are meant to culminate in bhakti-yoga. So, here, Prabhupada is using the word
yoga in the sense of in a process. If there is jnana-yoga. There is
ashtanga-yoga. See, these are all if we imagine a, hmm, ladder. Or a staircase
which goes to multiple stores, you know, storeys. So, first storey. Second
tore..., storey. Third storey. Fourth storey. Like that, there are multiple
storeys in the stair..., staircase. So, the topmost storey, topmost floor is the
place where one wants to go. So, that topmost level of realisation, the Bhagavan
realisation. And now, to just, you know, enhance this metaphor, consider that
there is, there is a staircase. You know. Sometimes, there are stairs,
staircases which do not go all the way up. So, imagine, there are, say, there
are, you know, four levels. There are four storeys from the ground storey
onwards. From floo..., first floor. Second floor. Third floor. Fourth floor.
Now, there is one staircase. Which goes only to the first floor. The second
staircase goes only to the second floor. So, third staircase goes only to the
third floor. Hmm. And there is one staircase which goes to the fourth floor. So,
now, the staircase, which, so, the, now, the first floor, we could say like
svarga. Then, there is Brahman. Then, there is Paramatma. And there is Bhagavan.
So, ka..., the process which, staircase of karma-kanda. That will take only to
svarga. The staircase of jnana will take one to Brahman. The staircase of yoga
will take one to Paramatma. And the staircase of bhakti, alone, will take one to
Bhagavan. So, the building itself has multiple st..., levels, store, you know,
storeys. Multiple floors. And one has to go to the highest storey.

So, Prabhupada says, what is ashtanga-yoga? Actually, that is yo..., ultimately,
there is only one goal. That is to go up. So, that is what? To go up. That is
the only goal. And, you know, one wan..., ultimately, wants to get to the
topmost level. Because that is the, that is where we will get the topmost
fulfillment. But to get there to the topmost level, one has to go in different
ways. And what does different way mean? Actually, those who take a staircase,
which takes only to the first floor. Then, what happens? It is not that they
are permanently trapped over there. You know. These floors are connected. And
they can find out. Where is the other staircase which will take me to the fourth
floor? And then, they will reach the fourth floor. So, when we talk about, you
know, a, different yogas, we can talk about them in two different ways. One way
is that, these other yogas, you know, are themselves independent path which
takes us to particular destinations. And also, the other understanding is they
are assistant paths. Which can help one ultimately to reach the highest
destination. If one has bhakti element within oneself. You know. If one
eventually takes to the bhakti path. You know. Not just has bhakti elements. One
takes to the bhakti path. Now, when I say, the view, other yogas are
independent. They are not entirely independent. We will look in the later
chapters. Especially, in the Ninth Chapter. How other yogas also need to have
bhakti element within them to be successful. That will come repeatedly. In the
Eighth Chapter, it will come. But the point is that here, that means we can look
at these pa..., these yo..., paths as two different ways. That as separate
staircase. Which takes to a particular level. But ultimately, one wants to go to
the fourth floor. So, if one wants to go to the fourth floor. Then, it is best
to take the staircase which takes one directly to the fourth floor. You know. If
one takes a staircase which just takes one to the first floor. And goes up.
Looks around. Oh. I reached here. I came here. Let me see. Oh, this is svarga.
And afterwards, one comes back down. Again down the staircase. One thing, I went
to svarga. I came back. No. That is not the goal. There is something higher than
svarga. So, you know, Prabhupada says over here in the purport. Now, let, this
example, we can understand. You know:

"Yoga actually means bhakti-yoga; all other yogas are progressions toward the
destination of bhakti-yoga. From the beginning of karma-yoga to the end of
bhakti-yoga is a long way to self-realization."

It is like climbing up these multistorey building. So, now, let us, what
Prabhupada says, let us try to understand this with a slide over here. So,
bhakti-yoga is the most complete yoga. Why? It involves action. Introspection.
And meditation. Which are the limbs of the other yogas. So, action in
karma-yoga. "karma-yogi" is going to do action. And that is a positive aspect of
karma-yoga. Then, there is introspection. Introspection means thinking within.
And, you know, speculation, contemplation, all that is there. So, to try to
s..., you know, understand what is the Absolute Truth. That is jnana-yoga. And
meditation, you know, is more a directed med..., directed, you know, thinking
which tries to go towards the Absolute Truth. That is also there. So, now,
actually, you know, you know, bhakti-yoga is the highest. Because all these
three are included within bhakti-yoga. There is action. There is introspection.
And there is meditation. And beyond that, ultimately, all are faculties. Follow
the heart. Whatever we want to do, ultimately. If our heart is in something,
everything else comes in. You know. When we love some, you know, something or
someone. Naturally, we physically render service to that person. We mentally
think about that person. We intellectually, you know, connect with that object
of love. So, you know, so, the heart, the body, the mind, intelligence,
everything follows the heart. So, if the heart is involved, then all other
beings are ultimately involved. Because, you know, the heart is the ru...,
governing faculty for us. So, for all of us. You know. Even people who are
intellectuals. They are primarily head-driven. They also have a heart. And
actually, when their, their heart may not be very activa..., active regularly.
That means, they may not be too emotional. Normally speaking. But when they do,
they become emotional. You know. They had emotions to take control of their
lives. And certainly, when material emotions take control, that is undesirable.
But spiritual emotions taking control is supremely desirable. So, that is why
our ultimate goal is to connect with Krishna. And, you know, everything follows
the heart. So, that is how bhakti-yoga, because it activates the heart. In
bhakti-yoga, we connect with our heart towards Krishna. That is why it is the
topmost of all yogas.

So, in this way, Prabhupada explains in the purport that how, you know, now, in
the first time in the Bhagavad Gita, he will talk about how Krishna is
all-beautiful. So, the ideal yogi. "mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā". Prabhupada explain.
What does that mean?

"The ideal yogī concentrates his attention on Kṛṣṇa, who is called
Śyāmasundara,"

So, basically, Prabhupada is giving the description of, from "Brahma Saṁhitā"
over here. With some other things added. And then, the "brahma-jyotir" comes
from Him. And then, He incarnates in various incarnations. He is known as mo...:

"son of mother Yaśodā, and He is known as Kṛṣṇa, Govinda and Vāsudeva."

Hmm, m..., so, then Prabhupada talks about how can one contemplate like this?
Through the process of bhakti. So, here records the famous verse from the
"Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad", 6.23.

        yasya deve parā bhaktir
        yathā deve tathā gurau
        tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ
        prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

So, those who have implicit faith in the spiritual master. "yasya deve parā
bhaktir". So, "yathā deve tathā gurau". So, one has "parā bhaktir" for the
"deve". And along with that, one has "bhakt...", similarly for the guru.
"tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ". M..., m..., "hy arthāḥ". "arthāḥ" of all this.
"kathitā". Will be. "prakāśante". Will be illumined. Will be revealed. Hmm.
"mahātmanaḥ". So, interestingly, here, those who have faith, even if they are
seekers. And they are just trying for understanding, they are referred to as
"mahātma" in this verse. So, you know, Prabhupada is explaining here, you know,
about the point of "śraddhā". So, he is taking systematically. First, he talked
about the, you know, the point of "bhajate". Then, he talked about "mad-gate".
You know. Who is the person who we have to meditate on? And now, he is talking
about "śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ". "śraddhā". "dhā" means faith. So, the faith
that, actually, you know, by the mercy of Krishna. And by the mercy of guru,
"prakāśante mahātmanaḥ". Things would be revealed to us. And then, Prabhupada
quotes the f..., a famous definition of bhakti from the "Gopāla-tāpanī
Upaniṣad". Now, there are eleven principle Upanishads. And there are many other
Upanishads which are, among the 108 Upanishads which are also important. So,
among, among those important Upanishad which especially talks about the worship
of Gopāla is called as "Gopāla-tāpanī". And it is frequently quoted by our
acharyas. So, let us see what the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad" says. It gives a
definition of bhakti, also.

        Bhaktir asya bhajanaṁ tad ihāmutropādhi-nairāsyenāmuṣmin manaḥ-kalpanam, etad eva naiṣkarmyam.

So, "Bhaktir asya bhajanaṁ". So, bhakti means devotional service. And "ihā". And
"āmutra". "ā..." c..., "ihā" and "āmutra", this f..., usage, ver..., came in
the, you know, Bhagavad Gita, also. In 6.40. When Krishna assured Arjuna that
m...:

        pārtha naiveha nāmutra
        vināśas tasya vidyate

Either in this world. Or in the next world. "iha". "amutra". That in this or the
next world, the transcendentalist will not meet to a disaster. So, "Bhaktir asya
bhajanaṁ". We worship the Supreme Lord. We serve the Supreme Lord. "tad
ihāmutro". It means one does not have, you know, "nairāsya". One has, one does
not have desires for gaining either in this or in the next world. In this life
or the next life. And then, "manaḥ-kalpanam, etad eva naiṣkarmyam". So, we
should absorb the mind in Krishna without any desire for fruitive activities.
That is actually "naiṣkarmyam". That is actually bhakti. So, this is the
perfection. Now, after describing this, you know, very categorial way. So, this
is the first time in where, it categorical, emphatic way, Krishna has said that
connecting with Him is the highest truth. You know. Ok. He has talked about
fixing the mind earlier on Him. But earlier, when He had talked about it, it was
more of, you know, for, in 2.61, He talked about fixing the mind on Him so that
one could become sense-controlled. You know. So, like that, He has talked about
connecting with Him on several occasions. Where all has He talked? As I said,
m..., it, 2.61 was:

        tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya
        yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

"yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ". So, that is very helpful. That somebody who wants to
control the s..., senses. "yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ". So, that person should fix
the mind on Me. But here, also, Krishna has not revealed Himself as the ultimate
truth to meditate on. Has He? Ok. Those who want to sense, con..., sense
control, they can fix their mind on Me. Then, they will be able to control the
senses. But, you know, so, like that, He has referred again in 3.30, you know,
that He has said that we should offer the fruits of the work to Me. There, also.
Yes. It is the goal of the fruits of work. But again further, you know, nothing
clearly has been mentioned. Then, in fourth chapter, also, Krishna says, you
should have faith in me. Those who do not, and faith in Me and My words. And He
has talked about how in four point, four, He Krishna talks about His position
several times. But we are talking now here about fixing the mind on Krishna. So,
in 4.9, He says that one should understand My work.

        janma karma ca me divyam

Then, that person should attain liberation. And then, for that:

        man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ

He says in 4.10. Fix the mind on Me. And then, many in the past have become
liberated. So, the yo..., yogi can also become liberated. And 4.35, Krishna says
that, you know, those staff, 4.34:

        tad viddhi praṇipātena
        paripraśnena sevayā

That, you know, surrender to the guru. And then, what is the result of
surrendering to the guru? In 4.35, Krishna says that, such all, such person sees
all living beings to be situated in Me.

        yaj jñātvā na punar moham
        evaṁ yāsyasi pāṇḍava
        yena bhūtāny aśeṣāṇi
        drakṣyasy ātmany atho mayi

We will see all living beings as spiritual, "ātmany" and "atho mayiy" in Me. So,
He is talking about the relationship of all living beings with Him. Then, in
Fifth Chapter, He has also said that, actually, there is only one reference to
"māṁ" in the Fifth Chapter. Where f..., 5.29, He says that everything should be
offered to Me. I am the ultimate:

        bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ
        sarva-loka-maheśvaram
        suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati

I am the "bhoktā" of everything. So, in this way, Krishna has talked repeatedly
in the previous chapters. But never as emphatically. He is talking about it in
the Sixth Chapter, also. We discussed where all Krishna talks about "māṁ". He
mentions it in 6.14-15. We discussed. We have discussed this. I will, do not
repeat that. "mat-saṁ...", first is "yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ". And "mat-saṁsthām
adhigacchati". Then, again, He talks about "māṁ" in 6.30, 31, 32. Where He
s...:

        yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra

And bha...:

        sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ yo māṁ
        bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥ

And 6.30-31, He talks about "māṁ". So, the "māṁ" has come again and again. But
it has never come as emphatically as it is coming here. Here, at the end of the
chapter, Krishna is telling, one who thinks about Me. One who abides in Me with
faith. Serving Me.

        śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ
        sa me yukta-tamo mataḥ

Such a person is most intimately connected with Me. So, th..., if we look at the
flow of the chapters. So, what is happening in the first Six Chapters? Krishna
is recommending to Arjuna something far, you know, more subtle, sophisticated,
sublime, satisfying, you know, empowering than just the dialectic. Dialectic
means choice. Ok. You know. Debate. Two opposites in a debate. Arjuna's
dialectic was action or renunciation? So, either I, should I act? Or should I
renounce? That was the only thing that Arjuna was thinking about. But Krishna
has revealed something much more subtle. He said, yes, you know, do not think of
same thing as supreme, as action and renunciation. Actually, action can be, what
Arjuna thought as two options, Krishna has explained that, actually, action and
renunciation are not just two options. He said, within action, also, there can
be variety. There can be renunciation in action. So, what was two? Krishna
brings a third one which integrates the two. There can be, instead of action or
renunciation, you can have action with renunciation. Or renunciation in action.
And that has been the overall tenor. And the connection with Krishna has been
just talked about briefly. But now, in this verse, and from here, we will start
with Seven Chapter. The focus will become much more on "māṁ". So, now, it is not
just renunciation in action. From now onwards, it will be devotion in action.
That means, one performs the action with devotion internal. Not just
renunciation ex..., renunciation. You know. Just, I am not connected with the
world. I am, still, I will act. Yes. I am not connected with the world. But I
want to be connected with Krishna. And the more I am connected with Krishna, the
more I will make spiritual advancement. So, spiritual advancement will not be in
the, in the bhakti section. Which is, start from 7.1. Spiritual advancement is
judged not by how much one is disconnected from the world. But by how much one
is connected with Krishna. So, we will see from the Seventh Chapter itself a new
mood develops in, you know, the Bhagavad Gita. The mood is, till now, it has
been of disconnection. Rejection. Detachment. But now, from 7.1 onwards, it will
be connection. Attachment. Devotion. And this inaugurates, so si..., the first
six chapters are actually setting the scene for the heart of the Bhagavad Gita.
That is Seven Chapter to Ch.., Chapter Seven to Twelwe. Chapter Seven to Twelwe
are the chapters talking about bhakti. And these chapters will reveal, will put
the spotlight on Krishna. So, the Bhagavad Gita's flow is such that Arjuna's
spotlight is on the body. Krishna moves the spotlight from the body to the soul
in the Second Chapter onwards. And then, the spotlight, focus on the soul. Ok.
How can the soul be liberated? That is by karma-yoga. Not just by simple
renunciation. But by sublime action. And then, you know, while focusing on the
atma, now, Krishna moves the spotlight further from the atma to the Paramatma.
And that Paramatma is revealed to be Krishna Himself. So, in this way, the flow
of thought of the Bhagavad Gita will move on. So, let us look at the Seventh
Chapter now. So, in the Seventh Chapter, let us look at the overview of the
Seventh Chapter.

There are two broad section in Seventh Chapter. First is know Krishna in full.
That is from verses 1 to 12. And then, from 13 to 25, the second section talks
about surrender to Krishna. And in that, now, which of these two sections? There
are further subdivisions which we can have. So, in analy..., you know, in know
Krishna full, you know, first is 1 to 3 is g..., the glory of knowledge about
Krishna. Then, 4 to 7, what does knowledge of Krishna mean? It means that
Krishna is the source of everything, material and spiritual. And then, 8 to 12
talks about how Krishna pervades everything. Krishna does not just exist. But he
pervades everything. And then, you know, you know, 13 to 25 talks about
surrender to Krishna. So, in 13 to 25, in the surrender to Krishna, first, 13 to
14 is why surrender? Fif..., now, 15 is one verse which talk, just refers to
those who do not surrender. 16 talks about those who do surrender. Then, 20 to
25 talks about those who surrender to krishnetara. Krishnetara means those who
surrender things, something other than Krishna. So, actually, there are 30 verses
in this chapter. So, there are three sections. So, third section does not have
any divisions directly. Third section is from 26 to 30. Which talks about how
the soul gets liberated by knowledge about Krishna. So, this chapter talks
about, shifts the spotlight to knowledge about Krishna. And as the chapter is
called as "Knowledge of the Absolute". So, there will be Ten Chapter which will
called as "The Opulence of the Absolute". Where the focus will be on the vibhuti
of Krishna. But here, the focus is on general knowledge about Krishna. So, there
is, of course, general and specific knowledge. But the focus is only about
Krishna. So, first, you know, first, we get knowledge about Krishna. Then,
knowledge should not just remain theoretical. Knowledge should be
transformational. So, the transformation is surrender to Krishna. That is
described in second section. And then, how the transformation ultimately leads
to liberation. That is discussed in third section. So, in this way, the second
ch..., the Seven Chapter of Bhagavad Gita, you know, shows how one can attain
the perfection which yoga promises. So, the connection between the Six and the
Seven Chapter is that in the Sixth Chapter, Krishna has said that such a yogi
i..., "mayi vartate". He has talked about, you know, such a per..., yogi will
always live in Me. Such a yogi will always be liberated. You know.

        sarvathā vartamāno ’pi
        sa yogī mayi vartate

He talked about it in 6.31. You know. That, you always stay in Me. So, He has
talked about liberation, you know, in the Sixth Chapter. Now, Krishna will give
another process of liberation based on knowledge about Him. One does not have to
go through the laborious process of ashtanga-yoga. Going to the forest. And
renouncing everything. Krishna will offer an alternative process over here. So,
that alternative process is described in, you know, the Seventh Chapter.
Or starting from the Seventh Chapter. It is indicated. It will be described
further in detail in Ninth Chapter. Again in Twelwe Chapter. Repeatedly, it will
be described. You know. But here, the point is, Krishna has a particular thought
flow going on. And He is now giving Arjuna an alternative. The alternative is
that not just, you know, renunciation in action. But devotion in action. So, let
us look at the 7.1. This is the among the verses, on which Srila Prabhupada gave
the maximum classes. 7.1 in the Bhagavad Gita.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha
        yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ
        asaṁśayaṁ samagraṁ māṁ
        yathā jñāsyasi tac chṛṇu

So, "mayy āsakta-manāḥ". So, with mind attached to me. Oh, "pārtha". "yogaṁ
yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ". Engage in yoga. Taking shelter of Me. "asaṁśayaṁ samagraṁ
māṁ". You will become free from all doubt. "asaṁśayaṁ samagraṁ māṁ". "jñāsyasi".
Then, you will know Me completely. And how all that will happen? "chṛṇu". Hear.
So, now, there, we can have an alternative way of looking at this verse. This
verse is a direct call for hear. By hearing, one will attain glory. So, hearing
is important. But how is hearing important? You know. Hearing is the means by
which Krishna will tell the, how this would work. And hearing is also the means
by which we will move along. See, hearing tells us the path. But hearing is also
the path. That is interesting. See, hearing shows the path. And hearing is the
path. What is the difference between the two? You know. By hearing, you come to
know. Ok. How will I make spiritual advancement. How will I move closer to
Krishna. That is true. But along with that, hearing is the path, also. Why?
Because hearing itself increases our attraction to Krishna. "chṛṇu". By hearing,
you know, you know, it is one of the limbs of bhakti.

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
        smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

Prahlāda Mahārāja described in nine limbs of bhakti. And he says, hearing is one
of them. And Prabhupada would often say that everything begins with hearing. So,
hearing sh..., shows the path. And hearing is the path. Whether path is not the
only path. There are nine limbs of devotional service. But hearing is a very
important limbs. So, you know, you know, when we want to look at hearing as the,
is the path. So, the, is, Krishna is telling here, hea..., just hear about how
all this will happen. "tac chṛṇu". Hear about how you will come to know Me in
truth. You will become free from doubt. Your mind will become attached to Me.
Hear about it. That, He will describe in the Seventh Chapter. So, that is
hearing shows the path. But we want to look at hearing is the path. We can look
at the flow of this verse in a different way. And that flow will connect it with
the previous chapter. So, in the previous chapter, Krishna has said that the
yogi who always thinks about Me is the topmost yogi. So, now, in this chapter,
Krishna will say, now, if one is always thinking about Krishna, one has, you
know, naturally has to be attached to Krishna. You know. We cannot think about
something constantly unless we have an affection for that. So, similarly,
Krishna is telling over here that if you want to become attached to Me, what is
the process? This is the process. I will tell you. So, let us look at this
process. So, we, what we are doing is, from the First Chapter to Sixth Chapter,
there has been a flow which is going up. To "mayy āsakta-manāḥ". Now, how, you
know, to "m...", "mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā". Always thinking about Me. "śraddhāvān
bhajate yo māṁ". So, now, but that process involve karma-yoga. Then, you know,
ashtanga-yoga. Then, detachment. And then, attachment to Krishna. Com...,
detachment in terms of complete indifference to material reality. And attachment
to spiritual reality. Now, Krishna will describe another process to reach the
same ladder. So, we often talk about the example of a staircase and an elevator.
"bhaki-yoga" is like the elevator. And the other yogi processes are like the
staircase. That is true. So, here, we will see how Krishna will not outline the,
you know, elevator. So, the goal, which is point, glorified in the Sixth Chapter
at the end is:

        mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā
        śraddhāvān bhajate ...

That thinking of oneself within the Lor..., within one's, you know, the Lord,
within one's heart. Within oneself. And faithfully, and diligently serving that
Lord. So, that is centered on attachment. So, how one will get attachment? Let
us look at this f..., s..., verse from a different perspective. So, "mayy
āsakta-manāḥ" is the goal. So, let us look at the verse from bottom up. So,
shrnu. By hearing, what will happen? We keep hearing reguarly, then jnasyasi
samagram. We will know Krishna properly. We will know Krishna completely.
Samagram. And when we know Krishna properly, then what? Asamshayam. We will
become free from doubts. See, the more our knowledge increases, our doubts
decrease. They get clarified. They get removed. They get purified. Ashrayah. And
when we understand, actually, Krishna is "suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ". Krishna is
my greatest well-wisher. Krishna is the ultimate object of my love. Then,
naturally, what I will do is, I will take shelter of Him. I will. So, the
ashrayah. "mad-āśrayaḥ". When we take shelter of Krishna. Shelter of Krishna is
not just some abstract conception. It is a practical application. So, that is
yogam yunjan. We practice devotional service. "yogam yunjan". And then what
happens? By the practice of devotional service, asakta-manah. Our mind will
become attached to Krishna. So, in this way, through these six stages, one will
attain perfection. Asakta-manah. One will attain perfection. That is what
Krishna is talking about over here. Hmm. Hmm. So, you know, the goal is
asakta-manah. Now, let us look at this progression once again. When hearing
about Krishna, what happens? By hearing about Krishna. By hearing about Krishna,
you know, the, we get "samagraṁ". So, the more we hear, we understand. We hear
pastimes about Krishna. We hear the philosophy about Krishna. All this deepens
our understanding. So, our jnana increases. And, you know, "samagraṁ". We will
know Him in full. What does full means? Full does not mean complete in, in
the terms of knowing Krishna completely. No one can know Krishna completely. In
fact, Ninth Chap..., in the Tenth Chapter, Kri..., Arjuna will say, you know,
that:

        svayam evātmanātmānaṁ

That only You know Yourself. Nobody else knows. And actually, the Gaudiya
Vaishnavas then say that even God does not know Himself fully. Because
God's energies are expanding. So, you know, here when, we, "samagraṁ",
"jñāsyasi" means, we will know fully according to our capacity. So, we cannot
know the Absolute Truth in totality. But we can know Him full according to our
capacity. And when we know Him according to our capacity, we will become
purified by that. And what are the purifi..., impurities that are removed? That
is "asaṁśayaṁ". So, the doubts. That, now, you know, doubts can be from very
basic to complex, also. Now, d..., does God exist? Does God care for me? You
know. There can be kind of doubts. But then, you know, doubts can be, it, just,
the holy, is the holy name so powerful that it will give ultimate liberation. Is
the holy name the only way to liberation? Ultimately, in this Kali Yuga, you
know, is Krishna the highest aspect of the Absolute Truth? So, all these, if we
keep hearing, "śṛṇu". Then, "asaṁśayaṁ". The doubts will go away. You know. You
know. The acharyas have written, the, so many books. And there are so many
devotees who have studied these books. And they are all, they are, you know,
scholarship is available to us if we just seek it. Then, thus, this go away.
Then, we will have "āśrayaḥ". "śṛṇu". Know, so, when we want to learn about
Krishna, we do not want to learn about Krishna just for the sake of
entertainment. We want to learn of Kri..., about Krishna for the sake of
attainment of shelter. It is not entertainment. But it is attainment. Attainment
of what? Shelter. Now, Krishna had become our ultimate shelter. So, when the
shel..., when we get the shelter of Krishna. "āśrayaḥ". Then, "yogam yunjan". We
will wholeheartedly start practicing yoga. Which yoga? That is bhakti-yoga. That
is yoga which will lead to "āsakta-manāḥ". Which will make our mind attached to
Krishna. So, getting the mind attached to Krishna is the perfection of our
spiritual life. It is the perfection. Once, we, our mind is attracted to
Krishna, it will not get distracted to anything else. When the mind is not
distracted to anything else, we will attain, you know, constant, not just
peacefulness. But joyfulness. Because Krishna is supremely joyful. So, by
connection with Krishna, we will attain the supreme joyfulness. Let us look at
Srila Prabhupada's purport here. Now, Prabhupada explains that, Prabhupada also
points to the connection between these two.

"One should therefore begin yoga practice as directed in the last verse of the
Sixth Chapter."

What is the? What was directed over there? "mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā". Fix the mind
on the Supreme Lord. And then, he says that:

"Concentration of the mind upon Kṛṣṇa the Supreme is made possible by prescribed
devotional service in nine different forms, of which śravaṇam is the ﬁrst and
most important."

That is why Krishna is saying over here "śṛṇu". And now, Prabhupada quotes this
section of verses which we have discussed in our, you know, Isopanishad study.
How the heart becomes purified. Let us look at these briefly. You know.
This is, actually, the section, Chapter Two of the First Canto. 1.2.17-21. So,
these verses are actually the most quoted verses from the Bhagavatam by Srila
Prabhupada. You know. Any one section that Srila Prabhupada quotes the most, you
know, from the Bhagavatam. If we look at it, you know, consistently. This is
this, this, you know, 1.2 Chapter. And the verse is starting from 5 to 25
roughly. 6 to 21. 6 is "sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo". You know. So, these verses
are quoted very frequently by Srila Prabhupada. And there is a whole series of
lectures, also, he gave. That is called as the, come as the book "Dharma: The
Way of Transcendence". So, here, Krishna describes the process. How "śṛṇu". So,
now, with this verse, He is saying, from "śṛṇu", "mayy āsakta-manāḥ" will come.
So, how that will happen? That is elaborated in this sequence of verses. So, let
us look at the verses. "śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ". So, when we hear about
Krishna. Now, this is described from the perspective of Krishna. That is
"sva-kathāḥ". For Krishna, it is own "kathāḥ". So, just hearing this "kathāḥ".
And speaking this "kathāḥ" is purifying. "puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ". It is hea...,
purifying in and of itself. They are pious activities. "puṇya". But
additionally, when we hear about Krishna. "hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi". That,
that Lord, He is situated in our own hearts. "antaḥ-stho". And what does He do?
He remove..., "dhunot...", "vidhunoti". "abhadrāṇi". He washes away, cleanses
away our "abhadrā". Our impurities. And why does He do that? "suhṛt satām". He
is the well-wisher of all living beings. But He is especially the well-wisher of
those who are transcendentalists. You know. He wants the welfare of all living
beings. A doctor wants to cure all people. But if a patient is especially
cura..., you know, cooperative. A patient is diligent. Naturally, the doctor,
you know, his therapy works more. Doctor is also a person. You know. If that
person, if a co..., patient is far from being cooperative, is hostile, is
ksa..., cursing. And kicking. Not at all cooperating. Then, naturally, what
happens is, the doctor will still do the duty. So, like that, Krishna is present
in the heart of all living beings. Always. Irrespective of whether they glorify
Him. Or defy Him. But still, naturally, Krishna is a person. And those who
cooperate. And those who try to devote themselves to Him, Krishna reciprocates.
He says, they want to be, want to be helped. I will definitely help you. So, for
those, who hear about Krishna. The purification happens in two ways. Just the
sound vibration itself is purifying. But along with that, our re..., submissive
reception of the sound vibration activates the presence of Krishna within our
heart. And then, Krishna also purifies us wi..., internally. And then, what
happens?

        naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu
        nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā
        bhagavaty uttama-śloke
        bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

So, "naṣṭa-prāyeṣv". So, most of the anarthas. "prāya". "prāya" means most of
them. "abhadreṣu". They get destroyed. "naṣṭa". By, how? "nityaṁ
bhāgavata-sevayā". By serving the "bhāgavata". So, who is the "bhāgavata" over
here? It is the book "bhāgavata". But essentially, it also the person
"bhāgavata". So, both, through both of them, we get to hear Krishna "kathāḥ".
So, the same process is being cont..., continued. So, first, it has been talking
about by hearing, Krishna cleanses our heart. But then, this verse goes on
further.

        bhagavaty uttama-śloke
        bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

So, what happens after that is, that Lord who is "uttama-śloke". For Him, bhakti
awakens in our heart. So, first, He talks about we become detached from the
negative. And we become attached to the positive. "bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī".
So, what is required for "naiṣṭhikī", "bhaktir"? Why don't we have "naiṣṭhikī",
"bhaktir" right now? "naiṣṭhikī" means steady. Unshakeable. So, that, does, that,
we do not have because the modes are interfering with our connection with
Krishna. So, what happens, by the practice of bhakti steadily, is:

        tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ
        kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye
        ceta etair anāviddhaṁ
        sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati

So, "rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ". So, because of the l..., modes of passion, ignorance,
there is "kāma" and "lobhā". They go away. "anāviddhaṁ". They become, we become
freed from them. And we become situated in sattva. And what is the way we
situate in sattva? "prasīdati". The mood of goodness itself makes us joyful. In
the 14th Chapter, we will see that, one of the characteristics of mudha is,
goodness is "sukhem".

        sattvaṁ sukhe sañjayati

So, you know, you know, when there are no longer the pulls of the lower modes.
Then, when we are situated in sukha. We can move forward steadily. "sattvaṁ
sukhe prasīdati". "sthitaṁ sukhe prasī...", "sattve prasīdati". So, we become
sit..., joyfully situated in goodness. And actually, you know, resentful
devotional service does not lead to much spiritual advancement. Joyful
devotional service leads to spiritual advancement. Resentful means, you know,
why is Krishna the enjoyer? Why only Krishna has to enjoy? I want to enjoy,
also. So, you know, that sort of devotional service, resentful. But when
devotional service, joyful, then we make rapid spiritual advancement. So, "evaṁ
prasanna-manaso". When we are engaging devotional service thus.

        evaṁ prasanna-manaso
        bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ

"bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ". By the practice of bhakti-yoga. We engage in:

        bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ
        mukta-saṅgasya jāyate

So, when, you know, with a pleasant mind, we engage in devotional service, then
the "bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ". The bhat..., the scientific knowledge about
Krishna awakens in our heart. And when that scientific knowledge about Krishna
awakens. And "mukta-saṅgasya jāyate". We become liberated from, you know, all
kinds of contamination. "mukta-saṅga". "mukta-saṅga" means, you know, any
contact with matter. So, earlier, it was described that one becomes freed from
the lower modes. But now, it is described, once we become situated in goodness.
And practice devotional service steadily. Then, steadily, then, we become free
from all contaminations. All kind of "saṅga", we will become "mukta". And then,
what happens is the most dramatic here. That is kind of, Prabhupada is using
this to "śṛṇu" and "asaṁśayaṁ". To explain these two verses, vers..., verse from
the Bhagavad Gita. This is 7.1. So:

        bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś
        chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ
        kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi
        dṛṣṭa evātmanīśvare

So, "bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś". So, all the attachments that are there in the
heart. They get cut off. "bhidyate". "bhidyate". Get cut off. The attachments
that are there in the heart. They are all what keep us bound to the material
world. But "chidyante". But when we become, understand Krishna. And we become
m..., m..., enlivened by that knowledge of Krishna, then all the attachments
fall away. And then, doubts also go away. "chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ".
"chidyante". Cut off. So, the doubts will also destroyed. And then, naturally,
when the desires and doubts go away. Then, we do not do any activity apart from
Krishna. Apart from service to Krishna. So, "kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi". Therefore,
all fruitive activity stops. And "dṛṣṭa evātmanīśvare". So, one gets the
transcendental vision. One understands and becomes attached to Krishna. So, this
is how this wonderful process of bhakti works. We will continue discussing this
in the next chapter, next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
