Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wmTnjTRZ09Q
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=lg21GVHXNU3ob6L8lMlAbUDfWt18MTU0ODQ4Nzg1N0AxNTQ4NDAxNDU3&event=video_description&v=wmTnjTRZ09Q&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_070_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_04_Text_11_to_13_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course, last
series. So, today, we will discuss the Fourth Chapter. We are concluding the
first section of the Fourth Chapter. And then, we will move on to the second
section. So, we discussed about ho..., why Krishna appears. So, at one level,
Krishna appears to give us, a, to teach dharma. And to establish order of a
real. Krishna teaches and establishes dharma. That was the first section. But
then, we discussed dharma does not mean just establishing order over here.
Dharma also means, He is setting up an order over here so that people can come
out of this material world and return back to Him. So, for that, one has to have
"tattvataḥ". Understanding of Krishna. So, now, let us move forward and look at
4.10. So, now, in 4.9, Krishna has said that the people who understand me in
truth will come back to me. Now, in this verse, after this, He explains, what
are the obstacles to understanding Him in truth. So, three obstacles, He
mentions. And Prabhupada elaborates them, profoundly in his purport. So, we
will look at those three obstacles. And then, once we become free from these
three obstacles, how we can attain the shelter of Krishna. That is what Krishna
tells.

        vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā
        man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ
        bahavo jñāna-tapasā
        pūtā mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ

So, "vīta". "vīta" means to become free from. "rāga-bhaya-krodhā". "rāga" is
attachment. "bhaya" is fear. And "krodhā" is anger, born of frustration. Anger.
So, when a person becomes free from these three things. Then, "man-mayā". That
person can fix the mind on Me. "mām upāśritāḥ". They can, that person can take
shelter of Me. So, this is the first time in the Bhagavad Gita Krishna is using
the word "āśritāḥ" for "mām", "āśritāḥ". To take shelter of Me. This will come
again and again in the Gita. But it is the first reference. "mām āś...",
"upāśritāḥ". And then, what? "bahavo jñāna-tapasā". So, Krishna is telling that
this path, which I am telling you, you know, of taking she..., fixing the mind
on Me and taking shelter of Me. Actually, many people have done that in the
past. "bahavo" is many. "jñāna-tapasā". By the austerity of knowledge. "pūtā".
They have become purified. And "mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ". They have attained my
"bhāva". They have attained divine emotion for me. "bhāva" refers to emotion.
So, they have attained transcendental love for me. So, Krishna says,
"vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā". So, the same phrase, "vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā" had come
in the Second Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. When Krishna was talking about
"sthita-prajña". You know, "sthi...", "sthita-prajña". "munir". So, He says:

        duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ
        sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ
        vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ
        sthita-dhīr munir ucyate

So, Krishna talks about that in answer to Arjuna's question about hy..., "kā
bhāṣā":

        sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā
        samādhi-sthasya keśava
        sthita-dhīḥ kiṁ prabhāṣeta

So, that, 2.54 was Arjuna's question which are four questions. 2.55 was the
answer. You know, "kā bhāṣā". What are the characteristics? And 56 and 57 were
the answer. "kiṁ prabhāṣeta". So, there, also, "vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ" was
there. So, there, Prabhupada explained, attachment, aversion and f..., you know,
"vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ", Prabhupada, person, the devotee, when the, he is
serving the Lord, he is not attached. Neither frustrated, not fearful. So, he is
courageous. So, n..., now, Prabhupada uses deeper explanation of these three
factors in this purport. So, let us look at this. So, first, Srila Prabhupada
explains "rāga". So, what he says is, when people are in "rāga". In mater...,
people are, people who are so abs..., abso..., possible:

"people who are attached to the bodily conception of life are so absorbed in
materialism that it is almost impossible for them to understand how the Supreme
can be a person."

So, here, Srila Prabhupada makes the first point is, first, he says that when we
are too materially conscious, then we think of everything in terms of matter. So,
first problem is that when we are attached to matter. We do not want to think
about G..., God, only. We think, you know, actually, I am enjoying over here. I
am happy over here. Why do I need anything else? Why do I need God at all? I am
happy. So, one does not care for God if one is very attached. The only ways in
one make care for God while one is attached is if one feels that by that God can
help me enjoy over here better. Then, only, one will care for God. But then,
that is not really caring for God. That is caring for the things of the world.
And using God as a tool to the things of this world. As Prabhupada would say,
when we ask God for bread, that shows our love for bread, not love for God. So,
like that, that "rāga" prevents us from "man-mayā". We may pray to God. But even
when we are praying to God, we are not thinking about God. We are thinking about
the things of the world which God may give us. So, this prevents us from
"upāśritāḥ". There may be some level of religion that is being practiced. But
"upāśritāḥ". Taking shelter of Krishna is not possible. And then, Prabhupada
says that "rāga-bhaya-krodhā". So, they cannot think of spiritual form. They
think, form means material form. So:

"people in general keep this same bodily idea in mind when they are informed of
the personal form of the Lord. For such materialistic men, the form of the
gigantic material manifestation is supreme."

So, they think that there is nothing beyond matter. And if there is a God at
all, then that God is, that God is transcendental. You know, that God cannot be
personal. Because they assume that form and personality are characteristic of
material realm, only. So, a, so, "vīta", so, this "rāga" creates such
attachments that do not think about God. And even they do think about God, if,
wh..., why do they think? Because the "rāga" is frustrated. They try, they
become attracted to the forms of this world. And they found those forms are
disappointing. They try to develop relationships in the world. And they found
that disappointing. So, by all this, they start feeling. There must be something
higher in life. There must be something which must be beyond this. But because
they are so averse to material things. So, what Prabhupada says is:

"because they are too materially absorbed, the conception of retaining the
personality after liberation from matter frightens them."

So, that is the, Prabhupada is explanation of, Prabhupada's explanation of
"bhaya" over here.

"When they are informed that spiritual life is also individual and personal,
they become afraid of becoming persons again, and so they naturally prefer a
kind of merging into the impersonal void."

So, here, Srila Prabhupada is making the point that when we project the material
conception on the Absolute, then we think, oh, I have to form re..., I, whenever
I try to form relationships, it leads to misunderstanding. That leads to
heartbreaks. So, if I have, have a relationship in the spiritual realm, also.
That will also lead to misunderstanding. That will also lead to heartbreaks.
Better I do not want any relationships. Let us forget it. What do I want?
Shanti. Shanti. Shanti. So, based on one's materialistic conceptions,
intellectually and emotionally, one recoils from a personal conception of the
Absolute. Intellectually, one, in one's conceptions, the form and matter are
rooted together. People cannot think, how there can be form without matter. How
there can be spiritual form. Yeah. Of, matter means form. As if, form is not
there. Then, that means, you know, if matter is there, form has to be there. And
if form is there, matter has to be there. How can the two be separated? You
know. You know. They just cannot conceive of a spiritual form. Their idea of
spirit is not just spiritual. Their idea of spirit is primarily anti-material.
So, they cannot think of spirit in its own glory. So, they think that by
negating matter, we will get spirit. So, if matter has form. Then, spirit should
be formless. So, with this conception, they cannot m..., m..., get a personal
understanding. And they remain fearful of the personal aspect. So, that is why
they cannot do "man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ". Gi..., they cannot think of Krishna and
take shelter of Krishna. Because of their fear of the personal co..., conception
of relationshps in the spiritual realm. And then, after that, there is "krodhā".
So, Prabhupada explains. What is "krodhā"?

"Being embarrassed by so many theories and by contradictions of various types of
philosophical speculation, they become disgusted or angry and foolishly conclude
that there is no supreme cause and that everything is ultimately void."

They are ultimately void. So, here, "krodhā" refers not just to anger. Here,
"krodhā" refers to something deeper. It refers to the anger which comes from
frustration. When one cannot understand what is the ultimate truth of life.
These people said this is right. These people said this is right. Some people
say that God is like this. Some people say God is like that. Some people say God
is like that. Wha..., what is the truth? Then, I find it out. I cannot find it
out. You know, everybody present their philsophy very persuasively. And
everybody seems to be right. So, what, how do I find what is right? Better do
not get into this business, only. Better forget the whole thing. And they say,
what is Absolute Truth? Ultimately, everything is a void. So, they just do not
care that "krodhā" is a result of the, of scepticism. So, when one is
excessively sceptical. And one is not ready to make a commitment, find out what
is the truth. Then, one falls prey to this "krodhā". So, when Prabhupada was
asked about this "kro...", scepticism, Prabhupada says, scepticism means
rascalism. Why? He said just because you cannot find the truth. That does not
mean nobody can find the truth. That does not mean that nobody i..., i..., is a
capable of finding the truth. Prabhupada says that, yes, you know, just like a
fox, when it sees the grapes. And it sees the grapes are too far away. So, it
says, sour grapes. So, those grapes are sour. So, like that, we cannot
understand the truths. So, we say there is no truth, only. So, how do we know
what is the truth? See, there is one truth. There are many paths to the truth.
And it is not necessary that there is such a way. One think right and
everything has to be wrong. There is, you know, truth is like pyramid. So,
progress only, we get clearer and clearer understanding as we move forwards. But
essentially, there is inner transformation that happens. We become purified. We
start developing attraction to Krishna. So, in that way, there is a process by
which we can verify. You know, for example, if somebody says that, oh, there are
so many different therapies. There are naturo..., naturopathy. There is, you
know, ayurveda. There is allopathy. There is homeopathy. There is so many. There
are so many pathies like that. And different doctors give entirely different
explanations of, you know, what is the disease. And how it can be cured. What
should I do? Better do not get into this medicine business, only. Because just,
I do not, I will not go to any doctor. Because there is no way I can find out
what is right. So, we, if somebody thinks like this, then who is the loser? It
is that person who is the loser. That person continues to stay diseased. And
that person continues to stay suffering in material existence. So, that per...,
in a diseased condition. Similarly, just there are different, you know,
spiritual paths. You know, but there is an objective criteria. They are all
meant ultimately to heal. And the way we understand whether a path is right or
not, we use our intelligence to analyse. But then, we put, invest our
consciousness. If we get purified, we get spiritually healed. Then, we
understand this medicine works. So, like that, if we experience benefit from our
spiritual practice, then we should practice it. And that is how we move forward
in our spiritual life by practicing. Now, "vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā". So, then,
Prabhupada wri..., starts referring here to hippies.

"This last class of men take to the shelter of some kind of intoxication, and
their affective hallucinations are sometimes accepted as spiritual vision."

Affective hallucination means, so, somebody sees something. So, Prabhupada, you
know, so, somebody told Prabhupada. Prabhupada, you know, when I was taking
LSD, I used to get these kind of visions. Prabhupada says, stop taking, me...,
LSD. The vision will go away. Certainly, he says, no. He was so shocked. He was
completely deflated. He said, he thought his visions are such a wonderful
thing. And I am getting visions. I am spiritual person. Prabhupada said, you
cannot get spiritual visions by drugs. You know. Actually, spiritual vision, you
will get, by, when you become purified. So, actually, many times in that, you
know, when Prabhupada was in, you know, the first, at Lower Heatise..., East
Side. And then, Haight-Ashbury. First, in New York. And then, in San Francisco.
So, if somebody went high on LSD, then that person would be considered to be an
LSD saint. You know, a person, who, just like, a saint has some extraordinary
vision. And if some, there is, suppose, say, it has gone to samādhi. And while
in samādhi, the saint has, acting in a particular way. Maybe speaking certain
things. Dancing madly. Whatever. So, everybody stands there reverentially. Ok.
Ok. This person gone to ecstasy. So, like that, this person is a saintly
ecstasy. So, people would think that if somebody has taken high on, gone high on
LSD. And that person can speak any nonsense. Oh, these are the revelations of
the saint coming out. People would say. Oh, LSD saint. So, Prabhupada says, this
is, this is, you know, this is not a, you know, sensible. You know, anybody
takes drugs. And anybody gets any ideas. How can? They will be considered
spiritual vision. So, Prabhupada says one has to get all these three. One has to
get rid of all three stages of attachment to the material conce..., material
world. All these three stages of attachment. What are these? Negligence of
spiritual life. This happens when there is "rāga". Fear of a personal spiritual
personal identity. That is "bhaya". And the conception of a void that arises
from frustration in life. That is "krodhā". So, all these three, when one gives
up, then one can practice spiritual life sincerely. Be..., you know, now, when
Krishna tells us this path, He tells us that many other people have already
practiced it. "bahavo jñāna-tapasā". So, Krishna will talk about this once again
in 4.15, also. When He will say many others have practiced it. And they have
become liberated. And Krishna has referred to this earlier, also, in 3.20.

        karmaṇaiva hi saṁsiddhim
        āsthitā janakādayaḥ
        loka-saṅgraham evāpi
        sampaśyan kartum arhasi

So, He says, "karmaṇaiva hi saṁsiddhim". By karma itself, one has attained
perfection. "karmaṇaiva hi saṁsi...", "āsthitā janakādayaḥ". Who are the people
who have urgent profession like this? "janakādayaḥ". There are many others.
Janaka and others who have attained perfection. Similarly, Krishna is saying,
"bahavo jñāna-tapasā". Many others have attained perfection. So, this is giving
an assurance to Krishna. Just like, if somebody, if somebody says, I, if
somebody, a doctor says, you know, I am a specialist doctor. And, you know, I
have to do brain surgery. So, yes, doctor. What is your experience? How many
patience have you operated on? Oh, you have the honor of being my first
patient. Oh, I do not want that honor, doctor. I will go to some other doctor,
that is. So, if somebody is absolute nothing, absolutely new. And it is our
life that is addressed. We would not want to put our life to risk like that. We
would want to, so, ok, this experienced doctor. You know, and the, many people
have done this surgery. And people have got, become cured. So, like that,
"jñāna-tapasā", "bahavo". Many have become purified. Now, Krishna uses an
interesting compound word over here. "jñāna-tapasā". So, "tapasā" means
austerity. "jñāna" means knowledge. So, what is that "jñāna-tapasā" mean? The
austerity of knowledge. So, actually, you know, hearing about Krishna. And
understanding Krishna's glories, that can be an austerity, sometimes. Actually,
it purifies us. And you know, eventually, it fills us with great joy. When we
start understanding Krishna's glories. But initially, or transitionally, it may
happen that for some time, we may find, you know, the glories of Krishna, you
know, annoying. Irritating. Boring. Draining. Bewildering. There are different
emotions that can go on. Annoying. You know, why Krishna is supreme? I want my
own glories to broadcast. So, so, why hear about Krishna's glories, only? You
know. Boring. You know. The same things again and again. How will then, we are
in training? Very irritating. What is this pastime? It does not make sense. Why
does Krishna act like this? So, "janma karma ca me divyam". The pastimes of
Krishna, hearing about them gets sometimes we are in austerity. Of course, many
times, we pre..., find that, you know, if hearing pastimes, we are not in
austerity. We are, enjoy hearing pastimes as long as they are new pastimes. If
the same pastimes had been once, twice, thrice, four time, now, it is enough. He
said, if there is some new pastime is there. Please tell me some new pastime.
That attitude comes up. So, but if the new pastimes are new. And they are
entertainingly told be like them. But "tattvataḥ". Understanding the "tattva".
And then, understanding the pastime. That requires eff..., that requires
austerity. So, "jñāna-tapasā". But Krishna assures us that we do "jñāna-tapasā".
What will be the result? "pūtā". We will become purified. So, hearing about
Krishna's glories purifies us. And when we will become, a m..., purified, then
our original natural attraction to Krishna becomes revived the, by that
purification. So, purify and revive. Revive our attraction. That is a
conclusion. "mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ". They attain "bhāva" for me. So, Prabhupada
tra..., connects this "bhāva" with the nine stages of bhakti. Which is talked
about in the Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". The eighth among them being "bhāva". So:

        ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-
        saṅgo ...
        
S..., so, we know "śradd...", the spiritual life begins with faith. Then, there
is "sādhu-saṅgo". We come in the association of devotees. Then, devotees tell us
please chant Hare Krishna. "bhajana-kriyā". Then, "bhajana-kriyā". What happens?
Start experiencing transformation. Our bad habits fall away. There is
"’nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt"

        tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

Then, "niṣṭhā". Our faith becomes strong. Just like when we take a treatment.
And we become cured by that treatment, the disease subsides. And says, starts,
oh, this will, treatment work. "niṣṭhā". Then, after that "rucis tataḥ". Then,
"athāsaktis". "rucis" is taste. "athāsaktis" is attachment. Just like, we
discussed in the Nectar of Instruction, how initially, sugarcane juice does not
taste, you know, sweet for a jaundice person. But as the person gets cured,
then, you know, first of all, the person receives feeling goes away. So,
"niṣṭhā". Yes. This treatment work. But after that, hey, this sugarcane is so,
so true, sweet. I want to take it more. And, so, "niṣṭhā rucis". "athāsaktis".
So, attachment comes up. And then, "bhāvas". "bhāvas" means we start becoming,
expe..., we not only, you know, feel nice when we chant. When we remember
Krishna. When we serve Krishna. But along with that, "bhāvas". We feel positive
spiritual affection for Krishna. And then, "bhāvas". And then, finally comes
"premā". "premā" is spontaneous spiritual love for Krishna. And then, what he
says?

        tataḥ premābhyudañcati

"sādha...", "sādhanā...":

        sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ
        prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

"sādhakānām". For the seekers. "ayaṁ premṇaḥ". This "premā". "prādurbhāve
bhavet kramaḥ". That step by step, this love will come gradually. You know, this
is Prabhupada quoting "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And the correlation is "bhāva".
"mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ". What is that "mad-bhāvam"? Prabhupada, Krishna is saying,
say, referring to, that is e..., that person will attain love for Me. So, when
we give up a, the obstac..., when we go, you know, put aside the conceptions that
act as obstacles, "rāga-bhaya-krodhā". And s..., start surrendering to Krishna,
then we become purified. So, "mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ". Now, let us look at the next
verse. So, here, we start the next section of the Bhagavad Gita. And this is one
of the most important verses. So, here, the second section is Krishna is the
goal and creator of all paths. Now, when I am giving sections, you know, no
acharya has very specifically stated that this verse to this verse is a section.
This verse to se..., this verse is this section. There have been given some
outlines by Chakravarti Pada, Baladeva Vidyabhushana. So, different devotees
may classify the sections of the Bhagavad Gita in different ways. So, this is
something which is not integral to the test. That is something which we create
as a framework for our own understanding. So, there may be different, the, you
know, you know, different Bhagavad Gita teachers who may, you know, analyse the
Gita sections into different ways. And that is perfectly ok. As long as it gives
us a continuity of understanding. And clarity of understanding. So, as long that
happens, the co..., sections can be given in different ways. So, here, Krishna
is the goal and creator of all paths. So, now, what is the point, connection
between the first and second section? First, Krishna teaches and establishes
dharma. What is dharma? Dharma involves, you know, the pro..., practice of
religion. So that one becomes purified. So, now, the, for this purification,
there are multiple processes. You know, Krishna has actually recommended here,
"man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ". Take shelter of me. And practice bhakti-yoga. And come
back to me. But, you know, not everybody wants to practice bhakti-yoga. There
are other processes, also. So, what about those different processes? What
happens to those who practice those different processes? That, Krishna will
dis..., discuss in this section. And that is what we will start now. So, Krishna
right in the beginning gives us a first, a principle. The principle of what we
should do. Or, how we should understand these different processes. So:

        ye yathā māṁ prapadyante
        tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham
        mama vartmānuvartante
        manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

So, "ye yathā". As in what way? Those who, those who in whatever way. "māṁ
prapadyante". They surrender unto Me. So, this "prapadyante" is releated with
the previous verse, it, "upāśritāḥ". People take shelter of Me. So, different
people surrender to Me in different ways. In whatever way, they surrender. "tāṁs
tathaiva bhajāmy aham". I reward them accordingly. "tāṁs tathaiva". Accordingly,
I reward them. And "mama vartmānuvartante". That actually, people follow My
path. "mama vartmā". "vartma" is path. "anuvartante" is to follow. "manuṣyāḥ
pārtha sarvaśaḥ". So, "sarvaśaḥ" is an adjective that peo..., all people follow
my path. So, all people follow my path. And I reward people according to how
they surrender to Me. That, that means there are actually two distinctive
sections in this verse. We will look at these two sections. And then, we will
look at, try to understand what is the correlation between the two. Now,
significantly, generally, impersonalists like to quote the second part of this
verse. Whereas vaishnavas are, Srila Prabhupada frequently quotes the first
part. So, first part is the principle of reciprocity. As, as different people
surrender unto Me, the Lord rewards accordingly. That means the Lord is
reciprocal. The Lord is not, you know, not a, absolutely like a stone. You know,
whatever a..., anybody does, the Lord will stay the same. No. Lord reciprocates.
So, how does He reciprocate? "ye yathā māṁ prapadyante". So, Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura explains beautifully in his purport. And Prabhupada also
points to this. That those who consider the Lor..., or those who consider the
Lord, His activities, birth and activities, "janma karma". The, if the, they,
they think their "janma karma" is "divyam". Oh, the Lord's activities in, you
know, bir..., appearance are transcendental. Those who think my activities to
be transcendental. So, Krishna makes their activities transcendental. That means
what? Krishna purifies them. And when they become purified, then they become
liberated. They also start li..., living and acting in the transcendental
platform. So, those who accept Krishna's activities to be transcendental, their
activities become transcendental. So, those who consider Krishna's activities to
be material, their activities remain material. Those who think that Krishna is
just a, what is this Krishna? You know, He is just a, some historical character
or some mythological character. And, so they are materialistic, their activities
also stay mat..., they, Krishna says, ok, you stay, take off him
materialistically, then you continue on cycle of birth and death. So, those who
think of Krishna, you know, you know, in a monastic way, in a mayavadi way. They
think that, actually, Krishna is a man t..., every man is such an impersonal
Brahman. So, that is also an offensive conception. So, they are too much focused
on material conception, only. Because what is happening is they are assuming
that all forms are material. So, they are not beco..., broken free from the
fetter of matter. Fetter of matter. Feetter is a shackle. Because they have not
broken free from the fetter of matter, so, they stay on in material existence.
And when they stay on in material existence, then they also suffer. So, you
know, Krishna says that as people approach me with whatever conception, I reward
accordingly. I reciprocate accordingly.

        tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham
        mama vartmānuvartante

Now, so, this is the first part. The different people, I reciprocate
accordingly. This will be expanded later on in the Bhagavad Gita. And We will
discuss at that time, also, as we move forward in the flow. But "mama
vartmānuvartante". That, you know, all people follow My path. Now, this is,
verse is often tra..., mistranslated as all paths lead to Me. Now, if we look
at this verse:

        mama vartmānuvartante
        manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

So, you know, now, if you see "sarvaśaḥ" is close to "manuṣyāḥ". So, "sarvaśaḥ".
All people are on My path. "mama vartmā". Now, so, if we suddenly move
"sarvaśaḥ", "su", "vartmā". All paths lead to Me. It does not make a, proper
grammatical sense. Of course, some people argue that there is a figure of
speech in, you know, you know, called transferred epithet where an adjective is
moved away from one noun to another noun. So, like, there goes the, a traveler
on the weary path. That, now, the, the, pa..., weary is tired. So, the, it is
not the path that is tired. The traveler is tired. So, like that, some people
say that, this is a transferred epithet example. But the point is, Krishna is
very, here talking in a very analytical tone. And if we see, if it is just a
transferred epithet, if all paths were ultimately to lead to Him, then how do we
understand very categorical verses? Like, say, Krishna has said in four, you
know, 3.31, 32 that those who have faith, they will come to Me. Those who do not
have faith, they will fall back. So, if all paths were lead to Krishna, then
a..., what do you, what about such verses which clearly delineate two paths and
two destinations? So, two conceptions, two destinations. So, for, there is 9.25,
also very categorical.

        yānti deva-vratā devān
        pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ
        bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā
        yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām

So, Krishna is talking about four different conceptions or four different
object, objects of worship. And four different destinations. So, the idea that:

        mama vartmānuvartante
        manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

Refers to all paths lead to the same goal. That cannot be sustained, you know,
by comparison with other verses in the Gita. And so, scripturally, gramatically,
also, it does not make sense. Then, contextually, from the whole message of the
Gita, it does not make sense. And logically, also, if we look at it, you know,
you know, it does not make sense. If whatever anybody does in, the people are
going to come to Krishna. Then, what does it mean? Then, it means that,
actually, Arjuna does not need to fight. Because whether Arjuna fights or does
not fight, ultimately, everybody is on a, Krishna's path. And everybody will come
back to Krishna, only. So, Prabhupada asked the simple question that, you know,
if whatever we do in, Kri..., we are going to go back to Krishna. Then, why does
Krishna have to speak the Bhagavad Gita at all? Why does Krishna have to
persuade Arjuna to choose any particular course of action? He does not have to.
So, therefore, this, you know, particular idea that all paths lead to the same
goal is not a valid translation of this verse. Then, what does this verse
actually mean? What does it mean that all people are on My path? It means
something important. That it means, firstly, that actually whatever a person is
attracted to, actually, that person is attracted to manifestation of Krishna.
So, for example, now, if we consider all of existence to be a, like a massive
expressway. You know, some people, so, the, in that expressway, Krishna is
transcendental. Then, there is goodness, passion, ignorance. And different
people are attracted to different things. So, when they are attracted to
different things, what does it mean that they are attracted to? Some people are
attracted to the beauty of the opposite sex. Some people are attracted to
learning. Some people are attracted to, you know, the, a..., alcohol and
intoxication. These are example of passion, goodness and ignorance attractions.
So, when they are attracted like this, what does it mean? Actually, all these
attractions are ultimately ha..., ca..., having the capacity to attract. Because
they contain a spark of Krishna's opulence. This, we will discuss in 10.41, in,
when we come to Tenth Chapter.

        yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ
        śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā
        tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ
        mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam

That, you know, everything that is beautiful, it has this attracting capacity
because it possesses spark of Krishna's splendor. Now, if somebody may say that
the beauty of the opposite sex is also the beauty of Krishna, then what is wrong
with getting attracted to the beauty of the opposite sex? If, actually, yes, it
is ultimately by Krishna's arrangement that even the opposite sex is beautiful.
But that attraction does not connect us with Krishna. That, the, the spark comes
from the fire. But is this attraction, the spark taking us to the fire? Or is it
taking us away from the fire? That we have to see. Prabhupada writes in
Chaitanya Charitamrita purport that some mayavadis say that actually, you know,
everything is the experience of Brahman. So, somebody, if that person drinks
alcohol. Then, that person is also experiencing Brahman. Prabhupada says, yes,
that person may be experiencing Brahman. But that experience of Brahman does not
purify. That experience of Brahman does not elevate. That p..., that a,
experience of Brahman putrefies and degrades. So, therefore, you know, actually,
when peo..., Krishna says all people are on My path means, actually, they are
attracted to different manifestation of Me. But whether that attraction is
taking them towards me or away from me, that will vary. So, some attractions
take us away from Krishna. Some attractions take us towards Krishna. But all
people are on My path. They are in that sense attracted to Me. Like, you know,
Prabhupada, when he asked George Harrison to write a foreword for his book,
Krishna. See, at that time, George Harrison was, had a generic understanding of
Krishna Consciousness. So, he wrote very nicely, insightfully that everyone is
attracted to Krishna. Some people know it. Some people do not. As Prabhupada
also said that in the rasa-lila chapter, in his rendition of the rasa-lila
chapter, in Krishna Book. Prabhupada says, everybody is dancing in, e...,
everybody is dancing. So..., some people are dancing in maha-maya. And some
people are dancing in yoga-maya. Those in yoga, yoga-maya, they are loving
Krishna, pleasing Kishna. And they are happy with thereof. And those who are
dancing in maha-maya, they are in illusion. And they are becoming more and more
miserable. So, in this way, "mama vartmānuvartante". All people are on My path.
Now, Prabhupada concludes by saying that if you are attracted to different these
separated sparks of Krishna. Rather than being attracted to those sparks. Let us
be attracted to the whole. So, whatever we are attracted to, we will get that if
we turn towards Krishna. So, therefore, he says that, he quotes this verse,
2.3.10 from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

        akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā
        mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ
        tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena
        yajeta puruṣaṁ param

So, what is he saying? That, ultimately, whatever we want, we can get it from
the Supreme Lord. So, instead of worshiping others, we should simply worship the
Supreme Lord. "akāmaḥ". If I have no desires. "sarva-kāmo". If I have many,
ki..., the, all different kinds of desires. Or if I have "mokṣa-kāma". If I have
the desire for liberation. Still, if I am broad-minded. "udāra-dhīḥ". If my, I
am adequately intelligent. Then, what should I do? "yajeta puruṣaṁ param".
"tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena". With "tīvra bhakti-yoga". With intense bhakti-yoga.
With one-pointed. What I should do? "yajeta purusam param". Let me worship the
Supreme Lord. Let me worship the Absolute Truth. So, when I understand that,
actually, whatever I am attracted to in this world, it is simply a manifestation
of Krishna's attrac..., all-attractiveness. And instead of separately seeking
all those things, let me become attracted to Krishna. And by that attraction to
Krishna, by that worship of Krishna, let me seek those things. I will get those
sparks, also, if Krishna is merciful. And Krishna is, that is Krishna, part of
Krishna's plan. But both them as spark, I will get the whole. When I get the
whole, I will become supremely happy. So, you know, you know, we can either
choose, you know, to have, we can either choose to have infinite longings. Or we
can choose longing for the infinite. Infinite longings means, oh, I long for
this. I long for that. I long for that. I long for that. There are so many
things I long for. And this longing knows no end. So, like that, after I get a
c..., I get a new cell..., watch. Then, I want a new cellphone. Then, I want a
new dress. Then, I want a new car. Then, I want a new house. Then, I want a new
spouse. And I, various, goes on, and on, and on. There is no end to it. So, you
know, I can have infinite longings. Or we can have longing for the infinite. We
redirect our desires. All these things that are attracting me, just contain a
spark. But Krishna is the whole. So, let me long for the infinite. So, then,
"tivrena bhakti-yogena". We intensely serve Krishna, intensely love Krishna.
Then, we will become purified. Then, we will attain the supreme perfection of
life. Let us go to the next verse now. Now, a, Krishna will describe, ok, if
Krishna i..., u..., ultimately, all paths are ultim..., all people are on His
path. Then, why don't people worship Him directly? So, if, actually, it is, who
is ultimately, it is He who is ultimately the rewarder. And all people are on
His path. Then, why don't people worship Him directly? So, Krishna explains that
in the next verse.

        kāṅkṣantaḥ karmaṇāṁ siddhiṁ
        yajanta iha devatāḥ
        kṣipraṁ hi mānuṣe loke
        siddhir bhavati karma-jā

So, "kāṅkṣantaḥ". "kāṅkṣantaḥ" means hankering. Desiring. "karmaṇāṁ siddhiṁ".
Success in their work. So, here, "karma" refers to fruitive activity. Material
activities. "yajanta iha devatāḥ". "iha devatāḥ" means the gods of this world.
"yajanta". They worship the gods of this world. And what happens? "kṣipraṁ hi
mānuṣe loke". "kṣipraṁ". Quickly. "mānuṣe loke". In this materi..., in this,
"kṣipraṁ hi mānuṣe loke". In human society, people get quick results. "siddhir
bhavati karma-jā". You know. "siddhir bhavati". So, "siddhir". They get
perfection. "karma-jā". From "karma", quickly. So, Prabhupada, a, so, Krishna
explains. Why do people get attracted to Him? Because, people ge..., why do
people get attracted to worship the demig..., worshiping the demigods? Because
they get quick results. So, how does one get quick results of worshiping
demigod. Just like Lord Shiva is called as Ashutosh. Ashutosh means one who is,
"ashu" is quickly. "tosh" is satisfied. One who is quickly satisfied. So,
generally, you know, if somebody does some rituals for worshiping the demigods.
The demigods give the results. You know, because, you know, demigod worship is
like a contract. So, if the worshiper does a particular set of rituals. The
demigods are obliged to give the results. And, so, sometimes a child wants a
sweet. And the child has got teeth which are likely to get spoilt. So, the
mother says, no, you should not take sweets. You should not take, and, you know,
now, do not take sweets. You make sure that you have your treatment properly.
And later on, I will give special sweets, you know, but, first, you are not
going to take sweets. But the child says, no, I want sweets. You know, what the
child does? You know, mother says, yes, I will give sweets. But first, you get
cured. Then, I will give you. And I will cook special sweets for you. Mother
say, if you take chocolate, your teeth will get spoilt. I will cook some other
special sweets which will not get your teeth spoilt. So, child says no, no. I
want sweets right now. And I want chocolates, only. So, chocolates. So, he says,
takes some money from somewhere. In the pocket money or takes from the pocket of
the father. And then, goes to shopkeeper. And he says here is the money. Give me
chocolates. Give me hundred chocolates. And then, just gives the money, gets the
chocolates. So, that is basically a business. So, generally, when we worship the
devatas, people do it in the mood of a business. In the mood of a business means
that they are doing it for the sake of, for the sake of worsh..., you know, not
primarily making spiritual advancement. It is just for getting their material
desires fulfilled. And s..., a, Krishna, He will also fulfill our material
desires. Just as, it is not that the mother does not want the child to eat
sweets. But the moth..., mother also wants that the child's health not get
spoilt. So, Krishna does not want that, you know, we, the, we have to be
materially starved and poverty-stricken. You know, Krishna wa..., wants us to
have whatever material things we need. But He does not want us to get so
obsessed in material things that we hurt ourselves. That we will hurt our
spiritual prospects. That is why he will give things to us. But He may give them
slowly. In a way that does not, you know, increase our illusion. So, therefore,
people, because they want quick results. You know, they do not want
purification. They just want quick results. That is why "kṣipraṁ hi mānuṣe
loke". They get those quick results. And they worship the devatas.

Then, Prabhupada expands the semantic scope. Semantic scope means the semantics
refers to meanings. Semantic scope means the range of meaning. So, "iha
devatāḥ". Krishna uses it to refer to, you know, the devatas. You know, "iha",
it refers to in this world. So, there are devatas in this world. And people
worship them. So, Prabhupada explains that, that devata in this context can
refer even to other materialistic people. You know, some p..., people may do
some bootlicking of a politician to, you know, just become a yesman for that
politician. Oh, you are so, you are so great. You are this. You are that.
Flatter that person. And then, get something out of that person. So, people may
do that because they feel that, "kṣipraṁ hi mānuṣe loke". If I flatter the
politician. If I flatter a some, big l..., business person. Then, from that, I
will get so many things. I will get this. I will get that. I will ge..., and I
do not want these things. So, that way, you know, one can get the results. So,
now, that is how actually we see, "yajanta". Most of the worship happens because
people get something fruitive. So, for example, there is the, there is some
godman who just follows, believe to be God. And then, they write a book. Hundred
and one reasons. Why is so and so person is God. And if you see, what are those
hundred and one reasons? Basically, they are hundred and one stories of
a parently miraculous fulfillment of prayers. They say, oh, so and so person was
having, was having so..., his dau..., daughter was sick. And the doctor said
this is incurable. And then, they, they went to that godman. And then, they
were, they started chanting his mantras. They started chanting his mantras. They
prayed. And that patient was miraculously cured. Or, now, or they may say that,
oh, this person was not passing in the exam. And that person prayed to that so
and so baba. And then, what happened? That person passed the exams. So,
basically, these are, or, decide that, this is how all these stories from the
experience of their worshippers. You know, that they are God. That person is
God. Now, this is actually a simple error of logic. Actually, they have, there
are hundred and one stories like that. But there are probably ten thousand
stories or maybe a way, a, or hu..., thousand stories or mor..., whatever
number, who of people who reverse the situation. So, who prayed and did not get
anything. But when they did not get anything, the prayers do not enter the
books. So, the, the, so, they tell the stories, by the success. And even if we
think by pure statistics, you know, statistics by itself, you know, some people,
some, there are medically, miraculous cures happen. And so, some, statistically.
Some people who are not doing so well. If they feel that, oh, I am being
blessed. I am getting some power. Then, they study better. They get marks, also,
by that. So, this idea, first of all, even from the logical point of view, it is
not sound. And scriptural point of view, definitely, it is not sound. So, if we
choose an object of worship, based on just whether I get quick results or not.
Then, I will get quick results. But those results will quickly go away, also.
At the end, you know, when I die, what will I be carying with me? None of these
results will carry with me. I will just carry my karma with me. So, therefore,
Krishna says that this is not a recommended form of worship. Those who are
shortsighted. Children are shortsighted. They cannot think about their career.
They cannot think of the long. This, I just want to play right now. So, like
that, people who are shortsighted. They can think only in this, terms of this
lifetime. Hey, I want this. I want that. I want that. And they cannot think of
anything more. So, people who are shortsighted like that. They cannot practice
spiritual life very seriously. And even if they practice some sort of piety.
That is for "iha devatāḥ". They are directed towards some worshipable object in
this world. And they get some results from that. So, now, Prabhupada explains,
you know, the, sorry, now, Krishna explains that. Ok. For such people, how will
they get elevated? I have created a system. A system by which progressively,
step by step by step, people can get elevated. So, what is that system? That is
the varnashrama system.

        cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ
        guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ
        tasya kartāram api māṁ
        viddhy akartāram avyayam

So, "cātur-varṇyaṁ". There are four varanas. "mayā sṛṣṭaṁ". By Me, they are
created. Hmm. "guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ". Divide according to "guṇa" and "karma".
And then, "tasya kartāram api māṁ". Although I am the doer, still, know that I
am the non-doer. Being unchangeable. So, there are, this, every line of this
verse is very significant. So, first is, "cātur-varṇyaṁ". The four, a, four
varanas. It is "mayā sṛṣṭaṁ". It is created by Me. What does it mean "mayā
sṛṣṭaṁ"? Actually, whatever is created by Krishna is natural. It is innate. It
is there everywhere. So, "sṛjāmi", may say there is America and Europe. We do
not have the, this caste system as it the word is used nowadays. But actually,
we will see these four, you know, brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, shudra, they are
not just caste by designations. They are basically four human types. Four human
types. And we will find these four human types in all societies. There is the
intellectuals. That are brahmanas. There is administrators. That are ksatriyas.
There are the m..., merchan..., m..., merchantel community. That is the vaisyas.
And there are general assistants, the labourers, that the shudras. So, in every
society, we will find this. What to speak of every society, in the classroom, we
will find it. And in the classroom, you know, there is some students who will
just sit right in the front, being eager to study and learn. Some other
students, whenever there is something, organisation has to be done. Ok, they
will become class monitors and say, ok, we are going for this picnic, so please
stand in the queue. You will be the first. And they will make the arrangements,
organising things. These are ksatriya. So, sitting first and learning. They are
brahmanas. And then, there will be some children who will say that. Ok, you
know, some child may say, you know there is a new pencil which has come. Or you
know, this new pen has come. If that pen come, pencil come, eraser, everything
is there in one, only. Something like, some new high-tech product has come. And
show it. And, hey, can you give it to me? Can you give it to me, also? Yes, I
will give it to you. How much? Let us say, ok, it is fifty rupees. Ok. That
person gets it for thirty rupees from the shop. And gives it for fifty rupees.
And in the class, only, that person makes a tidy profit. So, or, you know, say,
what happens is, that is vaisya mentality. When the child, children, it is
there. And the shudras, the children, who, say, for example, you know, and the
class is going on. You know, just, maybe sitting in the back bench noding off to
sleep. Getting bored. But as soon as the class gets over. And the teacher goes
out. Will get up comfortably from the last bench. Clean the blackboard. Dust the
blackboard. And come back. And go and sleep again. So, they are ready to do some
sort of, they are not necessarily insincere. But just, they, they do not have
the inclination to study. But they want to contribute in some way or the other.
So, they contribute with some physical activity. So, actually, this is just a
simple understanding. But this is the basic divison of labour that is there in
every enterprise. So, in a factory, also. There is an R&..., and, in every
company, in industry, there is, there is some people who do R&D. So, we, we
could roughly equate them with the brahmana. There are people who do admin. They
are the ksatriyas. Then, there is the people who do the h..., marketing,
selling, generation of revenues. They are the vaisyas. They may find concerned
with money. And then, there are the people who are generally working. That the,
you know, there are the punes. There are the kulis. There are the general
assistants. So, they are all shudra..., you know, they all work like shudras.
So, basically, this categorisation is there everywhere. "mayā sṛṣṭaṁ". So,
"cātur-varṇyaṁ". These four divisions. Let us try to understand this varnashrama
a little bit more clearly.

So, in the varnashrama, what do we have? You know, yeah. So, what does
varnashrama actually do? Varnashrama provides the social structure for spiritual
advancement. You know, how does it provide? I will explain this. So, social
structure for spiritual advancement. What does that mean? That means that,
actually, for most people, spiritual advancement means, ok, there is God. And I
have to become, make spiritual advancement. I have to, I have to devote myself.
I have to purify myself. And mostly, it is an individual struggle. So, if that
individual struggle is supported by a social structure, then the struggle
becomes lesser. And the fruit comes more easily. That means, how, how do I
practice spiritual life? What do I do? So, when there is social, su...,
suppo..., socia..., suitable support, you know, supporting social system. Just
like if a student wants to study. If the student wants to become a doctor. And
if there is n..., no social structural support. There is no college. There are
no professors. There is a, there is no system of education and training. Then,
the person says, ok, I only read my books. I read this book. I read that book.
I read that book. I find out after reading this, this. So, this is what I do.
And then, I become, by that, I become m..., a doctor. It is very difficult
without a social structure just by individual struggle to progress is difficult.
But when there is social structure, things become easier. So, same way applies
to spiritual life. Just by reading books. Just by chan..., doing some meditation
to make spiritual advancement is difficult. But ashrama. So, what does ashrama
do? Ashrama provides the timewise progression in one's spiritual commitment. A
timewise progression means, when initial stages of life, brahmacari, one commits
oneself a lot. You know, goes to the guru's ashram. Stays there. And practices.
You know, and then, you know, the, after that, there is ks..., there is a
grihasta ashrama where one gets married. That time, one also gets involved in
the world. But with the family, also, one is s..., making commitment to his
spirituality. And then, there is vanaprastha where one starts taking off. And
starts focusing more on spirituality. And sannyasi means one focuses primarily
if not exclusively on spirituality. Then, while one is doing this, wha..., what
does the varna system do? Varna system provides for one's material needs in the
least complicated and the most harmonious way according to one's psychophysical
nature. Psychophysical refers to, psycho is mind. Physical is body. So,
according to their nature of our mind and body, va..., varnashrama provides us
engagement in the least complicated and the most harmonious way. What does it
mean? Least complicated and most harmonious? See, today, when a student, when a
person has, choose a career, it is a huge spectrum. You may say, this is
freedom. But that freedom causes anxiety. So, I have to go in this direction.
This direction. This direction. What should I do with my life? It is so complex.
Because of so much anxiety. What career should I choose in my life? So, you
know, it becomes very complicated. But if a person is in the traditional
varnashrama system. Then, when the brahmana and brahmani unite in proper
brahmanical consciousness, then a soul with brahmanical inclinations is born in
the family. And when that soul is also born, brought up in a brahmanical
culture. Then, naturally, there are innate brahmanical propensities. And there
are acquired brahmanical propensities. So, naturally, that person becomes a
brahmana. And b..., that way, the person continues on in a, a profession.
Whi..., for which, one is inclined and one has also been in cultured for that.
One has brought up, been brought up in a culture which helps one to do that. So,
one has a headstart over competition. Because from childhood itself, one has
been practicing brahmanical life. So, same applies with, say, somebody is a
cobbler. Then, from childhood itself, the person has been trained in being a
cobbler. Then, it, much easier for the person to go on, to proceed forward in
life. So, in the least complicated and most harmonious way. Why most harmonious?
Because many times, because of peer pressure, people choose careers that are not
good for them. That are not according to their nature.

So, everybody, for example, in India. People, you know, you know, people,
professions of, say, medicine and dogma. Engineering and medicine are
glamorised. So, everybody wants to go in that, also. But their nature may not
be that. Their nature may be to be artist. Their nature may be to a doctor. But
they do, a, n..., sorry, no, their nature may be to a..., a..., artist. Or a
painter. Or a musician. Or a photographer. But they d..., cannot choose that.
Because they are too caught up. You know, by the, in, in the peer pressure. So,
then, when they get into it. What they are living, doing is not harmonious with
their nature. And that is why, firstly, they cannot do it well. And secondly,
they are not satisfied while doing it. So, the whole principle of varnashrama is
not based on just mere, you know, fiat. Fiat means this is what you have to do.
And nothing else. No. It is not arbitrary fiat. It is based on "guṇa" and
"karma". So, according to one's qualities. And according to one's activities,
"guṇa" and "karma". So, "guṇa" refers to character. And "karma" refers to
competence. Just like when a person has to become a doctor. That person has to
have the competence. The competence refers to person should have skills. You
know, if that person is surgeon, that person should have the skills to be able
to, you know, cut the body and extract their damaged, d..., the heart, damaging
part. And then, you know, heal the sew. And heal the body, also. So, that
p..., competence has to be there. That is karma. But along with competence,
there has to be character, also. That is "guṇa". The doctor, the per..., the
doctor is opening the body, they are healing one part, organ. But at that time,
steals another organ, he steals one kidney from the sew. Then, that will not do.
So, there has to be, you know, character as well as competence. That person,
then the same applies to all professions. So, "guṇa" refers to the qualities.
And "karma" refers to the activities. Now, with re..., when I said earlier,
there is these four human types are there in all societies. Because "mayā
sṛṣṭaṁ". It is created by Krishna. But wha..., what is there is "karma". "guṇa"
will not come automatically. See, in every society, there will be some c...,
there will be some people who will become leaders. There is some people who
will become intellectuals. What does it mean they will become intellectuals?
They are literally in..., inclined. They are, you know, they are thoughtful.
They had become writers. They may become a, a, they may become opinion leaders
in society, thinkers. But then, if they do not have the proper "guṇa". Then,
their thinking will not lead to deep phis..., spiritual conclusions. Deeper or
spiritual truth. They will stay at this personal le..., level, spiritual
prin..., super, superficial level. And they may end up writing books on atheism,
materialism. They may wri..., end up boo..., writing books condemning religion.
They will not be able to understand what actually is the truth. And pursue
that truth. Same wi..., with ksatriyas. In every society, there will be some
administrators. Now, from material point of view, there may be good
administrators, also. There is, they have the "karma" to be administrators. But
the, to develop the "guṇa", one requires training. One requires training in
overall understanding the philosophical purpose of life. So, when the ksatriyas
understand, yes, the ultimate goal of life is to go back to God. Then, they
do not become too attached to their kingdoms. To their possessions and
positions. And they, say, a, are able to guide their subjects, you know, in a
caring way.  In a responsible way. In a non-exploitative way. You know, in a
parental way. So, this is "guṇa" and "karma". When both are taken care of, then
there is, you know, harmonious progress of the person. And then, now, let us
look at the last, "kar":

        tasya kartāram api māṁ
        viddhy akartāram avyayam

So, Krishna is saying, "tasya kartāram api māṁ". I am the maker of the system.
You know, so, what does it mean when He says, He is, I am the maker? What is, it
essentially means is that I am, I have made these divisions. But then, "viddhy
akartāram avyayam". But know that I am not the doer. What does He say? Why does
He, I am not the doer? That means that He has not put people in these various
places. It is not that Krishna has made somebody to be a shudra. And Krishna has
made somebody to be a vaisya. Actually, those people based on the way they have
acted in the past as a reaction to their "karma". They have been put in
different places. So, Krishna is not discriminating. Krishna is simply
rewarding, you know, you know, according to how people act. Krishna is not
partial. Krishna is reciprocal. He does not discriminate. I, this person is, I
like this person. So, I will make that person to brahmana. I do not like
that person. That person be a shudra. No. Based on the kind of psychophysical
nature th..., that they have cultivated in, they have, they have, the way they
have lived in a particular life. Accordingly, they get their next life. So,
"viddhy akartāram avyayam". I am not the doer. Sometimes, in some schools, you
know, there are, say, for ten, a, ten standard, there are divisions. A, B, C, D.
So, the, all the top students, all the high-class students, they are put in A.
And then, they get the best teachers, also, over there. And then, the l..., a,
those students who are, a, you know, at dull, those who are not very interested
in studies. Those whose performances have been very poor in the previous
classes. They are put in D. So, like that, there are divisions, say, A, B, C, D.
So, now, a, now, is this school administration repres..., responsible for this
division? Oh, there is a A, C. A division for high-class students. D division
for low, for not so good s..., mediocre students. O..., or, then, yes, the
school has created that. So, it is a "kartāram". That, but still, "akartāram".
Why? Because the student, school does not deliberately put some student. Oh. I
do not like you. I will put you there. No. What the school does is, ok, ba...,
the exams are there. Based on what kind of performance one, that person has
done, that the students are put in different places. So, you know, the judge may
give a reward to some per..., some person. Then, they may punish certain persons.
Judges are not, you know, being judgemental in the sense of being partial. You
know, they are just simply being reciprocal. Ok. This person has performed, you
know, has done something, you know, deserves some compensation for whatever
has happened. So, then, give us some compensing, give us some money. And some
person needs punishment. That person is given punishment accordingly. 

        tasya kartāram api māṁ
        viddhy akartāram avyayam

So, Krishna says, I am not the doer. I am not. I am unchangeable. I am
unchangeable means I do not get directly involved in this. I do not take sides
here. So, the judge does not take sides. Krishna is transcendental,
transcendental does not take sides. He has created the system of varnashrama by
which people can become gradually elevated. And that is what He helps people do,
you know, through the progression of varnashrama. So, by acting in their,
according to their varna and ashrama, people can get gradually elevated. So, how
will that happen? Krishna will talk about in the next verses. And we will
discuss in our next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
