Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=06uTDYqRCiI
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_075_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_05_Text_01_to_07_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=06uTDYqRCiI&event=video_description&redir_token=RvhvE3lbsZWLB2VnrPbbiPkFQM98MTU0ODQ4ODAyNUAxNTQ4NDAxNjI1

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We
completed the Fourth Chapter. Fourth Chapter was "Transcendental Knowledge".
With this, this Chapter on jn..., you know, titled Jnana i..., is a shas...,
assi..., bridge between two chapters on karma-yoga. Prabhupada tit..., titled
Chapter Three as "Karma-yoga" and Chapter Five as "Karma-yoga – Action in Kṛṣṇa
Consciousness". We have mentioned it, Fifth Chapter titled as karma, jnana karma
sannyasa yo..., you know, it is called as karma sannyasa yoga. And Fourth is
titled as jnana karma sannyasa yoga. So, you know, jnana karma sannyasa yoga
means, by jnana, one understands how one can actually practice karma in such a
way that one does the fruit. One does renunciation within karma. So, it is not
about, so, per say, sannyasa. But it is about sannyasa in karma, not sannyasa of
karma. So, that jnana, we acquire in the Fourth Chapter. And practically, how do
we do it? That will, we will, we will learn in the Fifth Chapter. So, the
essen..., karma sannyasa yoga does not mean sannyasa of karma. It means sannyasa
in karma. So, Krishna is going to talk about, you know, this essential principle
of not renunciation of action. But renunciation in action. In the Fifth Chapter.
And the whole theme of the Bhagavad Gita is that, action itself can lead one to
disentanglement and liberation if we, our action is done intelligently. So, that
we will discuss in the Fifth Chapter now. You know. The Fourth Chapter concluded
with Krishna telling Arjuna. "ātiṣṭhottiṣṭha bhārata". Rise and fight. The Fifth
Chapter begins with Arjuna having a doubt. You know. Arjuna's doubt comes
because prior to that, in 39, Krishna has talked about "śāntim". And in fif...,
41, Krishna has talked about karma sannyasa. So, both these, you know, you know,
togeth..., coupled with the non-reference to fighting in the entire Fourth
Chapter make Arjuna think that, you know, make Arjuna doubt whether Krishna
really want to, Arjuna to fight or not. So, the last instruction,
"ātiṣṭhottiṣṭha" seems to be contrary to the tenor, the tone, the mood of what
He has spoken, what Krishna has spoken earlier. That is why, a, the, creates a
doubt in Arjuna's mind. And Arjuna asks the question. So, in principle, Arjuna's
question is similar to His question in Third Chapter. So, some chapters in the
Bhagavad Gita are similar. Third and Fifth are similar. This, as we will see,
Seventh and Ninth are also similar. So, although they are similar, that is,
themes are similar. Krishna, whenever, He has to discuss same, the similar
themes only, also. Even He is discussing second time, He makes the concepts
deeper. He, you know, gives us deeper understanding of the concepts. So, we will
see how that happens in this particular chapter. So, let us look at, you know,
the Fifth Chapter. Before we go, start reciting the verse, let us look at the
overview of the chapter.

So, we can divide this into three broad sections. So, the first section is
kali..., karma-yoga is equal to, but easier than jnana-yoga. They are, you know,
you know, equal. You know. Both will give the same result. But karma-yoga is
preferable because it is easier. Then, seven to sixteen talks about a, by fixing
mind on atma, karma-yogi s..., remains free from bondage. So, elaboration
of the first ch..., six on..., first, the theme of the first six verses. How is
karma-yoga equal? You know, we sa..., vi..., vikarma, karma-yoga cau..., karma
causes bondage. And renunciation leads to liberation. So, Krishna is telling
that, act..., you know, if one is not fixing the mind on sense objects, instead,
one is fixing the mind on the soul. Then, you know, the karma-yogi will remain
free from bondage. And after that, Krishna says they are fixing the mind on
Su..., Supersoul, on the Paramatma. That seventeen to twenty-nine. The
karma-yogi will attain liberation. So, there are two phases. One is not getting
bound further. And second is getting liberated. Just like we may say that, when
we are sick. One is to, one part of the sickne..., a, one part of recovery is to
remove the sickness. Remove the infections, the germs that are, cause the
sickness. And the second is to regain the strength. So, Kr..., you know, first,
or we could say, first part is to prevent the aggravation of the sickness.
Whatever the infection, they should not spread further. And second part is to
ensure that, you know, one removes the sickness. And then, one regains the
health, also. Whichever way we look at it. The point is recovery involves these
two parts. You know, remove the negative. Stop the negative. And then, bring out
the positive. So, atma-jnana can help one to prevent further to act..., acting
in a way that leads to further bondage. And Paramatma-jnana, knowledge of the
Supersoul. Knowledge of the Supreme will lead to liberation. And in 29 to, and
that last section, 27-28 to 29, actually, karma-yoga will eventually lead to
m..., but K..., some form of renunciation. But Krishna, He does not recommend
jnana-yoga over here. He will, you know, recommend ashtanga-yoga. There is, talk
about in twenty..., verses 27 to 28. And that will be elaborated in Chapter Six.
And verse 29 talks about bhakti-yoga, which will lead, elaborate in Chapters
Seven to Twelwe. So, let us look at the first verse of the Seven..., Fifth
Chapter now.

        arjuna uvāca

        sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa
        punar yogaṁ ca śaṁsasi
        yac chreya etayor ekaṁ
        tan me brūhi su-niścitam

So, "sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa". That "sannyāsaṁ". When somebody wants to do,
take "sannyāsaṁ". "sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa". When one takes "sannyāsaṁ", at the
e..., one does karma accordingly. So, so, Krishna is telling here that, you have
recommended "karma", "sannyāsaṁ". That is a different to verse 10, 49.
"sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa". But then, in 10.42, you said, "punar yogaṁ ca
śaṁsasi". You know. "yogaṁ ātiṣṭhottiṣṭha parantapa". He says, equipped in yoga,
rise and fight. So, "yac chreya etayor ekaṁ". Among these, please tell me one.
One that which is "chreya". That which is long-term. So, Krishna, A..., He says,
Ar..., persistently been asked by Arjuna, please tell me, what is "chreya". And
"tan me brūhi". "brūhi" is I ask you now. Please tell me. "su-niścitam". This is
que..., question that has been going on. But now, tell me definitely.
"su-niści...", "niścitam" is itself is definitely. "su-niścitam" is the, it,
absolute definite, definiteness, with conclusive definiteness. Please tell me
what I should do. So, now, a, to this question, a, Krishna will reply.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        sannyāsaḥ karma-yogaś ca
        niḥśreyasa-karāv ubhau
        tayos tu karma-sannyāsāt
        karma-yogo viśiṣyate
        
So, "sannyāsaḥ karma-yogaś ca". "niḥśreya". So, so, Arjuna had asked, what is
"śreya"? So, Krishna is telling that, "ubhau". Both of them are "śreya". Both of
them will lead to "niḥśreyasa". "niḥśreyasa" means long-term benefit. Both of
them will lead to long-term benefit. "sannyāsaḥ karma-yogaś ca". But among those
two, "tayos tu karma-sannyāsāt". Among those two, "karma-yogo viśiṣyate".
"karma-yogaḥ" is better. So, now, the point of the Bhagavad Gita is that, a, one
should ensure that one does not become bound in material exis..., stay bound in
material existence. So, now, you know, what causes bondage is attachment. And to
the extent, one does not have attachment. To that extent, there is no bondage.
So, now, Krishna is telling, say that, actually, both karma-yoga and
karma-sannyāsāt, both k..., you know, they prevent detachment. So, in that
sense, both are good. But among the two, Krishna says karma-yoga is better. Why
is that better? Because that does not, that is more easy. Easier. So, now, Srila
Prabhupada, you know, does not focus so much on the comparative virtue of
karma-yoga or karma-sannyāsāt in this purport. He focuses more on the point that
we should not get bound. That that staying free from bondage is fundamentally
impro..., important. And "niḥśreyasa-karāv ubhau". Therefore, one should, you
know, avoid karmic bondage. And Prabhupada quotes the series of verses from the
teachings of King Ṛṣabhadeva in Fifth Canto, Fifth Chapter. You know, and, which
essentially underscore how the conditioned soul becomes bound. And how we should
stay free from bondage. Let us look at the verses. So, you know, 5.5.4–6, hmm:

        nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma
        yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti
        na sādhu manye yata ātmano ’yam
        asann api kleśa-da āsa dehaḥ

So, "nūnaṁ pramattaḥ". "pramattaḥ" means mad. In..., you know, in..., in...,
intoxicated with madness. "pramattaḥ" can mean intoxicated, can mean mad. So,
"kurute vikarma". Such a person does "vikarma". And what is "vikarma"?
"indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti". When one acts for sense gratification. One acts
for "indriya-prītaya". "na sādhu manye". This is not good. "yata ātmano ’yam".
Why is it not good? By that, a..., "’yam", by the soul will, soul will get
another body. "asann api kleśa-da āsa dehaḥ". So, what will happen is one will
continue in the cycle of birth and death. And "asann". The body is temporary.
But along with temporary, it is "kleśa-da". It gives misery. "asann api kleśa-da
āsa dehaḥ". So, we already have miserable body. And if we act for sense
gratification, then we show material nature that I want to enjoy the sense
objects. So, then, we will get another material body. But the material body is
subject to so many miseries. So, we will get all those miseries, also. Material
body gives us a, insignificant pleasure and significant pain. It gives
insignificant pleasure. The pleasure lasts for a few moments. But it gives
significant pain. Actually, the pain sometimes lasts for hours, months. Years
sometimes, when the person gets terrible diseases. So, "asann api kleśa-da āsa
dehaḥ". So, it is "kleśa-da". It is a, not "sukha-da". The body is "kleśa-da".
Now, how long will be, that person continue like this?

        parābhavas tāvad abodha-jāto
        yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam
        yāvat kriyās tāvad idaṁ mano vai
        karmātmakaṁ yena śarīra-bandhaḥ

So, "parābhavas tāvad". So, till that time, there will be "parābhavas". Till
when? "abodha-jāto". As long as the person cr..., remains ignorant. "abodha".
"bodha" means knowledge. "abodha" means no knowledge. And, so as long as the
person is ignorant, a person will stay pa..., a, will have "parābhavas".
"parābhavas" is failure. So, why? Because "yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam". As
long as one does not inquire about the soul. Then, there is some default
activity which all of us have to do. So, if we do not know about spiritual
activity, by default, we will do material activity. So, "yā...", so, "yā...",
as long as there is no spiritual inquiry, then by default, "yāvat kriyās tāvad
idaṁ mano vai". So, the mind will be involved in "kriyāḥ". What kind of
"kriyāḥ"? "karmātmakaṁ yena śarīra-bandhaḥ". One will act for karma. And one
will act sin..., fruitive activity. "śarīra-bandhaḥ". One will become bound to
the body. So, actually, the soul and the body are separate. Just like we got an
example of the car and the driver. The car and the driver are two distinct
things. The driver can go out of the car. And driver can walk somewhere else,
also. Or can it take some other car. Or can reach home and may not need a car.
Whatever we. So, the two are different. But that soul and body are for all
practical purposes identical now. We do not think of ourselves as the soul. We,
for us, the soul is a n..., theoretical concept. Ok. Gita says I am not the
body. I am the soul. Also, I, intellectually, understand it. But for all
practical purposes, the soul has become melded into the body right now. Conc...,
not a, in terms of identity, the soul is always separate. But practically means,
from our experential perspective right now, it is very difficult to understand
the soul is different from the body. Why? That is because of the enjoying
mentality. The enjoying mentality welds the soul to the body. You know. The
welding when tha..., that happens. Two material come together. And they get
heated and tied together. Soul is actually different from the body. But the soul
has become welded and melded to the u..., body because of the desire to enjoy
the body. So, "śarīra-bandhaḥ". So, one becomes bound by the desire to enjoy the
sense objects. The desire to engage in fruitive activity by which one can get
sense, sense gratification. So, sense gratification, fruitive activity, both of
them bind the soul. Now, what is the difference between the two? Both are, in
one sense, similar. But sense gratification is directly acting to gratify the
senses. So, I may eat something. I may touch something. I may enjoy something.
That is sense gratification. Fruitive activity is the activity that leads to
sense gratification. So, for example, somebody may do some karma-kanda rituals
by which one may, ev..., later gets sense gratification. So, or we may do many
other activities. Which will also lead to sense gratifications, or fruitive
activities. That. Now, after that Krishna describes, karma..., you know, sorry,
there is, "Ṛṣabhadeva" Maharaja describes here.

        evaṁ manaḥ karma-vaśaṁ prayuṅkte
        avidyayātmany upadhīyamāne
        prītir na yāvan mayi vāsudeve
        na mucyate deha-yogena tāvat

So, "evaṁ manaḥ karma-vaśaṁ prayuṅkte". So, the mind will be in "karma-vaśaṁ".
You know, under the "vaśaṁ". "vaśaṁ" means control of karma. And
"avidyayātma...", "avidya", "avidyayātmany upadhīyamāne". One will be controlled
by "avidya" about the atma-tattva, about spiritual reality. How long? "prītir na
yāvan mayi vāsudeve". Till one does not develop "prītir" for Lord Vasudeva. And
then, "na mucyate deha-yogena tāvat". The contact of the soul with the body. We
use the word yoga to refer to connection or contact. So, we want, we want
karma-yoga, bhakti-yoga. But here, the word here curiously is used "deha-yoga".
So, soul has become bound to the body. The soul has become bound to the body. At
that time, "na mucyate". So that bon..., that contact, that bondage is the soul
to the body. "na mucyate". One will not become free from that till "prītir na
yāvan mayi vāsudeve". By till one has not developed attra..., affection to Lord
Vasudeva. What happens when we develop affection to Lord Vasudeva? Then, we, the
mind is no longer filled with the enjoying mentality. And the enjoying mentality
is what? Binds the souls to the body. So, that is how, by developing affection
for Lord Vasudeva, we become free from the enjoying mentality. And we become
free from material bondage thereof. So, Prabhupada's whole purport focuses on
this point of staying free from bondage. That is the first point. Then,
Prabhupada writes that, significant statement over here, "jñāna", knowledge:

"jñāna (or knowledge that one is not this material body but spirit soul) is not
sufﬁcient for liberation. One has to act in the status of spirit soul, otherwise
there is no escape from material bondage."

So, it is not enough to know. It is enough to, a, what is required, is also to
act. So, therefore, when we act, then there is liberation by that. So, now,
Prabhupada explains that that acting on the spiritual platform is practicing
devotional service. And we discussed this "vairā...", a, this
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu verse of how renouncing that which is, can be used in
Krishna's service is not renunciation. That, that is actually false
renunciation. That is "phalgu vairāgyaṁ". "yuktaṁ vairāgyam" is to renounce the
enjoying mentality and to use the things in Krishna's service. So, Prabhupada
makes the point, also. Which he would often speak. That actually nothing belongs
to us. So, what is there actually to renounce? You know. Everything, even our
body belongs to Krishna. Because it belongs to Krishna. So, therefore, the only
thing for us to renounce is the illusion that we have anything renounce.
Actually, what, the, we, a, nothing belongs to us. Everything belongs to
Krishna. And the only thi..., now, only thing to renounce is the illusion that
we have anything to renounce. So, that is the illusion. That. Ok. This is mine.
This is mine. This is mine. This is mine. And when we become free from that
renun..., you know, illusion, when we renounce that illusion. Then, we
understand, rather than things being mine, I am Krishna's. I am Krishna's. And
when I understand I am Krishna's, then, you know, and Krishna is mine.

        āmi to’ tomāra,  tumi to’ āmāra,
        ki kāja apara dhane

What else do any? Bhaktivinoda Thakura says. I am Yours. And You are mine. That
is all that is impor..., matters. So, in this way, one makes, you know, steady
spiritual advancement. Srila Prabhupada's point in a purport is we do not have
to renounce action. We do not have to renounce possession. We have to renounce,
you know, the, conc..., misconception that we are the enjoyers. We are
cooperators. When Krishna enjoys, then we also enjoy as His subordinate
enjoyers. Now, Prabhu..., Krishna continues this. So, He, first He is saying
that karma-yoga is better. Now, why karma-yoga is better? He will explain in the
next verses, now.

        jñeyaḥ sa nitya-sannyāsī
        yo na dveṣṭi na kāṅkṣati
        nirdvandvo hi mahā-bāho
        sukhaṁ bandhāt pramucyate

So, "jñeyaḥ". One should know. Such a person is "nitya-sannyāsī". Such a person
is a constant renunciate. Who is? "yo na dveṣṭi na kāṅkṣati". Such a person is,
neither resents, nor hankers. What does the person do? "nirdvandvo hi
mahā-bāho". Without duality, that person acts and "sukhaṁ bandhāt pramucyate".
Such a person will happily become free from bondage. So, here, Krishna is
talking about renunciation in action instead of renunciation of action.
Renunciation in, in action, He says is that we act, "yo na dveṣṭi na kāṅkṣati".
One does not hanker. One does not, you know, resent. Hanker means, oh, I want
that. I want that. And I have to, resent means. I, why have I got this? Why have
I got this? I do not want this. Why have I got this? Like that. Hanker and
resent. "na dveṣṭi na kāṅkṣati". "nirdvandvo". In this way, one stays free from
duality. So, how will this happen? When internally, one does not have
attachment. So, that detachment at this stage, Krishna is talking by the not
atma-jnana. Later on, when the Bhagavad Gita, thought flow process, that will
come by bhagavat-jnana. When we are attached to Krishna. We want to please
Krishna. Then, that aver..., attachment and aversion will go away. And Krishna
says, in this way, "sukhaṁ bandhāt". How "sukhaṁ bandhāt"? Because activity is
natural for us. And giving up activity is unnatural. So, because activity is
natural, therefore, it is much easier to do activity and stay free from bondage
rather than to do inactivity and seek v..., a, freedom from bondage. So,
externally, inactivity seems very sim..., very easy. You know. I just sit and do
nothing. But internally, inactivity is very difficult. Because there is so much
passion in the body. And the passion makes us, I want to go here. I want to see
this. I want to do that. And that will make us go round, and round, and round.
It will not allow us to stay peaceful. So, externally, inactivity may seem easy,
you know, but internally, it is difficult. And externally, activity may seem
difficult. But internally, activity is easy. It is according to our nature. Not
just our conditioned nature, but also our eternal nature. As souls, also, we are
active in service to Krishna. Therefore, "sukhaṁ bandhāt pramucyate". "sukhaṁ
bandhāt". So, happily, one will become free from bondage. So, Prabhupada
explains in the purport that a devotee is always liberated because the devotee
acts always for the pleasure of Krishna.

"There is no duality in his mind because whatever he does, he does for Kṛṣṇa.
Being thus freed from the platform of dualities, he is liberated – even in this
material world."

So, how does doing everything for Krishna keep one free from duality? Because a
devotee does not think in terms of, oh, this is pl..., this is good. This is
bad. You know, from material tongue. A devotee simply think, I want to serve
Krishna. Whatever comes in my life, I will see ho..., how it can be used to
serve Krishna. How it can be, you know, tapped as an opportunity for service to
Krishna. And because the service to Krishna can be performed in all situations.
Of course, the form of service may change. But the idea that I am the servant of
Krishna, that can be c..., sustained in all situation. That is how a devotee
stays liberated from the circumstances. Now, Krishna will clarify this further.
This point of how one can stay free from bondage. You know. You know.

        sāṅkhya-yogau pṛthag bālāḥ
        pravadanti na paṇḍitāḥ
        ekam apy āsthitaḥ samyag
        ubhayor vindate phalam

So, "sāṅkhya-yogau". So, here, Krishna is saying that "sāṅkhya" refers to the
ana..., the process of jnana, the, the process involving inaction. And "yogau"
refers to the process involving action. So, going back to 5.2, "sāṅkhya" refers
to "karma-sannyāsāt". And yoga refers to karma-yoga. "pṛthag", g..., that these
two are separate. The people who think this are "bālāḥ". "bālāḥ" are childish,
or ignorant, or less intelligent. And He says, as contrary to "bālāḥ", there are
"paṇḍitāḥ". "pravadanti na paṇḍitāḥ". So, peo..., the wise people do not say
that two are di..., two are different. They are, Krishna is how the, how, how
are they same? Because He says that "ekam apy āsthitaḥ samyag". If one becomes
situated in one of them, then "ubhayor vindate phalam". One gets the fruits of
both of them. So, "ekam apy āsthitaḥ samyag". Situated oneself in one of those,
one will get the fruits of both. "vindate phalam". Both fruits will get. So, He
is, Krishna is telling that both are, you know, similar, both are not
differe..., non-different because their ultimate goal is the same. And that, He
will more exp..., make more explicitly clear in the next verse. So, I will
explain both the verses together.

        yat sāṅkhyaiḥ prāpyate sthānaṁ
        tad yogair api gamyate
        ekaṁ sāṅkhyaṁ ca yogaṁ ca
        yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati

"yat sāṅkhyaiḥ". That which is obtained through "sāṅkhyaiḥ". That is obt...,
obtained through "karma-sannyāsāt". "prāpyate sthānaṁ". The "sthānaṁ". The
destination that is obtained. "tad yogair api gamyate". That one attains by the
practice of yoga, also. And understanding this, "ekaṁ sāṅkhyaṁ ca yogaṁ ca".
When one sees "sāṅkhyaṁ" and "yogaṁ", both to be equal. "yaḥ paśyati". One who
sees like this. "sa paśyati". One who sees thus is the actual seer, is the
actual seer. "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". Suk..., so, there is diversity in path.
But there is uniformity in goal. There is diversity in path. But there is
uniformity in goal. Now, Krishna is, now, now, this is, these verses are no ways
supporting the idea that all paths lead to the same goal. Krishna is talking
about two specific paths over here. The path of, you know, you know, path of
intellectual introspection in inaction, and the path o..., path of, you know,
you know, you know, inaction based on jnana-yoga and the path of action based on
karma-yoga. You see, both these two lead to the same goal. Not that all paths
lead to the same goal. That is not a Gita teaching at all. In fact, that is not
a logical teaching, also. Leave alone a scriptural teaching. So, that was what
we already discussed in 4.11. Here, Krishna is talking something different. He
is taking two specific paths. And the goal of both of these paths to ultimately
free us from bondage. And He is saying that both these paths can free one from
bondage. But the vital point is, when will they free us from bondage? When they
are done with detachment. So, whether one has d..., authentic detachment and
renounces the world, renouncing all the activity, and renouncing all involvement
with the world. Or one has detachment. And one lives and acts in the world. If
one has detachment, in both cases, one will re..., one will be able to attain
freedom from bondage. But actually, He says, while doing activity, you know,
because doing activity is natural for us. So, detachment while doing activity,
hmm, is easier to do than detachment while giving up activity entirely. Because
giving up activity is unnatural. So, but here Krishna is not talking about the
difference. Now, He already said that this is better. Which is better?
Karma-yoga is better. But now, He is saying, both of them are the same. Both of
them ultimately lead to the same goal. That is, destination is obtained by
"sāṅkhyaṁ". That destination is also obtained by yoga. And therefore, ekaṁ
"sāṅkhyaṁ ca yogaṁ ca". So, now, how does this work out? That do both lead to
the same destination? See, normally, there is a hierarchy. There is karma-yoga.
Then, there is jnana-yoga. And there is bhakti-yoga. So, karma-yoga is higher
than jnana-yoga. Karma-yoga is lower. And jnana-yoga is higher. But when
jnana-yoga is higher. Why is Krishna saying that the two are not different? The
two, both are ultimately similar. They are "ekaṁ". How are they "ekaṁ"? Because
both are meant to take one towards the same goal. So, the karma-yogi is also
ultimately aiming for liberation. The jnana-yogi is also ultimately aiming for
li..., liberation. And by practicing karma-yoga, also, one can attain
liberation. By practicing jnana-yoga, also, one can attain liberation. So, in
terms of the goal, karma-yoga and jnana-yoga are similar. So, now, Krishna is
doing something significant. Now, if you, you remember, the flow of the third
chapter, in third chapter, if you remember, that is, flows like a spiral.

So, Krishna is telling that, you practice karma-yoga because that is what you
are qualified for. And even if you are setting, you also qualified for
jnana-yoga, still practice karma-yoga because that will set a good example by
that. So, there, in that discussion, Krishna had a, allowed the notion to
continue that jnana-yoga is higher. And karma-yoga is lower. But He is saying,
but there, he was saying that, ok, jnana-yoga, you are not qualified, so do not
practice it. It may be higher. But do not practice it. By that, by practicing,
you will become mithyācāri. But here, Krishna is, you know, taking the dig...,
you know, discussion to a deeper level. And He is saying that actualy jnana-yoga
is not higher. You know. You know. In one sense, on the yoga ladder, it might be
higher. But it is not that jnana-yoga will lead to a higher destination.
Actually, whatever destination is obtained by jnana-yoga, that can be attained
even by karma-yoga. Ultimately, both are meant to bring about liberation. So,
"ekaṁ sāṅkhyaṁ ca yogaṁ ca". One who sees that both of them are one. In the
sense that they both lead to the same goal. That is, that person is a true seer.
So, this is a phrase, "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". This will come again in the
Bhagavad Gita. And the Bhagavatam also has another verse. He says, "paśyann",
another verse conclusion often, which comes, "paśyann api na paśyati". So, these
are very significant verses which indicate something, you know, deep. So, "yaḥ
paśyati sa paśyati" means that actually, one who sees like this is a true seer.
So, Krishna is talking about seeing with knowledge. You know. If somebody gets a
chest X-ray and shows it to a layman, that person, oh, this is a black, black film
with some image on it. And doctor sees, hey, you have got terrible TB. Your whole
lung is filled with lesions. what is this? So, now, actually speaking, you know,
it is the same thing. But who is seeing it actually? The patient is seeing it. A
layperson is seeing it. The doctor is seeing it. But doctor sees, the doctor
understands, "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". The person sees, p..., the layperson
sees, "paśyann api na paśyati". The layperson sees, but he sees, but does not
see. Because he does not understand. So, we see with knowledge. We see with a,
the, atm..., with see with the pre-existing understanding that we have. So,
actually, what we can know depends on what we know. What we can know depends on
what we know. If somebody tells me, you know, that, if somebody tells an
illiterate villager, you know, that damage to the medulla oblongata can be a
f..., f..., fatal. You know, wha..., wha..., med..., medu..., medu..., what is
mid..., medulla oblongata? Person has no reference to connect it with. You see.
In the head, in the whole system of management of the brain, now, of the body,
there is an organ. Below this, you know, the head part, it is called the medulla
oblongata. And that is a very important organ. And if that is damaged, the
person can die. Oh, die, the person can connect. And brain, yes, brain also, you
will, you will, later, person will similarly say, the brain is important. So,
when, w..., whatever we hear, we have to be able to connect it with something
that we know. And then, we integrate it in..., into our conceptual framework.
And then, that expands our understanding. So, what we can know depends on what
we know. So, if I do not know anything about X-rays. Then, I will look at an
X-ray. Nothing makes sense to me. But the doctor already knows something. And
therefore, when the doctor sees, the doctor sees actually. And understands
further. So, what we can know depends on what we know. Therefore, you know, if
we just, you know, arbitrarily start studying scripture or quoting, there are
people who just know some verses. And they quote some verses from the scripture.
See, I also know Bhagavad Gita. I also know, see, I know this verse. I know that
verse. Well, it is good that somebody has memorised Bhagavad Gita verses and he
is quoting that. That indicates some's piety. But just quoting standalone verses
does not indicate a deep understanding of the Bhagavad Gita. All that it
indicates is one has some official piety because of which one has memorised some
verses. So, if we want to understand the Gita in its flow, in its integrity.
Then, we have to study it systematically. So, Krishna is telling over here,
when, you know, when we understand things properly. When we see things properly,
then "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". Then, we actually see when we see. Otherwise, we
do not see even if we see. So, whe..., so, externally, it appears as if that
person who is doing karma-yoga. That person is engaged in the world. Externally,
it appears as if that person who is doing jnana-yoga. That person is renounced
from the world. Sitting in silence. Contemplation. Grave. Austere. Oh, this
person is much more advanced. This person is not so advanced. That is what I may
think. But no. Both are working toward the same destination.

When we see the commonality of the destination beyond the diversity of the,
m..., process. Then, we understand that, actually, they are, then we actually
become seers. Then, we truly understand. So, "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". Now,
Prabhupada explains in the purport that:

"The real purpose of philosophical research is to ﬁnd the ultimate goal of
life."

Find the ultimate goal of life. So, what is the ultimate goal? It is:

        na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ

Hmm, the, a, Sri..., Prahlada Maharaja in the Seventh Canto explains that "na te
viduḥ". People do not know that the ultimate goal of life is Lord Vishnu. To
know lokam. To, to know Lord Vishnu. To love Lord Vishnu. To serve Lord Vishnu.
So, the Bhagavatam establishes that Krishna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He is the original manifestation of the Absolute Truth. But after that,
the Bhagavatam uses the names Krishna and Vishnu a..., a..., as identical and
interchangeable. So, even in the rasa-lila, where there is no conception of
Vishnu coming up. It is only Krishna. But at the end of the rasa-lila, it is
said, you know, that one who hears these pastimes of Lord Vishnu. So:

        vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇo

So, why? Because the Bhagavatam, it makes its ph..., the philosophical point, it
makes it clear. You know, ok. You know:

        kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

But after that, it does not go into doing a hairsplitting analysis. It simply
focuses on the point that Krishna and Vishnu, you know, at the, as names are
identical and interchangeable. H..., so, now, Prabhupada explains that how the
two similar. Now, suppose, somebody, you know, wants to know how to nourish the
tree. So, that person may find out. Ok. Some people try just watering the news.
Oh, it will look s..., very nicely watered. It may look nicely watered. But it
will not be nourished. So, somebody asks me, say, ok, this tree, it has its
roots. Maybe, something is there down. Then, I start digging it, digging it
carefully without damaging the roots. But I take it and I reach. Then, I see,
oh, these roots are going down, down, now they go till here. Now, after, what
after that? So, after I find the root, what I have to do is I have to water the
root. On the other hand, the other is, somebody understands in faith. That, yes,
from authority that, actually, we have to water the root of the tree. That
person starts watering the root. And the watering the root, the t..., tree
starts growing. So, both ways, essentially, what i..., what is happening is that
one is going to water the tree. And when one waters the tree, the tree is going
to grow. But the second process is easier. "karma-yogo viśiṣyate". Krishna says.
Why? Because one does not have to go through the laborious process of digging
and digging without damaging. Digging the area around the tree's roo..., roots
without damaging the roots. And after digging, also, what we have to do is water
only. So, if we water initially itself, then that is much easier. So, actually,
even when comes to, one, one by philosophical analysis. So, the body is like the
tree. And below the body, something deeper. That is the soul. The soul is the
root. So, you know, the soul is the essence of existence. And ultimately, the
soul comes from the Supersoul. So, the Supersoul is a root of all roots. You
know, Krishna talks about Himself as "bījam avyayam". In the Seventh Chapter.
The imperishable tr..., seed of all existence. So, after one comes to know that
I am not the body. I am the soul. Through the process of sankhya, even after
that, what does one have to do? One ultimately has to water the root of the
relish..., tree. One has to act at the level of the soul. And that is perform
devotional service, ultimately. So, if one can start off acting at the level of
the soul right now, by acting with detachment. Then, also, one can make
spiritual advancement. So, now, for all practical purposes, karma-yoga and you
know, bhakti-yoga, you know, their main difference is the understanding of the
Absolute Truth. The karma-yogi may not know what is the Absolute Truth. There
is, there is some Absolute Truth. And I am not the body. I am the soul. I have
to become detached from the body. And let me act in this mood of sacrifice.
Non-pandered to the body. So, bhakti-yogi understands also that I am, I am a
part of Go..., Krishna. Krishna is the Absolute Truth. And I have to work not
just in the mood of sacrifice. But in the mood of divine sacrifice. In the mood
of sacrifice for the pleasure of the Supreme Lord. When I act in this way, then
I will become liberated. So, actually, both involve some sibling similar, but
Krishna says that, the ultimate goal being simil..., this, being similar, the
two are similar. But there is a difference because one process is easier. So, He
will come back to the same point again. So, Prabhupada concludes very nicely
over here. So, Prabhupada says:

"superﬁcially one process appears to involve detachment"

That is jnana-yoga.

"and the other process appears to involve attachment."

But what is the difference? You know, for, for one this detachment from matter
and that is, detachment from matter is jnana-yoga. And attachment to Krishna is
bhakti-yoga. Attachment to spirit in general will be karma-yoga. Are one and the
same. One who sees things w..., w..., sees this, sees things as they are.
Prabhupada saying..., "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". Now, Krishna will continue this
thread of thought. And He is conclu..., conclude this part by saying, why, you
know, you know, karma-yoga is better. Or why jnana-yoga is to be discouraged.

        sannyāsas tu mahā-bāho
        duḥkham āptum ayogataḥ
        yoga-yukto munir brahma
        na cireṇādhigacchati

So, "sannyāsas tu mahā-bāho". "sannyāsas tu mahā-bāho" means oh, Arjuna, you are
"mahā-bāho". This word has been used again in this chapter, now, earlier. It was
used. Now, it is being used again. "duḥkham āptum ayogataḥ". When one ha...,
when one does "sannyāsas" without doing yoga. That means one renounces action.
"ayogataḥ". Then, one gets "duḥkham". Why "duḥkham"? Because inactivity is
difficult. It is troublesome. It is unsustainable. It is unnatural. "yoga-yukto
munir brahma". On the other hand, if somebody is "yoga-yukto". Now, such a
"munir", person engaged in activity, "brahma na cireṇādhigacchati". Such a
person will attain brahman. And when? "na cireṇa". Not after a long time.
"cireṇa" is a long time. "na cireṇa" is not after a long time. "adhigacchati",
one will attain. One will attain soon. It will not take too much time. So,
Krishna is saying that again, He is reiterating:

        sannyāsas tu mahā-bāho
        duḥkham āptum ayogataḥ

Oh, "yogataḥ". If one is dispossessed of yoga. One does not have a connection
with spirit, co..., it. Connection with the Absolute Truth. Then, "duḥkham
āptum". Because what is happening, one is detached from matter. You know, So,
one is no..., one is not getting into bondage. But one is, one is detached from
matter, one is not, you know, gaini..., getting any satisfaction. And one is not
allowed to do any activity. When one is detached from matter. Because any
activity in the material realm causes bondage. So, detachment from matter means
staying in inactivity. So, that is "duḥkham āptum". It is difficult to be in
inactivity. It is difficult to be without pleasure. And one, because one is
"ayogataḥ". So, one cannot, one is not connected with the Absolute Truth. One is
not experiencing higher happiness. So, i..., it is, you know, neither here, nor
there. One has come, one is trying to come out of matter. But one is not
entering into spirit. And in that situation, one is lost. Therefore, one is
klesa. One gets klesa. "duḥkham āptum ayogataḥ". Therefore, Krishna says, you
know, one should, what one should do is be "yoga-yukto". And by being
"yoga-yukto". One will soon, soon attain liberation. One will attain brahma. So,
brahma is generic word used for attaining the Absolute Truth. So, Prabhupada is,
explains how this jnana is referring to the impersonalists, the mayavadis. And
how the mayavadis have their own commentaries. But those commentaries do not
give the ultimate conclusion. So, Prabhupada talks about mayavada sannyasis and
the vaishnava sannayasis.

"he Māyāvādī sannyāsīs, engaged in the studies of Sāṅkhya and Vedānta and
speculation, cannot relish the transcendental service of the Lord. Because their
studies become very tedious, they sometimes become tired of Brahman speculation,
and thus they take shelter of the Bhāgavatam without proper understanding."

So, this is an interesting point. See, you know, if we look at the Vedas, at the
Vedic history. Now, Śaṅkarācārya did not comment on the Bhagavatam.
Rāmānujācārya also did not comment on the Bhagavatam. Madhvācārya started
commenting on it. He wrote a, a Pratamash..., a, so, actually, the, he, he
commented on the Bhagavatam. "Bhagavata Tatparya Nirnaya", just like he wrote,
as he wrote "Mahabharata Tatparya Nirnaya". So, basically, the Bhagavatam gives
a profound philosophy which con..., concludes in personalistic, theistic
devotion. M..., Śaṅkarācārya did not mess with it. And because Rāmānujācharya
was primarily responding to Śaṅkarācārya, so he also did not, you know, refer to
the Bhagavatam. Although he quoted concepts of bhakti which are similar to what
is given in the Bhagavatam. But to our context, what is important is, so,
Śaṅkarācārya had appeared in the seventh century. So, after him, Rāmānujācārya
came in the tenth century. You know, the 10th-11th century. Then, Rāmānu...,
Madhvācārya in 11-12th century. And then, after that, in the medieval Indian
history, there was a bhakti renaissance. Now, bhakti was there long ago, when
before five thousand years when, you know, the boo..., Vedic culture was present
in the world. M..., but we are talking about recent history, now. So, when this
bhakti renaissance started, you know, the appeal of mayavada started paling.
Started appearing stale as compared to bhakti. And ultimately, the idea that,
you know, I am brahman. It may be t..., relating to the ego. But it is no
satisfaction of the heart. Oh, just, in the mayavadi path idea that unless you
renounce the world, you cannot even begin the spiritual journey seriously.
Because if you are in illusion, you have to come out of illusion. So,
everybody has to take sannyasa. So, it is a very demanding path. And also, it,
not only is demanding, it does not lead to the ultimate destination, also,
actually. But what happened is the mayavadis, they found that they just, they
are not, they were not able to sustain themselves in the renounced path. And
they were not able to sustain people's attention, also. So, they, so, within
impersonalism, slowly, you know, the bhakti cult, we could say. Prabhupada uses
the word cult. We do not use the word cult, generally. Because the word cult has
got a very negative connotation. Cult conveys the idea of people who, you know,
live in isolation. And people who are brainwashed. And they do all sorts of
weird things. That is what a, that is what we refer to by bha..., by the word
cult nowadays. Of course, during Prabhupada's times, the word cult was just a
group. It referred to a group. So, it is not, it had no negative connotation to
it. It was just an objective meaning that was there. It meant a group. So, we
avoid the use word, a, use of word cult. Although, Prabhupada does use it. Now,
in our context, you know, bhakti started spreading very rapidly. So, the
mayavadis, among their own selves, so, some people started practicing bhakti. Not
bhakti in the sense that they wanted to practice bhakti i..., as ultimate goal.
But, still, they started practicing bhakti. And they also started studying
Bhagavatam. And they also started teaching b..., b..., on the based on the
Bhagavatam. For example, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati was a prominent scholar in
the Vedantic line, in the Advaitic line. And he wrote documentary called the, he
actually wrote many books. So, one of the books is Srimad Bhagavatam
Pratham Shloka Tatparya. So, it is almost a, it is a book of, so, of dozens, and
dozens, and dozens of pages. You just, the first shloka of the shyama, m...,
o..., Srimad Bhagavatam, there is extensive elaboration on it. So, in this way,
the Bhagavatam is commented on by the mayavadis. And nowadays, many mayavadis
also do bhagavat saptah. But actually, they just cannot, you know, they cannot,
you know, enter into the mystery of Bhagavatam. They try to interpret everything
metaphorically. And then, they, you know, they feel almost embarrassed by
Krishna's pastimes with the gopis. You know, a, this is meant to be the Absolute
Truth. Why is He acting immorally? And they try to explain away everything as
symbolic. Or whatever. They say, oh, what does a rasa-lila represent? It
represents the union of Radha and Krishna. It represents the merging of the soul
with the Absolute Truth. Actually, this is not at all what the Bhagavatam is
teaching. And, you know, this is quite offensing. But they, this, the, even they
speak on the Bhagavatam, they cannot really relish the Bhagavatam. Because
their, their underlying defining conceptions are all wrong. They are not
studying the Bhagavatam to understand Bhagavan. They are studying Bhagavatam to
transcend Bhagavan. To, in one sense, d..., denigrate and destroy the form of
Bhagavan. And they are after attaining Brahma. So, now, that is why they cannot
be satisfied. So, there is this, a there is strength of bhakti which is there
among the impersonalists, also. And somehow, what has happened is that there are
some bhaktas, who, some people who may have genuine bhakti, also. But they get
attracted to the mayavadi path. Because they think those organisations are
prominent. They are respectable in public size. And saying, I want to practice
spirituality.  These people are doing bhakti. Let me also do bhakti. So, we have
to understand that not all people who are in mayavadi organisations are
necessarily mayavadis. They are mayavadis by, you know, by affiliation. But they
may not be mayavadis by inclination. So, affiliation means, that is what they
are affiliated with. But by inclination, they may not be mayavadis. So,
Sridhar Swami was actually like that. Sridhar Swami is the, you know, seminal
commentator on the Bhagavatam. There may have been commentators before him. But
their commentaries are not available. You know, Sridhar Swami's commentary is 
seminal. Caitanya Mahāprabhu also referred to that commentary. And glorified
Sridhar Swami. Now, Sridhar Swami, if we see, he was not a bor..., he was, he
was not belonging to a Vaishnava Sampradaya. Externally speaking. He was a
devotee. Exalted devotee. Great acharya. But he was externally belonging to the
mayavada sampradaya. And that is why when he, he wrote his commentary. In some
places, he gives certain understandings which seem to support mayavada. So, in
the Srimad Bhagavatam, in the antya-lila where there is a pastime of Vallabha
Bhatta coming to meet Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Vallabha Bhatta tried to counter the
conceptions that Sridhar Swami has given. So, Caitanya Mahāprabhu understood the
heart of Srimat..., s..., Sridhar Swami. And He understood that, actually,
whatever he has given, is appropriate. He has given the highest devotional
conclusions in the right places. And some other places, there are certain
statements which may lead to some misunderstanding. But when we understand the
context and we understand the heart of Sridhar Swami, there is no mistake.
Caitanya Mahāprabhu did not approve of, you know, Vallabha Bhatta's attempts to
counter and correct Sridhar Swami's commentary. But what was Sridhar, K...,
G..., Vallabha Bhatta's objection? It was that, you know, everything is
contextual in his commentary. You know, it is not, there is no consistency.
So, actually, the consistency was there. But because of affiliation, he had to
make certain statements. So, Jiva Goswami, when he is writing his Sandarbhas.
Then, he uses, Sridhar Swami has the standard reference for commenting on the
Bhagavatam. And he says, tikaiti. So, even he say that. Ok, the tika. He
does not even mention who is tika. Because understood who, he is quoting Sridhar
Swami's tika. So, he t..., he, when he, when Sridhar Swami is making a point of
supports personalism. Jiva Goswami is, quotes it directly and then explains it.
And when Sridhar Swami gets certain places, because of the affiliation to
impersonalism has to use some impersonalist explanations. Then, Sridhar Swa...,
then what Jiva Goswami says is, he does not refer to Sridhar Swami at all. And
he simply says that according to an emergen..., imaginery interpretation, so,
some people say it is like this. And he says, no, it is not like this. Actual
understanding is this. And he gives logical and scriptural, makes his, for his
understanding, also. So, Jiva Goswami shows how Vaishnava etiquette is to be
maintained. Something which Vallabha Bhatta could not do. Caitanya Mahāprabhu
told him that, Sri..., I do not want to hear this. Which actually, the
Caitanya Mahāprabhu cou..., chastised him quite a bit strongly at that time. So,
even now, there may be some people who are impersonalists. But they are imp...,
they are mayavadis by affiliation. We should not assume that those who are
mayavadis by affiliation necessarily have to be mayavadis by inclination. So,
there are people, if they get the proper understanding, they may turn away from
mayavada. And come to the process of bhakti-yoga. If they are given the right
understanding. Now, Krishna will talk about how one can be "yoga-yuktaḥ":

        yoga-yukto viśuddhātmā
        vijitātmā jitendriyaḥ
        sarva-bhūtātma-bhūtātmā
        kurvann api na lipyate

"yoga-yukto". So, "yoga-yukto" is word used in the previous verse. So,
Krishna, a, when one is "yoga-yuktaḥ", one is con..., "viśuddhātmā". The soul is
purified. "vijitātmā". So, second atma refers to self-control. And
"jitendriyaḥ". One who has conquered the senses. So, one who is pure. And one
who controlled his mind and senses. "sarva-bhūtātma-bhūtātmā". This is an
interesting compound word. "kurvann api na lipyate". Such a person, even if such
a person acts, is, not get bound. So, the prior qualifications are fine.
Actually, in the Se..., a, Fifth Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, there is the
pastime of Mahārāja Uttanapada who was a descendant of Svayambhuva Manu. He and
his descendants, they keep ruling the ea..., they keep ruling the earth. So, he
is described in the Fourth Canto. His description comes in Dhruva Maharaja
pastime, the Seventh, Eighth, Ninth Chapters. And then, his descendants keep
ruling the world. But then, his dynasty ends. So, when his dynasty ends, the
rule has to go on. So, therefore, from Uttanapada, Priyavrata is told. That
you, you know, Priyavrata was another son of Svayambhuva Manu. And he is told,
you, please become the king. And Svayambhuva Manu has actually already, he had
gone to the forest, you know, as a brahmacari, as a renunciate. And his plan was
that he wanted to live as a brahmacari and take renunc..., a, take sannyasa
eventually. And then, become liberated from material existence. So, for this
purpose, when he was acting, at that time, he was under the guidance of Narada
Muni. And he withd..., renounced the world more or less. So, at that time,
Svayambhuva Manu came to him. And told him that there is no one to rule the
kingdom. Please come back and take the responsibility of ruling. So, Priyavrata
was extremely reluctant. He said I have saved myself from engtanglement of
this world. I do not want to become entangled now. So, then, when he said this,
at that time, Svayambhuva Manu became disturbed. You know. So, we see,
Priyavrata, he was caught between the two. Narada Muni was telling him, do not
get entangled. Narada Muni, see, he preaches so powerfully that he gets people
disentangled from material existence by his strong f..., f..., instructions. So,
you know, so, now, both of them are mahana..., mahajanas. So:

        svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ
        kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ

So, Manu is also mahajana. So, Narada is also a mahajana. So, what to do?
Priyavrata has seen a dilemma. But he was, so, when two authorities are saying
the same thing. Then, what should one do? He wanted to continue what he was
doing. So, seeing the grave need in the world for a competent administrator.
Brahmaji himself defended Svayambhuva, so, and carrier. And Brahmaji told him
that actually do not resent the order of the Lord has given you. Do not be
envious of the Supreme Lord. Whatever He wants, you should do. That is the
meaning of being a servant. And he told him at that time, that, if somebody,
may, a, somebody is not attached. If somebody, rather somebody is attached.
Then, even if that person goes, lives in the forest, that person is living with
six wives. You know, six wives, the five senses and the mind. They are in
essence six wives. And one stays with the six wives, one will be bound. One will
simply be a hypocrite. And one will stay in bondage. Because of contemplating
the sense objects. On the other hand, if one is sense-controlled, one is
detached, then even if one stays at home and has other wives, also. One will not
become bound. Therefore, because the service is required. Please accept it. So,
he accepted it eventually. Why did he accept? Because he thought and felt this
is the ways the Lord is asking me to serve Him. And, you know, Brahmaji himself
has come. So, Brahmaji is the spiritual superior and teacher of both Svayambhuva
Manu and Narada Muni. He is like the spiritual master for both of them. So, when
Brahmaji came and gave a decision. Both the disciples, they agreed, now f..., it
seems that Svayambhuva Manu won and Narada Muni lost. But Svayambhuva Manu did
not gloat on his glory looking down at Narada Muni. And Narada Muni also
accepted what was the will of, you know, his superior, the Brahmaji. So, there,
the point is that he said, there, also, the similar words are used. And the
point is that when some is, one is not attached, then even when one stays at
home, stays in family, stays in a palace, still, that person will become a,
bound. Even if that person is a king. So, when will that happen? "kurvann api na
lipyate". One is:

        yoga-yukto viśuddhātmā
        vijitātmā jitendriyaḥ

So, one who is purified. "yuk...", "viśuddhātmā" is purified. "vijitā...",
"jitendriyaḥ" is one..., "vijitātmā" and "jitendriyaḥ" is one has controlled the
mind, controlled the senses. So, one who has done this will stay liberated no
matter what happens. "kurvann api na lipyate". Now, Srila Prabhupada explains,
you know, so, if he says that Prabhupada's purport going to the point of
"sarva-bhūtātma-bhūtātmā". "sarva-bhūtātma-bhūtātmā" means what? Such a person
is compassionate to all living beings. You know. Prabhupada translates it as:

"is dear to everyone, and everyone is dear to him."

So, the o..., so others' atma becomes like his atma. That means he treats others
so lovingly that others' atma becomes like his atma. This does not mean that
they all become an impersonal one. It simply re..., you know, you know, a, it
indicates that there is a deep emotional conn..., th..., connection that comes
about. That almost makes the feeling to be like oneness. So, we will discuss
about this in:

        ātmaupamyena sarvatra

In 6.31..., 32. In 6.32 will discuss it more. You know. But at this stage, the
point is Krishna is talking a..., at this level that He is assuring Arjuna that
Arjuna will stay free from bondage if he acts in this way. "yukto".

        yoga-yukto viśuddhātmā
        vijitātmā jitendriyaḥ

And such a person becomes dear to everyone. Because that person has no selfish
motivation. That person does not want anything from anyone. That person simply
wants to serve. You know, there can be various definitions of material and
spiritual. You know, how do we know? Whether our relationship, material or
spiritual? We can start with selfish and selfless. When we meet someone, if I
think, what can this person do for me? Then, my relationship is selfish. When I
meet someone and think, what can I do for that person? Then, that person is
selfless. And if we deepen this and connect this with Krishna, then what can I
get? What, what that, this person can give me for, for sense enjoyment? Then, I
am thinking materially. I think, oh, how can this person bless me with
advancement in Krishna Consciousness? Maybe, I please this person by going and
talking respectfully, attentively. Or by hearing the classes that this person is
giving. Or by associating with this person. Asking questions. And hearing
the discussions attentively and submissively. Whatever way is possible. We get
that association. And we make spiritual advancement by that.
"sarva-bhūtātma-bhūtātmā". A devotee is the well-wisher of all living beings. A
devotee is not, is n..., selfless. For oneself, and selfless for the sake of
others. For the sake of others means that the devotee is concerned about
everyone.

        sarva-bhūtātma-bhūtātmā
        kurvann api na lipyate

Such a person, even if he acts, that person does not become bound. Let us
continue our discussion in the next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
