Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DhtCNnxwyT8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=DhtCNnxwyT8&redir_token=iVr9t6rW4rRWlIgTk9W9PtV6bGl8MTU0ODQ4NzU1M0AxNTQ4NDAxMTUz&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_060_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_03_to_09_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita course. We are now in the third
chapter. When we are discussing the first section of the third chapter. So, let
us have a quick overview of the sections. So that we will understand what we are
doing. Yesterday, primarily, we discussed the rationale for Arjuna's question.
So, the fir..., we will now be discussing the first section of the third
chapter. Karma-yoga is better for you as you are not qualified for jnana-yoga.
That is the essential message from the first section. So, let us look at this
message. And then, we will go to the details of the various verses. So, we
discussed in 3.3, Krishna was telling that there are two ways of practicing
spiritual life. So, there are two levels at which one can practice s...,
spiritual life. "loke ’smin dvi-vidhā niṣṭhā". Karma-yoga and jnana-yoga. Now,
Prabhupada writes over here that:

"Religion without philosophy is sentiment, or sometimes fanaticism, while
philosophy without religion is mental speculation."

So, both of them are important. And religion enables us to actually do the
activities. So, chanting Hare Krishna is, we can say, religion. Studying the
Bhagavad Gita is philosophy. So, of course, these are not so descriptive.
Studying, studying v..., Bhagavad Gita, because it is the words of Krishna, you
can also say that is, that is religion. You know, because it is a devotional
activity. But in general, that which involves an intellectual, systematic
understanding, that is the philosophical part. And the religion part is that
which involves doing something by which we move forward towards gaining that
experience. So, when there is only philosophy, but there is no philosophy, then
it is sentiment. Oh, why do you f..., worship Krishna? Because it feels good.
And then, what happens? Somebody says that, oh, actually, you know, I feel that
so and so, baba, when I worship Him. That feels very good. So, that is not
worshipping that person. So, then, how do we know what is right and what is
wrong? So, that, it is, can be sentiment. And it will be sentamentalism. And
then, it can go into fanatism, also Why fanatism? Because one may start thinking
that, oh, oh, I worship this particular God. This is my God. This is how I
worship. If you do not worship this, you are going to go to hell. So, when there
is no philosophical understanding. That is just belief. Then, it can become
fanatism. On the other hand, philosophy without religion, is mental speculation.
Because if there is nothing what person is doing philosophy. Oh. Maybe, it is
like this. Maybe, it is like that. Maybe, it is like that. Then, basically,
there is no transformation that is happening. And when, so, maybe, you know,
there is so much order in the world. Maybe, God exists. Somebody sits like that,
on a, sits on an armchair, on a Sunday afternoon after a heavy meal, and starts
thinking. Maybe, God exists. Then, we pick up the newspaper and say, oh, 25000
people killed in an earthquake. Hey, that is so much suffering. Where was God at
that time? Probably, God does not exist. Anyway, picks up a bottle of wine. The
pleasure in this wine exists. So, let me just drink that and enjoy. So, this is
when people stay at a mental speculation platform. They are not doing anything
to realise the higher realities. And that is when it becomes a problem. So, if
we want to realise something higher. We need to actually practice spiritual life
systematically. And for practicing spiritual life systematically, we need
philosophical understanding. So, religion and philosophy, when both are there,
then we move forward steadily in our spiritual life. So, I just show a diagram
here which illustrates this point of spiritual and religious. So, this is an
article which I have written. It is published in Back to Godhead. So, hmm, hmm.
Behe..., yeah. Hmm. Hmm. Hmm. So, spirituality, a higher dimensional science.
So, spirituality has two levels. There is philosophy. And there is religion. So,
just as science has two aspects. There is theory. And there is experiment. So,
when there is theory and experiment both. Then, science becomes a complete body
of knowledge. So, for example, a, Newton absor..., observed the fruit falling.

So, maybe thousands of people had observed the fruit falling before. The only
thought that th..., came in their mind is let me pick it up and eat it. They did
not think of anything more than that. But Newton, when he observed it. He
thought. Why is this happening? Why it..., and then, he posted it, the principle
of gravity over there. So, theory means we observe something and try to come up
with, try to, you know, find out the explanation for it. Now, after I c..., I
posted it, some explanation for something which I have observed. How do I know
whether explanation is correct or not? That is, for that, there is experiment.
So, then, ok. If that fruit falls here, the fruit should fall everywhere in the
world. And if there is a force which is there among all material objects. Then,
even if I throw up a stone, it should f..., come down. And not just I, anybody
throws up a stone, it should come down. And not just stone, different object,
whatever object it can be, it should come down. So, there is, we do ex...,
various experiments by which one confirms the theory or disproves the theory.
So, similarly, with respect to spirituality, we have philosophy and religion.
So, in philosophy, what do we observe in philosophy? That, ok, philosophy tells
us that I am not the body. I am the soul. So, I think that, you know, I do not
want to die. Yet, there is death. And I am just knocked out. So, where does my
longing for immortality come from? And how can I, you know, is there some way
that I can live forever? So, where does a longing for immortality coming from?
Because there must be a part of me which is actually immortal. So, that way, we
can come to know that I am not the body. I am the soul. So, of course, we also
come to know from scripture about we are not the body. We are the soul. But even
from logic, we can point towards that. Now, once we come to know the philosophy,
how do I know? Whether it is right or wrong. Whether I am not the body. I am the
soul. How do I know that? The way is by practice. So, then, if I am the soul,
and the soul has a life of su..., unending supreme happiness at the level of
spiritual reality in loving Krishna. Then, if I try to live spiritually. If I
try to practice devotional service, then I will experience happiness. I will
experience a higher happiness by which my lower drives, my lower desires will go
down. So, that is what religion does for us. So, religion is like the
experiment. So, by reli..., the purpose of practicing religion is to experience
the, you know, higher spiritual realities. So, when we chant Hare Krishna, what
happens when we chant Hare Krishna? We do jappa. We do kirtan. We experience
some deeper peace, a richer happiness. And then that happiness freeze us from
our bad habits. Many of the unwanted habits, which we wanted, which we may have
wanted to give up earlier. But we are not able to give up. After we start
practicing spiritual life, we are able to give it up. So, this acts like a
confirmation for us. So, religion and philosophy, when both are there. Then,
the spirituality becomes a higher dimensional transformational science. How
higher dimensional transformational? Because, you know, i..., it is dealing with
the dimensions higher than what, you know, modern science deals with. That is
why it is higher dimensional. And how transformational? Because it involves
inner transformation. It involves experience of higher reality. The difference,
of course, between mo..., material science and spiritual science is that, you
know, material science is experimental. Whereas spiritual science is
experiential. We have to ex..., the experiment is to be done on us. And we have
to experience that difference. So, in that sense, it is experiential. But it is
also a science. Because f..., when we chant Hare Krishna. Anybody in any part
of the world, if that person chants Hare Krishna, that person experiences a
higher happiness, and becomes gradually freed from the lower drives.

So, we see that, Srila Prabhupada's Krishna Con..., when he pursued Krishna
Consciousness, people from America, Africa, Australia, you know, you know, even
various parts of the world, Europe, Russia, wherever, what, all different
background who have never even heard of Krishna anytime. Even they all became
purified. They all became elevated. So, this is how there is the universality.
Just like in science, the principles are universal. Of course, we do not know
whether in science, the principles are universal. But as far as our observation
goes, gravity seems to apply everywhere. So, just but, it is, but, by
repeatability, that is the characteristic of f..., a good scientific theory.
Similarly, there is repeatedability, that is there in spirituality, also.
Anybody who practices, that person experiences transformation. So, you know, in
bhak..., in the bhakti science, our heart is the laboratory. And chanting is the
process, procedure. So, when we practice the procedure of chanting, you know, in
the laboratory of our heart, we see the transformation. So, bhakti is a science.
And Prabhupada says that, when both are not there. Now, looking back from this
perspective. If there is only philosophy. And there is no religion. Then, that is
like, there is only theory, and there is no experiment. Then, anybody can come
up with any theory. You know, anybody can come up with any theory. And then,
what is the validity of that science? Not much validity. Because there is not
much, a, way of a, evaluating, and confirming which is, theory is right. Which
is wrong. There has to be experiment. So, similarly, there is religion. Religion
is what brings about the transformation. And, so, if so, theo..., the philosophy
will remain speculative and unauthoritative if there is no religion. Just as a
theory will remain speculative and unauthoritative, there is no experiment. On
the other hand, if somebody simply does experiment, and not knowing what the
theory is, then, it will be pointless in many ways. As, suppose, somebody is
doing a theory, experiment to find out, ok, this is a, this, and, an acid and
alcali, when we mix them together, then we get salt and water. So, now, I want
to find out, what, what is the strength of the alkali over here. So, I put in
this much acid, this change happen. This much acid, this change happens. This
much acid, this change happens. So, I do not, if I am not knowing what is the
theory, what is the purpose of the experiment. I just keep doing it, doing it,
nothing will happen. Or, w..., nothing will happen means no understanding will
come to me. Because I am just letting things happen. But I do not have any
background understanding. So, similarly, when people do religion
ritualistically. Then, there is some benefit. The, but, actually, people do not
have a deeper conviction about what they are doing. Why they are doing. So,
when, a, for example, a child is throwing a ball at a wall now. Tuck. Tuck. And
he is throwing the ball and catching the ball. Ba..., catch..., throwing the
ball, it over. And catching, it will comes back. You know, If somebody is, say,
a mechanical engineer. And that person has scientific knowledge about the
strength of a, materials. And then that person throws a ball at a wall. And
then, if he finds, ok, that ball is, throw over here, then it comes back fast.
If you throw the ball over here, it comes back slow. Then, because that person
has knowledge, then observe. Ok, that means the wall is thicker, th..., you
know, stronger here. It is weaker here. So, basically, the same activity is
being done. But because there is background knowledge. So, therefore, there is a
clearer understanding of what is happening. And one's understanding deepens.

So, one has some understanding. And of, further observation, the understanding
deepens. Similarly, people, there are so many thousands of people, especially in
places where the spiritual culture is still there. Who go to temples and they
glorify God. And they get some, they feel so peaceful. They feel s..., something
good about it. But if they do not have philosophical understanding, their
inclination to continue to do that may not last. Because they may find that, oh,
I can go to movie theater. That also makes me feel good. So, then, you know,
when other alternatives come up, then they may feel, ok, thi..., this is good,
let me do this only. So, if it is entirely based only on feelings, then it
cannot last for very long. Whenever alternatives come up. Whenever o...,
obstacles come up, one may give it up. But for a devotee, now understands, ok, I
feel so good when I chant. Why do I feel so good? It is because I am connected
with Krishna. And Krishna is the source of all happiness. I am experiencing
spiritual happiness. And then, sometimes, I am not feeling so good. So, like a,
throw the ball on wall over here, it comes back properly. When I throw it here,
it does not come back properly. So, when I see this difference, I observe. Ok,
that means the wall must not s..., have good quality. So, sometimes, I feel
ch..., sometimes, I chant, I do not feel good. Why is that? Oh, it must be 
because the lower modes are affecting me. So, our, the mo..., modes keep going
up and down like a sine wave. They make my consciousness go up and down like a
sine wave. So, now, I must be in a tamasic mode. That is why I am not feeling
any. But I just "tam stitha suka vayu". If I just tolerate it. The tama-guna
will go away. And the taste will come again. So, like that whatever is happening
to us, if we have background philosophical understanding, then we learn from it.
And we grow by it. That is why we need to have a balance of both philosophy and
religion. And that is what Srila Prabhupada has given us. We have ch..., we have
ch..., for example, the morning programme that we have. We have chanting. We
have darshan. You know. Twice, we have darshan. We have the mangala aarti
darshan. And then we have the shringar aarti darshan. And then, we have kirtans.
So, all this is, and, of course, we have jappa. All this is the religion part.
And then, we have the Bhagavatam class. There is the philosophy part. So, like
that, all of us individually, even if you are not able to attend the temple,
morning programme. You know, we create our own situation. We have some
philosophy and some religion. And when we combine both of them, then we move
forward steadily in our spiritual life. So, that is how philosophy and religion
are integrated together in the standard programme, Srila Prabhupada, by
Sri..., given by Srila Prabhupada. And we also have to have a balance in our
practice of spiritual life. So, roughly, Prabhupada is correlating over here
philosophy with jnana and religion with a, karma-yoga or bhakti-yoga. That is
a rough correlation. And we will discuss about this much later. You know, later
in our, a course. Yeah. So, let us move to the next verse now.

        na karmaṇām anārambhān
        naiṣkarmyaṁ puruṣo ’śnute
        na ca sannyasanād eva
        siddhiṁ samadhigacchati

So, "na karmaṇām anārambhān". When one has n..., when one does not do karma.
"anārambhān" is beginning. So, if one does not begin karma, one does not do
karma. And Krishna says that just by not doing karma, one does not achieve
"naiṣkarma". "aśnute" means to attain. One does not attain "naiṣkarma". Just by
avoiding karma. And "na ca sannyasanād eva". And just by beco..., taking
sannyasi, one does not get "si...", "siddhim". One does not attain perfection.
"siddhiṁ samadhigacchati". One does not attain perfection. So, why is that? You
know, here, the emphasis of Krishna is that, i..., the, the more important than
the externals is the internals. So, Krishna, now, what is the connection between
this and the previous verse? In the previous verse, Krishna said there are
levels. So, now, in general understanding, jnana-yoga is higher than karma-yoga.
But Krishna says, what makes jnana-yoga higher than karma-yoga. Or what makes a
jnani higher than a karm..., jnani-yoga higher than karma-yogi is not just the
adoption of the external forms. You know, actually, there has to be an inner
purification. And only when there is inner purification, then adoption of the
external forms will help. But when there is no inner purification. If one just
adopts the external forms. So, Krishna is giving these two statements as an
indication of the adoption of external forms. That:

        na karmaṇām anārambhān
        naiṣkarmyaṁ puruṣo ’śnute

One thinks, oh, when I do activity, I give up, get entangled in life, en...,
entangled in the world. Therefore, I will give up activity. I have seen
renunciates. They give up all activity. So, then, a..., then, I will not only
give up activity. I will formalise it by taking sannyasi. "sannyasanād eva". So,
He said. No. Just by taking sannyasi. "siddhiṁ samadhigacchati". That will not
happen. No. No. He says actually. Here, 3.4A and 3.4C, both start with no. No.
No. No mean...., no. No. This does not happen. So, adoption of external forms
does not lead to inner transformation in and of itself. And so, Krishna is
telling over here, do not do just the, do not just adopt the external form. That
will not lead to any change. So, a, now, in bhakti, also, we have external
forms. We could say. We wear dhoti, kurta. We put on tilak. So, it is not,
Bha..., Bhak..., Bhaktivinoda Thakura says. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura
also says that, you know, it is not just that by adopting the external form,
one becomes a devotee. You know, if somebody is, you know, having the external
form, but is having a, a vicious enjoying mentality. That person is not a
devotee. That person is actually kalir chela. That person is actually agent of
Kali. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that. Bhakti..., both Bhaktivinoda
Thakur and Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, they both actually strongly, you
know, critic ostentatious devotion or hypocritical devotion. ostentatious means
one practices d..., makes a show of devotion. And hypocritical means one has no
intention of devotion. One simply has an intention of exploitation, but adopts a
devotional garb so that one can do the exploitation, you know, know, better or
ea..., more easily. So, that Krishna will talk about in the next verse. So,
here, Prabhupada explains that:

"Without puriﬁcation of heart, sannyāsa is simply a disturbance to the social
order."

"sannyāsa is simply a disturbance". So, the verse we have quoted often also.

        shruti-smriti-puranadi-
	pancaratra-vidhim vina
	aikantiki harer bhaktir
	utpatayaiva kalpate

So, without scriptural authorisation, if one practices bhakti. Then, that simply
leads to "utpata". "utpata" means disturbance, disruption. So, there is some,
and there is a notion among some mayavadis that if one just takes sannyasi:

        Daṇḍa-grahaṇa-mātreṇa naro nārāyaṇo bhavet:

That if one accept "Daṇḍa". Then, by the acception of "Daṇḍa". The "naro" has
become "nārāyaṇo" now. So, it is, no, this does not happen. And "naro", first of
all, "naro" does never become "nārāyaṇo". "naro" is always the servant of
"nārāyaṇo". But even a, while being the servant of "nārāyaṇo", one does not
become brahman realised just by adopting sannyasi. So, these are misconceptions.
And that, Prabhupada count..., says that, far better than this is practice of
bhakti-yoga. So, that, he will talk about, that Krishna will talk about in the
next verses. So, now, w..., now, Krishna, after stating this, He is, He is at
the point that, actually, it is very difficult to give up activity, in
principle.

        na hi kaścit kṣaṇam api
        jātu tiṣṭhaty akarma-kṛt
        kāryate hy avaśaḥ karma
        sarvaḥ prakṛti-jair guṇaiḥ

So, "na hi kaścit kṣaṇam api". That even for a "kṣaṇam" and "kaścit", for
anyone. "jātu tiṣṭhaty akarma-kṛt". To be situated in akarma is no. Again. You
know, we will see, a, 4A and 4C started with "na". And 4..., 5A is also starting
with "na". "jātu tiṣṭhaty akarma-kṛt". So, one cannot be situated by without
doing, by doing akar..., akarma. And what is the point? Bec..., why? "kāryate hy
avaśaḥ karma". One is helplessly forced to act. "sarvaḥ prakṛti-jair guṇaiḥ".
"sarvaḥ prakṛti-jair". By born of material, the modes of material nature,
everyone is forced to act. One cannot refrain from action. So, here, Krishna is
taking an important point that action is natural for us. Now, so, s...,
"avaśaḥ". We are helplessly forced to act. Now, somebody may argue that,
actually, yes, because we are under the influence of the modes. That is why we
are forced to act. But once we become free from the influence of the modes.
Then, we will no longer have to act. So, that is the point that Srila Prabhupada
counters in the first sentence of the purport itself. What does he say?

"It is not a question of embodied life, but it is the nature of the soul to be
always active."

What does it mean? Actually, so, if somebody says that, actually, because the
body is influenced by the modes. So, one wants to act. But actually, the body
cannot act. It is because of the presence of the soul that the body acts. It is,
yes, material nature is there. Its modes are there. But when we are acting, it
is not because of the modes alone that we are acting. It is because of the
presence of the soul. So, the soul's energy may be diverted towards
materialistic things because of the influence of the lower modes. But the point
is it is the soul's energy. The modes are simply directing where that energy
will go. So, energy and action are not produced by the modes. Energy and action
are intrinsic to the soul. The direction is determined by the modes. So, the
soul, when it is embodied. Even then, it is active. And when it is liberated,
then it will be all the more active. In a sense, for the soul, the body is a
burden. For the soul, which is transcendental, spiritual. The body is like a
burden. So, if somebody is burdened, so suppose, somebody is, we see that person
carrying a big, a, sack, you know, some, some, member, some trackers. They
carry, they, because they carry some tracking appro..., gear while they are
climbing up a mountain. So, if they are having a tracking, a, a, a sack, an app
sack, which they are carrying at their shoulders. And they are running fast. So,
now, if with that sack, they will, they are running fast. If the sack were
removed, what would happen? Will they become inactive? No. They will become
capable of running all the more fast. You know. Even faster. We, so, similarly,
the soul is burdened by the body right now. So, the soul will. When the soul is
burdened by the body, the soul is moving so enthusiastically. So, so active, the
soul is right now. Doing so many different things. Most of the things are
materialistic. But the point is, soul is active. So, if the soul is active in
the embodied stage, then, when it is free from the burden of the body, how much
more the soul will be active? So, the source of the energy, and the source of
acitivity is not the modes. The modes are the director of the activities. Which
way the activities will do. The source of the energy and the activities is the
soul itself. And Prabhupada's purport continues theme that it is better to do
devotional activity. And he quotes that while doing devotional activity, even if
one falls, see, there is no loss. We have discussed this with "tyaktvā
sva-dharmaṁ". Now, Krishna contrasts this, by after telling this, with the point
of if somebody does, a, a practice renunciation, then what will happen.

        karmendriyāṇi saṁyamya
        ya āste manasā smaran
        indriyārthān vimūḍhātmā
        mithyācāraḥ sa ucyate

So, "karmendriyāṇi", "karma-indri", "saṁyamya". So, one put "saṁyam". One
regulates the senses. And a, "ya āste manasā smaran". One is remembering within
the mind. What is one remembering? "indriyārthān". One is remembering the sense
objects. Then, what happens to such a person? "vimūḍhātmā". Such a person is
actually a bewildered person, is a deluded person. "vimūḍhātmā". And what is the
"vimūḍhātmā"? What is "vimūḍh" about the "ātmā"? Actually, it is thinking I am
making advancement, but is not making advancement. And "mithyācāraḥ". Such a
person is fooling oneself, and is fooling others, also. So, "mithyācāraḥ" is a
hypocrite. Hypo..., what is the hypocrisy? Hypocrisy means to seek the prestige
and privilege that comes from position without taking up the responsibility and
the sacrifice required for that position. I will repeat this. What is hypocrisy?
It means to accept the prestige and the privilege that comes from a position
without discharging the responsibility and the sacrifice that is expected of
that position. So, somebody becomes the king, say, of the country. Now, somebody
becomes the politician. Somebody become, and the politician, okay, taking taxes
and enjoy. But when citizens come with grievances, no time. Get lost. And that
is not good. That is unfortunate. So, in one sense, a, that is hypocritical. So,
if somebody is a renunciate. Somebody is sannyasi. And that person takes the
respects. Oh. I am a sannyasi. You know, you are a great soul. You have
renounced the world. People come and offer respects, and people, takes the
respects, takes the donations, and then is privately engaging in sinful
activities, illicit activities. So, now, if one is taking sannyasi, one has to
discharge the responsibilities. One has to do the sacrifices accepted of that
position. So, if somebody is sannyasi, one has to take up the responsibility of
sharing spiritual knowledge with others. And one has to do the sacrifice of
giving up worldly pleasures. Especially the pleasure of sex. So, every position,
it brings a prestige. It brings some privilege with that. But along with that,
there is, the sacrif..., there i..., it requires responsibility and sacrifice.
So, the Bhagavatam talks about it that one should not become a guru unless one
is capable of delivering one's disciples. So, one, capa..., a, capable of
delivering the disciples means one should be able to give the guidance, the
con..., the training, the education. By which the disciple will be able to
remold one's life and thereby, you know, progress towards liberation. If one is
not c..., capable of giving that kind of guidance, then one should not become a
guru. If one dou..., becomes a guru otherwise, then it is hypocrisy. Because one
is taking the respect that is given to the guru, but not, is not doing the
responsibilities. So, that is what Krishna is saying. "mithyācāraḥ". So,
"ācāraḥ" is behavior. "mithyā" is false. So, the behavior is false. That means
one is pretending to be a sannyasi. But one is not a sannyasi. So,
"karmendriyāṇi saṁyamya". So, one is doing restraint externally. But "ya āste
manasā smaran". One is remembering internally. Such a person is "mithyācāraḥ".
So, now, we may say that, we are also trying to follow the four regulative
principles. But sometimes, we may also get some bad thoughts. You know, so, is
this also falling, then do we also become "vimūḍhātmā"? Do we also become
"mithyācāraḥ"? No. It depends on what do we do with the bad thoughts. You know,
know. If those bad thoughts come. And we start cherishing them. Yes. I want to
think more, more, more. Say, you know, if sometimes, when a, you know, we, say,
if we go to some website where there darshan. There is a picture gallery. So,
then, we can see many pictures over there. Many pictures of Radha Krishna, of
the various deities. So, like that, all of us have a picture gallery in our
mind. You know, we have a picture gallery of all the sense pleasures that we
have done. And if those pleasures are immoral. They are anti-devotional. Then,
sometimes, there is a spontaneous f..., are, there is spontaneous
high-resolution flashback that starts in the mind of that mental gallery. And we
start seeing all those images and start thinking. You know. So, oh, I want to.
Oh, it was so nice. I would have enjoyed that. I would have enjoyed that. So,
when that starts, what do we do at that time? So, actually, switch off the
gallery. That means, we start thinking of something else. We do not continue
pursuing that. A, and even worse is that, we deliberately kindle all those
memories. Oh. I want to think. What was that? What did I do over there? What
was? How was that like? How was that like? So, here, "ya āste manasā smaran"
refers to consciously cultivating the, you know, memories of those sense objects
with the hope of enjoying them again in the future. As sadhakas, we may also be
struggling to give up sense gratification. And the memories may be coming back.
But wha..., it is one thing for the memories to come u..., come back uninvoked
on their own. And it is another for us to m..., dig out those memories. For us
to ferret out those memories from within. Or to try to refresh those memories
from without. The two are different things. So, if we are doing that, second
thing, that means, you know, trying to dig out the memories from within. Or
refresh the memories from without by further exposure, then that will be in the
direction of, you know, "mithyācāraḥ". So, as sadhakas, we want to give up sense
gratification. And this is not, and occasional thoughts are not, you know, what
leads to hypocrisy. But it is conscious and intentional, you know, cultivation
of those se..., memories and sense objects. That can take us towards hypocrisy.

So, Krishna is saying, such a person who externally adapts the garb. So, now,
that means there are two different stages here. First is, one adapts the
external garbs, but does not trive for purification. That will not lead to any
perfection. But on the other hand, if one tries for an external, a..., adopts
the external garb. But far from trying for purification inter..., far from, you
know, trying for purification, one not only does not try for purification, one
continues one's past mode of thinking. Then that will be "mithyācāraḥ". So, that
means, best is, there is external change. And there is internal change. Second
best is there is external change. And there is a sincere attempt towards
internal change. Third is, there is external change. But there is no internal
change at all. And fourth is, there is external change. And there is
continuation of all the ways with the garb of the external change. The
difference between third and fourth is, in third, one has just adopted the
externals. But in fourth, one is using the externals as a means for doing the
internals i..., secretly. So, that is very, a, that is very unfortunate. And
Prabhupada writes that, even such a man, so, person has knowledge:

"must be called the greatest cheater, even though he sometimes speaks of
philosophy."

Greatest cheater, so very strong, you know, statement by Srila Prabhupada. Even
if somebody speaks philosophy, and speaks philosophy nicely, still, that person
is a cheater. Why? You know:

"But he who makes a show of being a yogī while actually searching for the
objects of sense gratiﬁcation"

That is a person who is a cheater.

"Such a pretender’s mind is always impure, and therefore his show of yogic
meditation has no value whatsoever."

That is just a show. But, and it will not lead to any spiritual advancement.
Now, here, we may wonder that is Krishna in a p..., a blanket way, condemning
renunciation entirely? You know, we see that, Srila Prabhupada himself took
sannyasi. And we have so many sannyasis and brahmacaris in our movement. So, you
know, how can we relate this with Bhagavad Gita? What Krishna is telling over
here. Actually, Krishna talks about multiple levels. And in this section,
Krishna is primarily talking about, not bhakti-yoga. He is talking about
jnana-yoga and karma-yoga. So, in jnana-yoga and in karma-yoga. Jnana-yoga
involves inactivity. Karma-yoga involves activity. So, Krishna is saying,
inactivity and just passing yogic meditation, that will not lead to any
purification. So, here, we are not talking about bhakti at all. In Krishna
Consciousness, whether a person is in the renounced order, the household order.
That person is actually practicing bhakti. And that is, Krishna will talk about
that later on in the Bhagavad Gita. And for devotees, the principle, based on
which they are taking sannyasi is:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

So, that is 18.66, the conclusion of the Bhagavad Gita. So, you know, we, for
us, renunciation is not primary. For u..., us, renunciation is not our sadhana.
Bhakti is our sadhana. And the renounced order is the facility for that sadhana.
So, we adopt renunciation, you know, in the path of bhakti so that we can
practice bhakti better. It is not that we adopt renunciation because
renunciation in and of itself will lead to purification. No. Renunciation is a
tool for us to, a, practice devotional service. That is why Caitanya Mahāprabhu
says that, I am not a sannyasi. There is that famous verse.

	nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir nāpi vaiśyo na śūdro
	nāhaṁ varṇī na ca gṛha-patir no vanastho yatir vā

So, he says, I am not a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. I am not a
brahmacārī, grihastas, vānaprastha, sannyāsī. I am:

	gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ

I am the servant of Krishna. So, a devotee, when the devotee adopts
renunciation, that is for the sake of practicing bhakti. And bhakti involves
activity. Bhakti involves activity. So, here, Krishna is not talking about
bhakti. He is talking about karma-yoga and jnana-yoga. And jnana-yoga involves
inactivity. And that sort of inactive renunciation is what Krishna frowns upon
over here. He recommends active engagement. And that active engagement can be
as karma-yo..., can be through karma-yoga. Or that active engagement can be
through bhakti-yoga, also. And we see in ISKCON, even the, say, brahmacaris
and sannyasis, they are not just doing inactive meditation. They are doing,
actually, active engagement in devotional service. So, now, Krishna will talk
about how activity is preferable to renunciation.

        yas tv indriyāṇi manasā
        niyamyārabhate ’rjuna
        karmendriyaiḥ karma-yogam
        asaktaḥ sa viśiṣyate

So, "yas tv indriyāṇi manasā". Therefore, controlling the senses with the mind,
"niyamyārabhate". "niyamya". "niyamya" is control. "ārabhate". "ārabhate" means
to begin. So, what does one begin? "karmendriyaiḥ karma-yogam". One engages the
"karmendriyaiḥ" and practices karma-yoga. "asaktaḥ". How does one practice
kayma-yoga? With detachment. "asaktaḥ". "sa viśiṣyate". "viśiṣyate" means is
better, is superior. So, Krishna here recommends engagement as contrasted with
renunciation. He said, it is far better to engage oneself positively using the
senses. The significant word here is "karmendriyaiḥ". So, what are our
"karmendriyaiḥ"s? Our s..., hands, legs, our speech. All these are
"karmendriyaiḥ"s. We engage all of them. We do not keep them passive.

        karmendriyaiḥ karma-yogam
        asaktaḥ sa viśiṣyate

Now, even for the yogis. Or even for those who practice passive meditation.
Their jnanendriyas do not become active, inactive entirely. You know, there will
be, they will be seeing, they will be, you know, smelling. Of course, they cut
it down. But the primary action, what causes bondage, is not just what we
acquire through the jnanendriyas. Yes. If we pursue sens..., sensory, sensory
stimulating objects, tempting objects, then that itself causes contamination.
But what causes primarily karmic bondage is when we engage the karmendriyas.
When I see something, that brings some contamination. But when I act on what I
see, then, I get caught. So, I see some delicious food item. Or I smell some
delicious food item. So, ok, there is, information is coming in from the senses.
But when karmendriya, when I go there. And I, legs go there. My hands go there. I
want to eat this. And then, I stuff myself till I feel as if I have put a
boulder inside my stomach. You know. Stomach becomes so full and starts paining.
Then, there is problem because of that. So, problem in this life itself from the
health point of view, and there is, if the food is not offered to Krishna. Then,
there is karmic bondage, also. So, the point is, a, the, Krishna is emphasizing
karmendriya here. Because it is, when we act with the karmindriya, that,
primarily, the bondage occurs. So, he says that, you know, it is far better to
regulate the senses and with the detachment, practice karma-yoga. So, now, we
may wonder, you know, how can we practice karma-yoga if we do not have adequate
level of detachment? So, some people feel that actually, you know, it is better
to go away from the sense objects. Because then at least I will not fall prey to
maya. And therefore, I will stay safe. Some people feel that, m..., m..., if I
am in contact with the world constantly, even contact with se..., if I am
exposed to sense objects, I will fall more prey to maya. It is more likely that
I will fall prey to maya. Therefore, let me stay away from sense objects. Then,
I will stay away from, I will not get entangled in maya. So, you know, now, to
some extent, it is true that out of sight is out of mind. That if you do not
pursue the sense objects, they will go out of mind. But some things are so
deeply rooted in the mind that out of sight does not lead out of mind.
Actually, when something goes out of sight, it becomes all the more prominent in
the mind. And then, we will the, we will turn our sight. Where is it? Where is
it? Where can I find it? So, detachment has to be there to some extent. That
detachment comes from jnana. Without jnana, you know, we cannot have the
practice of devotional service properly. You know, jnana does not refer to
jnana-yoga. Jnana refers to philosophical understanding. When we have proper
philosophical understanding. By that philosophical understanding, we can
steadily practice devotional service. And when we are practicing devotional
service, thus we make spiritual advancement by that. So, here, Krishna is
talking about engaging the senses. So, now, whether we should be, you know,
certainly, as devotees, we do not want to expose ourselves to sense objects that
are, you know, going to take us away from the bhakti. But a, some regulated
engagement keeps us steadily practicing spiritual life. Because, they say, if
someone, we have regulated principles. No eating. Then, there will be no
practice of devotional service, only. So, there is eating. And we can eat also
nicely. But it is eating prasad. That is how we become purified. So, Prabhupada
writes, do not become a:

"a pseudo transcendentalist for the sake of wanton living and sense enjoyment"

Pseudo transcendentalist is the person who pretends to be transcendentalist.
What does he want? Wanton living. In all, so, if one, regulated living is there.
And this is a famous quote. This is based on a quote by Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura which Prabhupada is quoting over here.

"A sincere sweeper in the street is far better than the charlatan meditator who
meditates only for the sake of making a living."

So, making a living. That means what? A meditator, people, especially where
there is a spiritual culture. Or where there is a culture of respecting piety
and spirituality. There, if somebody wears saffron robes. Somebody w..., you
know, is, you know, in the renounced order. Somebody is doing meditation.
Somebody is doing chanting. Then, that person gets respect. And not only the
person gets respect. The person gets donations, also. So, then, when that
happens. The person, some people, there are many people like that who adopt
this. They adopt a garb of a renunciate just so they can get all these things.
So, renunciation should not be adopted because one does not want to take up
responsibility. Some people think, oh, if I have to go to office. And I have to
work. And then, or, I have to take up a job. And after that, I will get some
money. So, instead, let me just renounce. Let me just wear a saffron robe. And
then, what will happen? People will give me donation. People will give the
respect for so. So, that will be very nice. So, it should not be taken as an
escape way from the hard work of material life. If that is the purpose, then we
are cheating ourselves. We are cheating others. The purpose of renunciation,
accepting the renounced order is to have a greater focus on Krishna. But it is
quite unfortunate that there are many people who adopt the renounced o...,
order. They actually do not adopt it. They just take the garb, externally, for
the sake of, you know, cheap prestige and easy living. And this is, this kind of
people have ruined the spiritual culture. You know, these people often, they
exploit others. And when they exploit others, then, that gu..., often gets
widely publicised. And when that gets widely publicised, then people get a
general negative perception of everybody who in the renounced order. So, there
has to be a proper understanding from both, those who are accepting the
renounced order and those who are respecting the renounced order. Those who are
accepting the renounced order have to clearly understand that this is,
this is a, the saffron dress is a dress to be, you know, w..., actually, it
should be worshiped. It represents a de..., it represents renunciation. It
represents devotion to Krishna. And one has to live in a way that honors that
dress. And o..., one takes it up as a responsibility. It is a responsibility
which we away, which we are accepting so that we can, you know, serve more
without more distractions. And for those who are respecting the renounced order,
also, they have to also be careful. That it is not that just because somebody
wears a saffron robe, that person suddenly becomes respectable. Yes, we may
respect if somebody is wearing saffron. But we also have to look at the life.
And life, the person is not living properly, you know, then we cannot associate
with such a person. So, actually, what to speak of somebody wearing saffron?
Somebody wearing devotional garb, also. Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura says that
if a devotee, if the person is a devotee, in the sense, that he is chanting,
wearing tilak, having kanthi-mala, but if a devotee is not behaving properly.
Then, we can respect that devotee from a distance. We should not associate with
devotees in that sense. So, same applies with renunciates, also. So, if there is
no proper understanding of what, you know, renunciation is. And how it is to be
mo..., practiced. And how it is to be understood, recognised by others.
Then, that can lead to this sort of unfortunate, you know, perpetuation,
multiplication of pseudo renunciates. This is, especially happen..., this
especially happens in dhams. You know, the dhams are the places of devotion. And
the dhams are the places of deviation. So, when we go in the association of
devotees to the dhams, then we actually, you know, advance in our devotion. But
dhams can also be places where there is deviation happening. So, people can go
there. And especially in dhams, there are pilgrims who come with a, a, with a
devotional bent of mind. And they want to give donations. They want to give, so,
a, they want to do seva in the dham. And as a part of that, they give donations.
Similarly, people go to dhams and start adopting a devotional garb just for, you
know, getting easy donation from the pilgrims who are coming there. So, we have
to be cautious from our side. And i..., actually, different people come to the
renounced order, also, for different purposes. You know, Sri..., because Srila
Prabhupada has provided us a systematic philosophical understanding, we
understand what is the purpose of renounced order. And also, Prabhupada has also
used to set strong standards for the renounced order. Strict standards. So,
because of that, also, people who are not very serious about spiritual life,
they will not come only to the renounced order. They will just, you know, is too
strict. Forget it. You know, actually, waking up early in the morning. Chanting
sixteen rounds. Following the four regulative principles. Doing the morning
programme. If those in the renounced order start doing that. If there is, you
know, this is too much of a price to pray for prestige and some donations. Better
let me go outside, only. So, generally, Prabhupada has provided us safeguards by
which this kind of things can, will not happen within the Krishna Consciousness
movements. That pseudo renunciates happening. You know, but, a, a, but apart
f..., but still there can always be people who somehow creep in, through those
safeguards. So, we have to be careful. You know. But beyond that, outside
ISKCON, there are many people who do like this. So, as devotees, we have to be
careful. And overall, devotees f..., our focus is not on renouncing. Our focus
is on connecting. So, you know, we connect everything with Krishna. So, even
devotees, who are renounced, also. If they have certain talents, they may use
those talents in Krishna's service. They do not reject those talents materially.
So, they, "karmendriyaiḥ karma-yogam".

So, Tamāla Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja, when he was building the, he..., helping Prabhupada
build the Juhu temple. And making the arrangements for that. Procuring the land.
And negotiating with the, mister Amit, mister Ann who was trying to fleece the
devotees. So, the land dealings were becoming so complex. And it was causing so
much anxiety. One day, he came to Srila Prabhupada. And he said, Prabhupada, you
know, this land, this is causing me so much anxiety. I am not able to chant Hare
Krishna attentively. It is disturbing my chanting. So, Prabhupada smiled at
Tamāla Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja. And He said. No. Yes. It is disturbing my chanting, also.
You know, that was the last thing that Tamāla Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja expected. You
know, Prabhupada is a pure devotee, a mahā-bhāgavata. How can anything disturb
his chanting? Then, Prabhupada said, your anxiety for serving Krishna will take
you back to Krishna. Your anxiety for serving Krishna will take you back to
Krishna. So, you know, as devotees, bhak..., we make spiritual advancement by
developing our relationship with Krishna. And developing our relationship means
taking up responsibility. For Krishna wants His mission to spread. And we take up
responsibility for the spreading of Krishna's mission. So, a, taking up
responsibility meals accepting anxiety. So, when we accept anxiety, we are,
through that acceptance of anxiety, expressing our affection, expressing our
devotion, you know, to Krishna. And that itself will lead to spiritual
advancement. So, of course, when we take up anxiety, also, we have to take up
anxiety that is manageable for us. You know, we cannot take up unmanageable
anxiety. So, sometimes, when anxities become unmanageable, then we may have to
tell. You know, this has become a bit too much. I will do this, this services.
But this is, can you hand this over to somebody else? We can tell that to senior
devotees like that. But in general, the principle, we have to know that, we
should not be running away from anxiety in the name of, you know, practicing
spirituality. No. By taking up anxiety, you know, for Krishna's sake, we make
spiritual advancement. So, now, why is Prabhupada comparing a charlatan
meditator with the sincere sweeper over there? He is pointing out that the
externals do not matter. From the varnashram point of view, a sweeper may be
called as a shudra. But if that sweeper is doing the d..., devotional activities
responsibly. The, then, that sweeper will make spiritual advancement. So, the
externals are useful to the extent that they aid in the internals. But if the,
you know, internals are there, then whatever the externals, they will, one will
keep making spiritual advancement. So, now, Krishna will give one more reason
why Arjuna should do his duty.

        niyataṁ kuru karma tvaṁ
        karma jyāyo hy akarmaṇaḥ
        śarīra-yātrāpi ca te
        na prasidhyed akarmaṇaḥ

So, "niyataṁ". "niyataṁ" is prescribed. "kuru karma tvaṁ". So, do your
prescribed duty. "karma jyāyo hy akarmaṇaḥ". So, bet..., is, "karma jyāyo" is
superior, better. "karma" is better than "akarma". "śarīra-yātrāpi ca te". So,
"yātrā". You know, we have all heard Vrindavan "yātrā". We have heard Mayapur
"yātrā". So, "śarīra-yātrā". You know, the s..., so, the soul is on a "yātrā" of
the "śarīra". The soul is in the body. And the soul goes from one place to
another. And so, the, our one lifetime is like a pilgrimage in the body. So,
"śarīra-yātrāpi ca te". The, the journey through the body means li..., survival.
"na prasidhyed akarmaṇaḥ". One will not be able to do that. One will not be able
to survive if does not do one's prescribed duty. So, here, Krishna is saying,
what is another reason? For bodily maintenance. So, Krishna has till now given
three reasons why akarma is, you know, is n..., you know, inactivity,
renunciation is not to be done by Arjuna. The first reason was that it is
unnatural. It will not lead to purification. It will not lead to advancement.
Second reason is, it will disrupt social order. Because people will get misled.
It will become hypoc..., hypocritical. So, it will not benefit oneself. It will
not benefit others. Now, b..., now, we will talk about benefitting oneself, it
is about making spiritual advancement. Just by externals, one does not lead to
spiritual advancement. You know. And it will misre..., misrepresent, and
mislead. And third is, one will not be able to maintain one's body, also.
So, therefore, you know, o..., we have to do our prescribed duty. What do we
mean by maintaining one's body? Actually, in the Vedic culture, the "varṇa" is
for the body. The ashram is for the soul. In a broad sense. So, you know, the
"varṇa", where the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, that particular, the,
according to one's "varṇa", when one does activities, then one is able to make,
you know, contributions to society according to one's psychophysical nature. And
thereby, also earn one's living. So, the dharma, the p..., karma, and, the
karma, the prescribed duty for the person is the sva-dharma. There is the
material dharma and there is spiritual dharma. So, the material dharma, when one
does, then by that one earns one's living. So, for a "kṣatriya", the sva-dharma
is ruling. A, so, by ruling, the "kṣatriya" earns him a livelihood. So, of course,
"kṣatriya" does not, do not take salary. "kṣatriya"s gets ch..., ch..., get
ta..., get taxes. But either way, the important point is that the "kṣatriya"s,
they have their sva-dharma. And similarly, every "varṇa" has its sva-dharma. So,
by doing that particular karma according to one's sva-dharma, one earns one's
living. So, now, in today society, we do not have the varnashram system. So, we
may have, have our different prescribed duties. We may have a job. We may have,
may be students. We may be housewives. Whatever. So, now, we all have to do our
worldly duties. And by that, we are able to maintain ourselves. So, for bodily
maintenance. For personal purification. And for the sake of setting a good
example, you know, we need to act according to our, you know, prescribed duties.
So, in this way, Krishna tells Arjuna that do not give up your prescribed
duties. Do your prescribed duties. And by this, you will make spiritual
advancement. Now, Arjuna may still have a question. Ok. All that is fine. But my
goal is, my question was about bondage. You know, I want to give up activity.
Because inactivity, you know, activity will lead to bondage. And inactivity is
the way by which I can stay free from bondage. So, then, the next verse tells.
No. That will not happen. You can still do activity and still stay free from
bondage.

        yajñārthāt karmaṇo ’nyatra
        loko ’yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ
        tad-arthaṁ karma kaunteya
        mukta-saṅgaḥ samācara

Hmmm. So, "yajñārthāt". For the purpose of Yajña. "karmaṇo". When one does, so,
one should do work for the purpose of Yajña. "’nyatra loko". If, "anyatra", if
for any other purpose, one does work, "loko ’yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ". One becomes
bound by karma. Therefore, "tad-arthaṁ karma kaunteya". What is "tad-arthaṁ "?
"Yajña", "arthaṁ", means for the sake of Yajña, "karma kaunteya". Arjuna, you
should do. Then, "mukta-saṅgaḥ samācara". Then, you will always stay free from
bondage. You will not get associat..., you will not get bound. So, what does
this verse refer to? Now, this is the first reference in the Bhagavad Gita to
the concept of Yajña. Yajña will come again repeatedly in this chapter and will
be referred to a few times in the later chapter, also. Now, Yajña also has,
there is a form. And there is a principle. Just like in yoga, there is a form.
Most people associate wi..., yoga with sitting and doing yoga asanas, particular
asana. But that is the form. And that is one particular form. And the principle
is, yoga means connection. Connection of the soul with the Supersoul. Similarly,
Yajña has a form. And Yajña has, has a principle. So, generally, pe..., people
just focus on the forms. You know, the form of Yajña is that we have a fire
sacrifice. And in the sacrifice, ahuti is made. And when the ahuti is made in
the fire sacrifice, then the Yajña is set to be performed. So, that is a form.
But what is the principle? The principle is sacrifice. Sacrifice. So, in Yajña,
some people may say, you know, what is the? So, you know, you just take ghee.
You take grains. Put into fire. That goes waste. What is this? It is simply a
waste of money. Why are you wasting money like this? So, they think the wasting
happens. Actually speaking, there are multiple levels at which we can understand
this. You know, when, you know, the yajnic s..., p..., sacrifice..., fires are,
sacrificial fires are made properly, according to Vedic descriptions. Then, the
Yajña becomes the mount of Lord Viṣṇu. And

        agni devanamavamo vishnuh
        devanamparamo vishnuh
        avamo agni tadantara sarva devata

        agnirvai devanamavamo vishnuh paramah tadantara sarva devata

So, the Rigveda says that among devatas, parama. The Supreme dev... devata is
Vishnu. You know, paramo is Vishnu. Avamo, lowest is Agni. "tadantara sarva
devata", in-between, there are other devatas. So, lowest does not necessarily
mean in terms of power. You know, Agni is not the lowest in terms of power. But
lowest in terms of accessibility. So, Viṣṇu is transcendental. Whereas, you
know, among the devatas, all the other devatas can be accessed through Agni. So,
when the fire sacrifices are performed, and through the fire sacrifices, Agni
deva is manifesting as the fire. And he is accepting. But he is the "vāhana". He
is the means by which the sacrifice goes through all the other devatas, also.
So, in this way, the princ..., we, we will discuss about Yajña in more detail in
one of the, in the next class. But here, the principle is what? That, what is
being offered to Agni is going through the de..., going through all the devatas.
Now, how does this happen? There is a complex subtle, you know, universal
government which does this. Just like when we have a credit card system. Now, I
have put some five thousand rupees in, you know, or fifty thousand rupees in a
bank over here. Now, all that I get is a card. Yeah. You lost. Some, some
person who use, does not know what credit card system is. He says, hey, you
have lost fifty thousand rupees. So much. When you just got one piece of
paper. What did you get? You lost everything. No. One who understands the
system properly. You know, he said, it is, is worth that fifty thousand rupees.
I have not lost anything. So, similarly, actually, from the material point of
view, it may appear that I am putting this, a, grains, and they are just getting
lost. But actually, they are being accepted as the offering. And that offering
is going to the devatas. You know, ultimately going to Vishnu. A, Vishnu is
Yajña Ishvara. He is the Lord of the Yajña, Yajña-pati. So, ultimately, all
"Yajña"s are meant for Him. So, there is a co..., subtle system by which this
happens. And the p..., just as a person who is uninformed about modern financial
systems may think that, you know, putting money and getting a credit card is
usel..., is lo..., wastage of money. Similarly, some people may think that just
putting forth ru..., putting things into the fire. And they are just losing
everything. But actually, we are getting pious credits. We are getting punya. We
are also getting our material necessities. We will see how that happens. But the
important point is, not lost. It is just material vision that i..., that it is
lost. And, but Krishna is now, in this particular verse, He is talking about the
principle. He is not talking about a form of Yajña. The principle is sacrifice.
So, I could have eaten the ghee. But I offer it to Lord Vishnu through Agni. I
could have taken the grains for myself. But I offer them to Lord Vishnu. So,
what I could have enjoyed, I will do it, I give it up for the sake of the Lord.
That is sacrifice. So, Yajña represents sacrifice. So, Krishna is telling here,
when you do your work as a sacrifice, a, then you will not be bound. You will be
liberated. So, therefore, do your work as a sacrifice. Then, there is no bondage
at all. And that is the principle of varnashram. So, varnashram, Prabhupada
quotes over here from the Viṣṇu Purāṇa.

"Varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān/ viṣṇur ārādhyate."

The purpose of varnashram ultimately is to satisfy Lord Vishnu. And when o...,
one, does, does thus way, the, this way. Then, one is not bound by karma. So,
now, Krishna had addressed over here Arjuna's concern about bondage by saying
no. If you do work for the sati..., for the purpose of Yajña. Then, you will not
become bound. So, in this way, Krishna concludes the section by saying that you
sh..., should act. Do not give up activities, not renounce, but act. And act in
such a way that you will not get bound. So, we will continue the next section in
the next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna. 
