Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a8bhW4CtXSM
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=a8bhW4CtXSM&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_043_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_01_Verse_01_to_07_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=y9wrHnuouoi5Z8jxtqlg2ANpj9t8MTU0ODQ4Njk0OUAxNTQ4NDAwNTQ5

Hare Krishna.

sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome to our Bhagavad Gita class. Today, we will begin with the
Bhagavad Gita, from, starting from chapter one onwards. And our goal will be to
try to complete the Bhagavad Gita in hundred classes. That will be approximately
seven verses per class. But because the first chapter does not have so much
philosophy, we will go a little faster in the first chapter. And then
afterwards, we will go little more slowly. So, let us begin with the first
chapter. Before we look at the first chapter, let us just have a look at some
general principles for understanding the Bhagavad Gita. So, these are broad
features of the Bhagavad Gita. Now, the Bhagavad Gita is often known as a
yoga-shastra. So, we discussed briefly the position of the Bhagavad Gita. Now,
from the Gita Mahatmya point of view. So, let us look at it further.
Significance of the Gita is that, it is Shruti in the Smriti. So, technically
speaking, it can be classified as Smriti. Why Smriti? We discussed in our
Isopanisad classes that there are two categories of Vedic literature, Shruti and
Smriti. So, the Vedas and the Upanishads, which are a part of the Vedas. The
Vedas have four parts. Brahmanas, Aranyakas, Upanishadas, and Samhitas. So,
those are the parts of the Vedas. So, those Vedas are considered Shrutis. That sound
vibration which is directly received from the Absolute. And Smriti refers to
that sound vibration when it is understood, internalised and expressed by the
great sages. Shruti is about hearing. Smriti is about... Shruti is about hearing
and transmitting. Smriti is about h..., after hearing, smriti, meditating,
contemplating, remembering, internalising, realising, and then expressing. So,
some people consider Smriti to be lower than Shruti. Because the Smriti is said
to be not the direct revelation of God. But it is the understanding of the
acharyas, understanding of the sages. That is true in one sense from the
technical perspective. But scripture is not just a book of body that is s...,
mere anthology of text. It is a symphony of revelations. That is past not just
through the medium of the texts, but also the medium of the hearts. So,
scripture is understood through not just the text, but also the examples of
those who are living according to text. So, therefore, the Smriti is actually in
many senses considered to be more important because there the scriptural wisdom
is made accessible, made comprehensible, is made relishable by the realisations
of the great sages. So, therefore, Smriti is not really lower. In fact, there
are scriptural statements which also say that without studying the Smriti,
Shruti cannot be understood. The education of Shruti is not complete without
education of Smriti. So, so even if we from a technical point of view say that
Smirit is lower, but still if we look at the definitional point of view, from
that point of view of textual classification, the Bhagavad Gita comes in the
Smriti as it is mentioned over here. That is in the Mahabharata, the Bhisma
Parva, the Sixth Parva, which is the, of the Mahabharata. And in that, it is in
chapter 25 to 42. Now, there are two primary renditions of the Mahabharata. And
in some chap..., some sections of Mahabharata, the chapters 23 to 40 also. But
the point essentially is that, the, it is eighteen chapters from the Mahabharata
within the Bhisma Parva. And within the Bhishma Parva, when it is positioned
over here, the important point to understand is that from the definitional point
of view, the essential definition of Shruti is that which is the word of God.
And Krishna Himself is God. So, Shruti refers to that which is the word of God,
which is heard by the stages. And Bhagavad Gita is the word of God, which is
heard by Arjuna, which is heard by Sanjaya, which is heard by Dhritarashtra. So,
it is, it is also Shruti in that sense. So, Shruti within Smriti. So, w...,
although, in the Prasthana Traya. In the Prasthana Traya, "traya" refers to the
three pillars of establishing authoritative teachings, Shruti, Smriti and Nyaya.
Bhagavad Gita comes in the Smriti. That is how the acharyas explained it. But
still, the Padma Purana does say that the Bhagavad Gita is the essence of all
the Upanishads. And in that sense, it is of critical important for the overall
internationalisation of the message of the scriptures.

So, now, let us look at some further features of the Gita. We see here, st...,
look at, look at, we will look at statistical features of the Gita. That means,
statistical features means, from, from the point of view of, what may, how many
verses are about what topics. So, in the Bhagavad Gita, there are 575 verses
that are spoken by Krishna, "sri bhagavan uvaca". Then, there are 83 verses
spoken by Arjuna. And most of Arjuna's verses come in Chapter One and Eleven.
And the remaining verses, all of them, there are just 28 verses in 12 other
chapters. And in some verses, there are no, in some chapters, there are no
verses by Arjuna. And Sanjaya s..., San..., speaks 41 verses, which are mostly
in chapter one, and other chapters also, "sanjaya uvaca" also comes in two,
eleven and eighteen. And Dhritarashtra speaks one verse which begins the
Bhagavad Gita. So, in this way, the 700 verses are there. Now, sometimes we say
that the Bhagavad Gita is spoken by Krishna. Which is true. But now we will see
over here by, from this numerical point of view that 125 of these verses are not
spoken by Krishna. So then, is it correct to say that the Bhagavad Gita is
spoken by Krishna? So, Baladeva Vidyabhushana analyses this. And he explains
that just as, he gives, he gives it by proximity shapes quality. So, he says
that, the essential message of the Gita is the message that Krishna has given.
And everything around that is just the context that immediately and powerfully
brings out the relevance, the necessity, the importance of that message. So,
because Krishna's words are transcendental and the surrounding words of the
Gita, which preface, or which succeed Krishna's verses, they are, provide the
context of a proximity to Krishna's wo..., words. They also acquire
transcendental characteristic. So, in the technical point of view, they are not
sp..., remaining 125 verses of the Gita are not spoken by Krishna. But from the
overall point of view that they also contribute to the transmission of Krishna's
message. So, they are also set to be in a sense potent, in a sense
transcendental. So, we consider the recitation of the whole Bhagavad Gita
purifying. It is not that when "dhritarashtra uvaca", oh, Dhrtarastra, or the
attached person. So, if I say Dhrtarastra and I recite his verse, I will not
become purified. Oh, I should only find out which verses in the Bhagavad Gita
"sri bhagavan uvaca". And I will recite only the verses. I will not recite other
verses. No, this is parochial attitude. This is a short sighted attitude because
we, we understand that Krishna's words, the purification is not just the recitation.
Yes, recitation is extremely important for those who are inclined to do it. And
all of us can recite verses for purification. We will discuss in the seventeenth
chapter how Krishna says this one of the austerities of speech, by which our
speech becomes austere and pure. But along with that, Krishna also wants to
convey meanings. And the meanings are understood with the context. That is why
we consider the recitation of all the verses of Gita purifying. So, so it is not
in a technical sense that Krishna spoke all the seven hundred verses. But in the
overall sense, all the seven hundred verses contribute to the meanings spoken
by, the essential message spoken by Krishna. Now, same applies actually to
Srimad Bhagavatam also. It is not that whole Srimad Bhagavatam was spoken by
Sukadeva Goswami. Sukadeva Goswami in fact appears in the Second Canto, First
Chapter. Or rather, his first verse appear in the Second Canto, First Chapter.
He appears in the last Chapter of the First Canto. That is 19th Chapter. And
then after that, he starts speaking in the next Canto. But still, the point is
that because it all, the, what has been spoken earlier is contributing to the
message. So, therefore, it is said the whole Srimad Bhagavatam is spoken by
Sukadeva Goswami. Sometimes, it is said. Now, when Krishna speaks, He covers a
wide variety of topics in the Bhagavad Gita. And His purpose is to establish the
best sadhya and the best sadhna, the topmost sadhya, the topmost sadhana.

Another feature of the Gita is that there are many names which are used to
address. And Arjuna is addressed by over twenty other names. And Krishna is
addressed by thirty-three other names. So, this indicates, the names indicate
various specific significant points. That means the acharyas explained that in a
particular context, when a particular name is used, that context helps us to
understand the significance of that name. But beyond that also, overall, the
context helps us to, the names indicate the personal nature of the
reciprocation. You know, if both of them are just es..., temporary
manifestations of Brahman. So, I am Brahman. You are brahman. And all names are
illusion. Then, there is no need for one Brahman to refer to another Brahman by
so many different names which are all basically forms of illusion. And
the purpo..., the, especially, this will be all the more true, when the
discussion is based on talking about how to go from illusion to light. "Tamaso
mā jyotir gamaya", that is the Upanishad's di..., message. And that is
demonstrated in the Bhagavad Gita. Because Arjuna is overwhelmed by illusion.
And Krishna helps him come out of illusion. So, this indicates the personal
nature of the relationships even in transcendence. Now, why is the Gita called
the yoga-shastra? So, yoga-shastra, it is often called.

        tahad viti yo adyaha

So, we say at the beginning of the Gita. And:

        ata
        
So and so:

        ata
        
So and so, then:

        yoga shastra

We say. So, the word "yoga" comes again and again in the Bhagavad Gita. The word
"yoga" appears 78 times in the Bhagavad Gita, and in 15 of the 18 chapters. So,
only chapter 1, 15 and 17 is the word, Bhagavad Gita, not, yoga is not present.
And if we look at variants of it, then the way, yogi is found 28 times. And
yukta is found even more, 49 times. So, 78, plus 28, plus 49 becomes 155. So,
the word appears a huge number of times in the Bhagavad Gita. Now, if we
consider 155 out of 700, it is almost, it is more than 20 percent. So, this,
more than 20 percent of the Gita's verses have the word yoga or its related
form. So, directly also, by seeing how repeated the word yoga, repeatedly the
word yoga comes in the Bhagavad Gita, we can understand that it is a book about
yoga. And if we look at, f..., not just the numerical frequency of the words,
but also the essential meaning of the message, then we see that the message is
all about yoga. The message is about a connection. Yoga co..., is related with
the word yuja. Yuja means to connect. And the whole point is to connect the Soul
with the Supersoul. Connect the atma with the Paramatma. So, and there are, the
Bhagavad Gita analyses various meanings for this connection. And it ultimately
concludes by talking about how the means of bhakti is the best. So, it analyses
various forms of yoga, and establishes of bhakti yoga is the highest, the best
way to connect with Krishna. So, when we talk about the Bhagavad Gita, we are
talking about the yoga-shastra. And if we look at the context also, Arjuna was
right next to Krishna. You know, Krishna was a charioteer. Arjuna was the
chariot warrior. And the charioteer and the chariot warrior were a team. And
they were in the same chariot. So, although they were there, what ha..., and
they were there together for one mission. So, initi..., initially, there was
yoga in their intentions, in their mission. Both of them were there to fight a
war. But when Arjuna saw, saw the warriors. Then, we will see what happened
after that in the first chapter. But basically, that perception created a
viyoga. There were vi..., there was yoga. But there came viyoga. Viyoga means
separation. Separation was not physical. Both of them remained in the same
chariot. But the viyoga was in terms of emotions, was in terms of conceptions,
was in terms of intentions. So, Arjuna became overwhelmed by come..., by, by
emotions of grief and apprehension, over whether I should fight or not. And
his conception became largely body based. And because of that, he lost. The
clarity of purpose which could have helped him to move forward q..., well. So,
this was a viyoga and by the words of Krishna to Arjuna, at the end, again yoga
came. Again yoga came up means, again both of them became one in intention. It
was "kariṣye vacanaṁ tava". That is the conclusion of the Bhagavad Gita from
Arjuna's decision point of view. So, Krishna concludes his speech in 18.72. And
there He asks Arjuna, so, has your illusion gone now?

        kaccid etac chrutaṁ pārtha
        tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā
        kaccid ajñāna-sammohaḥ
        praṇaṣṭas te dhanañ-jaya

So, oh Arjuna, have you heard attentively? Has your illusion been destroyed? Has
your doubts gone away now? So, and what is Krishna, Ar..., Arjuna replying? Yes,
he says.

        sthito ’smi gata-sandehaḥ
        kariṣye vacanaṁ tava

He replies in 18.73 verse that yes, I am situated in diminishion, and lacked, as
I, my doubts are gone. And I will act, do as you act. So, what has happened? The
yoga has happened again. So, in this way, from the numerical frequency point of
view, from the essential message point of view, and from the bracketing context
point of view, all these we see that the Bhaga..., from all these perspectives
that the Bhagavad Gita is the book about yoga. It is a yoga-shastra.

Now, moving forward, let us look at the chapter one overview. So, here, we have
46 cha..., verses in the chapter. And in these 46 verses, basically, two themes
are discussed. For as we see, 1 to 26 verses is observing the armies. And 27 to
46 verses is Arjuna's lamentation. So, accordingly, this chapter has been named
by different Gita commentators in different ways. So, Srila Prabhupada follows
one tradition of commentators, who focus on the first part. And then, the name
is Sainya Nirikshan Yoga, observing the armies in the battlefield. And another
name, which is used by another set of acharyas, another set of Gita
commentators is Arjuna Vishada Yoga, the yoga of lamentation. The, the yoga of
A..., Arjuna's lamentation. So, Arjuna Vishada Yoga or Sanyan Vikshan Yoga. Now,
among both these yogas, the essential point is the same. It is the s..., s...,
setting up of the background, or the context, or the immediate impetus for
Krishna to speak His message. Now, in the original Mahabharata as it was written
by Vyasadeva and in the Mahabharata that we get today, the, the chapters do not
have any titles. That is why different chapters are given different titles. In
fact, the Bhagavad Gi..., Mahabharata's nomenclature is also different. And that
is why sometimes the same, n..., not, not no..., not in nomenclature, but its
numerology, how its numbering system is also different. And that is why the same
chapters can be referred to by different ways. So, it is in this Parva. It is in
this s..., then the sub..., in this Parva, there is this Chapter. There is this
verse. Or there can be other ways of referring to it also. The Mahabharata is so
vast that accessing its message is often complex in terms of references. But the
essential point is that acharyas depending the Gi..., various Gita commentators
depending on the focus of their presentation have named the Bhagavad Gita
accordingly, named the Bhagavad Gita's chapters accordingly. So, among these two
Sainya Nirikshan Yoga and Arjuna Vishada Yoga, and we have to clearly understand
that when Krishna spoke the Bhagavad Gita, or Arjuna started speaking, you know,
A..., Krishna is not going to say that, that, say at the end of a particular
chapter, ataha, ekadasho adhyayah. He is not going to start a chapter by saying,
now, I am going to speak the eleven chapter. No, the Bhagavad Gita is a normal
conversation. So, it is a live conversation that happened. And then that
conversation is contextualised. And, and to create some reference points for,
for categorisation, then the chapter divisions are made by Vyasadeva. And the
chapter divisions are subsequently named by the various Gita commentators,
according to the focus of their presentation. So, observing the armies in the
battlefield. That is the name that Srila Prabhupada chooses for Chapter One.
Now, we will see prepar..., now in this, there are, in the first 26 verses, we
can divide in three sections. First is, des..., description of the preparations
for war. Then, that is 1 to 13. Then 14 to 20 is, there are signs of victory for
the Pandavas. And then after that, there is Krishna exhibiting role, his, His role as
Bhakta-Vatsala by obeying Arjuna over there. And then after that, 27 to 46 is
Arjuna's speech in which Arjuna expresses his Vishada, his lamentation. And he
gives four reasons why he will not fight. So, those are reasons: compassion,
enjoyment, fear of sinful reactions, and distraction of family traditions. So,
let us look at each of these one by one when we come to it. But we will begin
with the first chapter, as first verse. So, we will recite the verse briefly.
Then, we will discuss it.

        dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca
        dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre
        samavetā yuyutsavaḥ
        māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva
        kim akurvata sañjaya

So, "dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca". So, how is the Bhagavad Gita being spoken? The Bhagavad
Gita is featuring dialog at two levels. First is the dialog between Krishna and
Arjuna, which has not yet begun. But this dialog between Krishna and Arjuna is a
part of a narrative that is told by Sanjaya to Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Dhṛtarāṣṭra is
blind and so he, although war is there, he does not go to fight in the
battlefield. And the war is primarily between his sons and the sons of Pandu.
So, he is eager because his sons are involved. He is eager, anxious to know what
is happening on the battlefield. So, he, before the war started, he was given
the darshan of the virata rupa of Krishna. When Krishna came to Has..., came to
Hastinapur as a santidut, as a peace messenger, but was ripped off, and rejected
by Duryodhana. And who even, Duryodhana even tried to arrest Krishna at the
time. Krishna exhibited the virat rupa. And then, the spell binding vision, all
the soldiers who had come to attack him fell in fear and fled. And at that time,
Krish..., you know, Dhṛtarāṣṭra said please allow me to see. And then,
Dhṛtarāṣṭra got the vision at that particular time of Krishna's virat rupa. Then
after that, so that was the only time when Dhṛtarāṣṭra actually saw with his
eyes. So after that, when Sanjaya, when the war was about to became, Vyasadeva
came. Now, Vyasadeva in a sense is the father of, he is the grandfather of the
Pandavas and the Kauravas. It was through Vyasadeva that Dhṛtarāṣṭra was born.
So, the lineage is that the Pandavas are the, like the younger generation, the
current generation. Dhṛtarāṣṭra is the older generation. And Dhṛta..., so,
Dhṛtarāṣṭra was older generation. So, if we consider third generation from the
Pandavas. First, second. Pandavas were first, second, third. So, above that,
generation was, there was Vichitravirya, Chitrāngada. And there was Bhishma.
These three were in that generation. So, Vichitravirya and Chitrāngada, they had
passed away without begetting any offspring. So, therefore, and, and Bhishma who
was there in their darshan, had taken a vow of celebacy. So, now, for this
dynasty to continue, and for the Kingdom to have a ruler, a new King had to be
est..., new was needed. And for that purpose, there was a, the request by
Satyavati to her son before wedlock. That was Vyasadeva. So, if you go one
generation above. That means, there is Pandava generation. Above them is the
generation of the, now, Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Above them is the generation of
Vichitravirya, Chitrāngada and Bhishma. Now, above them is the generation of
Shantanu. So, Shantanu, he was attracted to Satyavati who was a, was a fisher
woman. And through her, he begot Chitrāngada and Vichitravirya. Now, before his
attraction to Satyavati, you know, he had been attracted to Ganga. And Ganga
had been his wife. It is a long story. But not going into the full story right
now. But through, through Ganga, he got seven wives who Ganga actually sent into
the ocean, tr..., driven to the river. Because they were cursed to have take a
birth on the earth. And then, the earlier they died, the earlier they could be
reinstated in heaven. But the eighth son when he was born. The son, Shantanu
could not tolerate. And he said, no, no, no, do not, how can you be so cruel,
how can you kill your own child? And Ganga had taken a pledge from him that, you
know, you will not question my actions. If you question my actions, then I would
go away. So, at that time, because he q..., he questioned her, he said, you
know, her that I will go away, and I will take your son with you. But I, when he
is older, I will bring him back to you. So, that eighth son who had survived was
Bhishma. So, now, Bhishma had taken a vow of celebacy. And afterwards through
Satyavati, through Satyavati, he had begotten further sons. But Satyavati, so
that means in this fourth generation, we have, we have mult..., we have, we
should understand there are different people. There are three people basically.
Satyavati, we have Shantanu that is the king over here. On one side of Shantanu,
we have, we have Satyavati through whom, he has begotten various children. Now,
Satyavati before her marriage, she was a fisher woman. So, she would also, has a
boat woman. You know, her father had asked her to, to take travellers across and
earn piety by that service. So, she was taking Parashara Muni. And Parashara
Muni saw at that time that the very auspicious time. And a great soul was meant
to appear at that time. And he assured Satyavati that her chastity, her
virginity would not be lost. Her chastity would not be compromised. But if she
became a part of higher arrangement for the manifestation of a great soul in the
world, then she would be blessed. So, she agreed. And then through their union,
Vyasadeva was born. So, Vyasadeva, in that sense, is in the same generation as
Bhishma Pitamaha, and Chitrāngada, Vichitravirya. The same generation in that
sense. Of course, because he is a sage, he is considered to be very venerable.
And Bhishma Pitamaha also respects him. So, now, because Chitrāngada,
Vichitravirya had died. So, then Vyasadeva united with their, their wives. And
through them, he had children born. And the children who were born through those
wives were Pandu, Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Vidura. So, of course, Vidura was born
because through a maidservant. Because Ambika and Ambalika, they were, they
united once with Vyasadeva. Becau..., but Vyasadeva was austere sage. And he
was, his continence was not very appealing. In fact, it was a bit frightening.
So, because of his, after they had unit..., each of them had united once. They
managed, they had wanted to unite a second time. So, they put a maidservant over
there.

So then, anyway, the point here is that through this whole complex chain,
Vyasadeva is like the father of, is like a father figure. He is in fact the
person who is, whose si..., as manifested, whose vedia has manifested as
Dhṛtarāṣṭra and as Pandu. So, he was a well-wisher of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. And he tried
to give good advice to Dhṛtarāṣṭra to stop from engaging in that fratricidal
war. But Dhṛtarāṣṭra said that I do not want to fight, but I am unable to stop
Duryodhana. And Duryodhana does not listen to me. And finally, Vyasadeva, just
before the war, he came and said that you do not have eyes, but it is going to
be a, a defining war, in not just your life, but in the history of the Kuru
dynasty, and in fact world history at large. So, I can give you eyes to see the
war. So, Dhṛtarāṣṭra was, he was torn between hoping for the impossible and
fearing the inevitable. Hoping for the impossible, just hoping that s...,
somehow my side, my side will win. My sons will win. And fearing the inevitable.
He knew that Dhṛtarā..., Duryodhana was sinful. And Duryodhana was doomed. So,
he said, actually, he fell thinking and started fearing. That actually my, you
know, I had not seen my sons throughout my life. And now, should I see them
dying? So, it is better I do not want to see. Then he said, I will, then San...,
he was, then Sanjaya, who was the secretary, was given the vision. And Sanjaya,
although he was on the, in, not on the battlefield directly. He was in the
court, court of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Still, by what Srila Prabhupada calls the mystic
television, Sanjaya was able to see his, his vision was projected. And he was
able to see. So, then, and through his transmission, the whole message of the
Bhagavad Gita has been given. Now, what do we mean? It is nice sounding this
word, mystic television. But what does it exactly mean? How does it work?
Actually, there is much in the universe that science has not been able to figure
out. And understanding how complex the universe is brings a sense of humility.
So, many people say that, oh, this is all impossible. This is all mythological.
You know, anything that contradicts the current conceptions of science, that is
immediately called as imaginary, as, as mythological. However, such, such
dismiss..., dismi..., dismissal of that which is incomprehensible is simply
arrogant. And it is completely contrary to the spirit that has led to human
progress. Rather than dismissing that which is incomprehensible as impossible,
you know, what we try to do is we try to expand our understanding to bring the
impossible within the realms of po..., to see how the impossible, what seems
impossible could be possible. So, actually, the powers of the mind are
remarkable. And science is only discovering them now. There are so many powers
like that. So, for example, the, there is, there is something called as staring,
staring experiment. So, so these are, what is the staring experiment? Suppose I
am sitting here, and somebody is behind me, and he is looking at me. Now, I have
no, unless there is a mirror in front of me, there is no way I can know somebody
is there behind and looking at me. And now if I am asked, if you sit in front of
me and ask, is somebody there behind you? Whatever I say will be a guesswork.
And we, just a guesswork, and the probability of my coming right is more or less
the same as my probability of my coming wrong. There is no real strong
probability there of my getting the right answer. Whether whatever it is
correct. So, if somebody is looking. Or somebody is not looking. But the
experiment is carried out by researchers in many parts have repeatedly shown
that the probability that people get the right answer far more than they get the
wrong answer, intuitively. If somebody is looking at us from behind, we feel
somebody is looking, we look around. And if that person sometimes, we all have that
experience, now if somebody is looking, we look into that direction, that person
sees, the looking person moves the eyes away. If the person does not want to be
seen staring at us. So, in general, we found that everybody can perceive this
more than what would be normally expected. Say, the normal percentage would be
fifty percent. That almost everybody can perceive it right more than fifty
percent, sixty percent, seventy percent. Some people can get it right even
ninety percent. Now, how this exactly happens? You know, it is just not
comprehensible within the current, current conceptions of science. But it
happens. So, from the spiritual perspective, you know, how this happens is that
the soul, if we consider three layers, like that. The soul is here. The soul has
spiritual vision. That is covered. And the body has physical vision. That is
functioning through the eyes. But in-between is the mind. And the mind also has
its senses. So, the mind also has eye. You know, we refer to, indirectly by the,
say that the mind's eye. But that is a figurative representation of something
which we see within our mind's eye. But actually, the mind also has an eye in
the sense that there is subtle vision that is there. So, when we look through
the mind's eye, at that time, that means that normally speaking, our, the, our
vision is through the physical eye. But the mind is not, mind is much subtler
than gross bo..., matter. It is subtle matter. And the mind is not restricted by
time and space, the way gross matter is restricted. And that is why the mind can
pursue things which are far away, which are not perceivable by the gross eye.
So, that is how, actually, Sanjaya is able to perceive that which is not visible
directly. That which is not easily accessible, Sanjaya is able to perceive that.
So, now, there can be special, special training by yoga sadhana. For
example, there is prāpti-siddhi. And there are those kinds of siddhis by which
the mind's power can be tapped. And when the mind's power is tapped, then that
person can see things which are at distance, and can even reach and get those
things.  So, s..., but the point here is just as the mind can be trained through
yoga sadhana to perceive things which are not perceivable normally to us.
Similarly, the mind can be granted the power by the blessing of some great soul.
So, when a blessing by a great soul is given, that means ultimately it is God's
power coming through that pole. Then by that, the mind's capacity gets expanded.
And that is how the person is able to see that which is far away. So, there is a
science behind this. That science may not exactly be similar to what we call,
as mo..., mo..., modern material science today. But, you know, the word science
is not monopolised by its modern material version. Science is such that refers
to systematic body of knowledge. And the w..., the way, the subtle body and the
gross body is analysed in the broad Vedic scriptures is also quite systematic.
And it is quite, a, a detailed and exhaustive in many ways. So, essentially,
this was, Sanjaya was given that mystic power by which, yes, he had the normal
vision. He could see Yudhishthira. He could see Dhṛtarāṣṭra right in front of
him. And he was talking with him. But at the same time, he could also see far
away. And in the mind's eye, he could see the battlefield. And actually, what he
could see was not just one part of the battlefield. But he could see everything,
everywhere in the battlefield. That was the remarkable aspect of his vision. So,
this was what was happening. And that is how Sanjaya was seeing and speaking.
So, we were discussing about how, you know, Dhṛtarāṣṭra said I do not want the
vision. But still, he wanted to know, know about the action. So, that is why he
is now asking Sanjaya. And what is he asking?

        kim akurvata sañjaya

What happened over there? What happened? Now, actually, this question is a bit
peculiar. Because he is himself telling that they have all assembled for
"yutsavaḥ". They have all assembled for fighting.

        samavetā yuyutsavaḥ

And then:

        kim akurvata

So, it, now, this seems to be a redundant question. After they all assembled for
fighting, what happened? You know, so, it is like asking after everybody sat
down for prasadam, what happened? Well, the logical answer, after everybody sat
down for prasadam, everybody took prasad. So, now, when somebody asks like this,
after everybody sat down for prasadam, what happened? What does it indicate? It
indicates that, you know, there is some apprehension that the expected pattern
of events may not take place. So, he, Sanjaya, so Yu..., Yudhishth...,
Dhṛtarāṣṭra knows that yes, they have assembled there for fighting. And the
expected pattern of events after they came for fighting, they fought. But his
question, after they came for fighting, what happened, indicates that he is
doubtful whether the, he is apprehensible, the expected pattern of events
took place or not. And why, why the expected pattern of events not take place?
That is indicated in the first line. So, normally, when we refer to sanskrit
verses, we ref..., if Gita verses, we can refer to them as A, B, C, D. So, the
first line of a verse will be A. So, "dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca" if we have. Then,
"dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre" will be, so it will be 1.1A. Then, "samavetā
yuyutsavaḥ" will be 1.1B. And similarly, "māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva" will be 1.1C.
"kim akurvata sañjaya" will be 1.1D. So, the question is raised in 1.1D. And the
questions, you know, strange or paradoxical nature is evident by looking at
1.1D. Yes, why did they assemble? When they have assem..., what did they do, when
they had assembled for fighting? And the strangeness of the question is resolved
by looking at 1.1A. So, 1.1A is "dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre". And the point here
is that the place where they have assembled for fighting is a holy place. It is
a pious place. It is a "dharma-kṣetre". Now, Dhṛtarāṣṭra knows that, you know,
sacred places have certain vibrations over there. And they can affect the mind
in different ways. You know, so, if we go to a temple. A temple is a holy place.
What happens is normally even ordinary people perceive that by going to a
temple, we feel a different atmosphere over there. Now, many people, even people
who are not devotees, even people who are materialists, even they feel, hey, the
atmosphere of this place is different. Now, most materialistic people, they may
not attribute that special presence to the deities. Certain, they say that, oh,
this pres..., this place is a very nice feel about it. They may say because
oh because everything is arranged ecstatically in a particular way. Oh, because
the vibrations are there. They say that there is some mystical, some presence,
which is coming, which is healing, which is energising. Oh, so, they do not know
what it is. Ultimately, it is a presence of God. Which is manifested, either in
the, the God has himself manifested in the past over there to perform some
pastimes. Or the great sages have invoked the presence of God by their intense
austerities. So, certain areas in space within this material world, where the
Lord's presence has manifested or has invoked, they are considered holy places.
So, the Kurukṣetra is referred to as a holy place in many Vedic scriptures.
Actually, right from the, right from the Vedas itself, Sri..., Shruti, in the
Shatapatha Brahmana, the Kurukṣetra is referred to in the Madhyan...,
Madhyan-dina part of it. It is referred to as very holy places:

        kurukshetra deva yagnam
        
And similarly, in the Mahabharata also, Kurukṣetra is referred. And many many
important, very very defining things have happened in Kurukṣetra. So, for
example, the Parashu..., Parashurama, after he, you know, after he f...,
purified the earth of its tyrannical rulers, the exploitative ksatriyas. Then,
he still felt that I am a, I was a brahmana. And I killed a ksatriya. So, I have
become contaminated. Therefore, I must do atonement. And for the sake of
atonement, he went to Kurukṣetra. And then semanta panca, he has performed
austerities. And like that, many great people have performed religious
activities over there. And therefore, this is a sacred place. So, now,
Dhṛtarāṣṭra is afraid that the sacred place will have its influence on the
people over there. And he knows that the sacred vibrations will favor those who
are pious. And the Pandavas are pious. The Kauravas are impious. So, he sees his
own sons, because they are impious, he is apprehensive that the place may
influence them and they may decide that we will not fight. Ok, let us do some
peace deal. Now, although to other people, Dhṛtarāṣṭra has been saying, I do not
want the fight. Actually, I am just not able to convince, you know, my son. He
is so obstinate. So, first of all, politically, Dhṛtarāṣṭra was the king. And if
he had wanted, he could have stopped Duryodhana. When Krishna is departing, when
Krishna's attempt to come as "shantidoot" does not succeed. It fails. And he
departs. At that time, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, while seeing of his, oh Yadava, please do
not blame me for this battle because I am helpless. So, then, Krishna, He turns
to Bhishma, Drona, and all the elders. And He says, oh so..., oh venerables one,
all of you have seen the emperor of the world declaring that he is helpless. So,
how can the emperor of the world be helpless? So, actually, that helplessness
happens because of attachment. You know, attachment can make the powerful
powerless. Attachment makes the powerful powerless. How? Because they have
power, but when they are attached to someone or something, then, they cannot
make right decisions. They just cannot figure out what is right and what is
wrong. And whatever that object they are attached to. Whatever will be pleasing
for that person, that is what they will do. So, that is what is demonstrated
through Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s example. And Dhṛtarāṣṭra, he is internally, he is hoping.
On one side externally, he says that actually I cannot stop Duryodhana. Although
he has the political lead with the power and position to stop. But emotionally
also, he feels yes, I could not become the king. But at least let my son become
the king. So, he has that attachment. Now, that is why actually, he does not
want the battle to stop. And he is hoping. What will happen? Will the battle
stop? Or will it go on?

        samavetā yuyutsavaḥ

When they have assembled for fighting, what will happen?

        dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre

It is a place of dharma. So, Prabhupada explains that, he is, he knows in a
sense. Now, the word "kṣetre" can have another meaning. The Ku..., now, we,
Ku..., dharma-kṣetre refers between to Kurukṣetra. But dharma-kṣetre also k...,
refers to the place where dharma is cultivated. "kṣetre" is a field. Now, field
is a place for cultivation. So, we can have rice, wheat, other such grains
cultivated over there. So, this is a place where the grains of dharma will be
cultivated. Now, if it is "dharma-kṣetre", d..., if it is a rice field, then
rice will be cultivated. Now, if other things grow over there, they will be weeded
out. They are considered weeds to be apportioned, thrown away. So, similarly, in
a dharma-kṣetre, what will be cultivated will be dharma. And that which is
adharmic, that will be weeds. And the weeds will be uprooted and thrown away.
So, that is fear that my sons, maybe uprooted. They may be destroyed. And that
is why he is asking, what happened? And in:

        māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva

This, so, 1.1C also had revealed something important. It reveals the partizan
mindset of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Dhṛtarāṣṭra, he, as a king, he is supposed to be equal
to all his citizens. As a family elder, he is used to be rev..., he is supposed
to be equal to all the young, younger members of the family. And, but he is
thinking, "māmakāḥ". Oh, my sons and the Pandavas, sons of Pandu. So, we see,
this is a fratricidal conflict. You know, confict between, between brothers,
cousins. And Dhṛtarāṣṭra's thinking has also become wa..., warped, has become
distorted. And he is thinking of, not all the Pandavas, all the Kuru
dynasty's descendents as one family. He is thinking my part, my party and their
party, my sons and Pandava's sons. When they assembled, what happened? So,
actually, this is a very meaning packed verse. And it illustrates the, is, this
is the verse which begins the Bhagavad Gita. And:

        kim akurvata sañjaya

This will actually be answered in 18.78, last verse. In essence, it will be
answered that actually whether Krishna and whether Arjuna, there will be
victory. So, let us look at the next verse. So, now, Sanjaya starts speaking:

        sañjaya uvāca
        dṛṣṭvā tu pāṇḍavānīkaṁ
        vyūḍhaṁ duryodhanas tadā
        ācāryam upasaṅgamya
        rājā vacanam abravīt

So:

        dṛṣṭvā tu pāṇḍavānīkaṁ

Now, Sanjaya is speaking. Now, he is referring to Duryodhana. So, Duryodhana,
what happened? "dṛṣṭvā", he saw. "pāṇḍavānīkaṁ vyūḍhaṁ". So, the soldiers of the
Pandavas, they are assembled in military flankses. Flankses are arrangements of
the soldiers. "vyūḍhaṁ duryodhanas tadā", and he saw it. He was very confident
that actually my army is much bigger than theirs. We have eleven Akshauhinis.
They have only seven. So, we are sure to be victorious. He is completely
confident. In fact, before the war started, he f..., he was so arrogant, so
complacent that he actually sent Shakuni's son, Ulupi. Shakuni's son, he is
Uluka. So, to provoke the Pandavas. And he told how he had insulted a w...,
every one of them. And he said, see, I have defeated you so many times in,
through by insulting you. Now, I will defeat you in war also. Now, they are
Pandava campus in outrage, when they heard the insults which Duryodhana had, had
handed out to them and have they spoken out like that. So, he was so confident
that we will be, so arrogant, complacent that we will be victorious. But now
when he s..., actually saw the armies. Now, army was very competent, very
determinately arranged. So, then, he felt, oh, it is a serious matter. So:

        ācāryam upasaṅgamya

So, he went to Droṇāchārya. And:

        rājā vacanam abravīt

He spoke. Now, interestingly, the word "rājā", who is it referring to over here?
Actually, in the Mahabharata Duryodhana is never referred to a "rājā". He is
referred to as a prince. Because Dhṛtarāṣṭra is the king. So, now, Sanjaya is
speaking to the "rājā". That is Dhṛtarāṣṭra. But still, he is referring to his
son as "rājā". Why is that? The word "rājā" can refer to the k..., word king.
And "rājā" can also refer to one who is very good at rajaniti. One who is at,
very good at politics, at diplomacy. So, he, now, in the future verses,
Duryodhana's diplomatic skills, his political maneuvering will become evident.
And because he is competent at the skills of political things, he is referred to
here as "rājā". Now, what Prabhupada does is, Prabhupada explains both. Sanjaya
said:

"O King, after looking over the army arranged in military formation by the sons
of Pāṇḍu, King Duryodhana went to his teacher and spoke the following words."

As he is saying, Prabhupada takes the king to refer to both the prince,
Duryodhana, who is acting expertly as a politican and also the father, who is
the nominal king. So, in this way, both are talked about. That is why
Prabhupada's rendition of the whole thing. Now, let us go to next verse.

        paśyaitāṁ pāṇḍu-putrānām
        ācārya mahatīṁ camūm
        vyūḍhāṁ drupada-putreṇa
        tava śiṣyeṇa dhīmatā

So, now, many of these man..., many of these verses, from tw..., verse three
till almost verse ten, actually, these ver..., man..., verses are spoken by
Duryodhana. But Sanjaya, while describing, there is no verse in the Bhagavad
Gita which says "duryodhana uvāca". Although these verses are spoken by
Duryodhana. But that is implied in the previous verse. "vacanam abravīt". He
spoke those words. Now, what were the words? "paśya...", "paśyaitāṁ", please
see. "pāṇḍu-putrānām", see the sons of Pandu. "ācārya mahatīṁ camūm". Which I
have seen, wow, formidable military formation, they have made. And then, now,
the question may come up, actually before the war started, you know, Bhishma was
made the commander. So, now, if the king is ca..., if the, the prince is
concerned about the safety of his own army. He should go to the commander. But
he is not going to the commander. He comes to Droṇācārya. Why? Because he wants
to point out the weakness of Droṇācārya. That is why he said:

        vyūḍhāṁ drupada-putreṇa
        tava śiṣyeṇa dhīmatā

This is how, he, later on, he will say, our army has been arranged well by
Bhishma. But our enemy, how were they, say, able to arrange themselves so well,
that is because they attain, now, the commander of the opposite army. Although
Arjuna was the most formidable warrior. But they had decided that,
Dhrishtadyumna would be the commander. And Arjuna would be like the advisor for
Dhrishtadyumna. So, Dhrishtadyumna was the person who had been born with the
blessing. Or he had been, his birth had been invoked with the intention that he
would be the person who would kill Droṇācārya. So, because of that, that had
been his mission right from the birth. Drupada had been once insulted by
Droṇācārya. And, actually, Drupada had earlier insulted Droṇācārya. Then
Droṇācārya insulted him back. And Drupada feeling very mortified did a yajna by
which he asked that he be given a son who will kill Droṇācārya. So, through
yajna, two people had actually appeared. One was this warrior who just appeared
fully clear in armor. And he, as soon as his body, was not born in a baby. He
appeared from the fire. And when he appeared from the fire, he was a, already an
expert warrior. That was Dhrishtadyumna. And then a dark complexion beauty
appeared. And that was Draupadī. So, he, he was known to have been born with the
express intention of killing Droṇācārya. But Droṇā was such a, Droṇā thought
that as a brahmana, I should give knowledge to everyone. And that is why he gave
knowledge even to Drupada's son. Now, Duryodhana is pointing that was serious
mistake that you committed. See, now, what, we, our, our enemy is f..., formed
their flanks so careful, so formidably that we will have tough time. So:

        drupada-putreṇa
        tava śiṣyeṇa

Because there is enmity between Drupada and Dhṛtarāṣṭra. By remembering one's
enemy, by reminding somebody about that person's enemy, that person's anger is
invoked. So, Duryodhana is hoping that by invoking the anger of his teacher,
ācārya, he may be able to bring out the ferocity within him to fight. So,
although he had, Duryodhana has his formidable Droṇācārya, Bhishma, Kripa on his
side, he is not sure about their commitment. He knows that they had chosen to
fight on his side. But he still has doubts about whether they will fight
wholeheartedly. He knows they will not, he, because they do not office...,
he opposes on Draupadī's disrobing. So, he knows that they will not oppose. But
they will fight, fight on his side. But how wholeheartedly they will fight, he
does not know. So, he is telling them about my cause. He says, just see, your
softheartedness, your so called broad mindedness, what has it done? It has
brought us, a bit danger upon us. Now, do not be softhearted like that. Fight
determinately now. So:

        tava śiṣyeṇa dhīmatā

So, the intelligence which you have gave to your enemy's son. Now, that is being
used to fight against us. Now, please do not be softhearted. Fight
wholeheartedly. That is the implied message of this. Then:

        atra śūrā maheṣv-āsā
        bhīmārjuna-samā yudhi
        yuyudhāno virāṭaś ca
        drupadaś ca mahā-rathaḥ

"atra śūrā", "atra" means here. "śūrā maheṣv-āsā". There are many who are,
"āsā" is, bow. "maheṣv-āsā". "maheṣv-āsā" means those who are, or formidable
bowmen. And they are like "bhīmārjuna-samā yudhi". So, for Duryodhana, Bhīma and
Arjuna were the most formidable enemies. And he was almost paranoid about Bhīma
on one side, whom he felt that he could, who he would not be able to tackle. And
Arjuna, and he was hoping that Karṇa will tackle him. So, "bhīmārjuna-samā
yudhi", and what is their nature he says? "yuyudhāno", he says, th..., so,
they are the reference point, the reference says there are many like demonic.
They are so formidable. And there are many like them. And he gives, says:

        yuyudhāno virāṭaś ca

And:

        drupadaś ca mahā-rathaḥ

So, he gives the names of formidable warriors. Now, "virāṭaś" and "drupadaś",
they are elderly. But they are vast experience. And they are also formidable
warriors. So, he says, endless thing, the various warriors, with whom he will
have to contend. Now, we is saying this, so, so, first of all, the armies have
been arranged very formidably. And within that army also, with, along with the
formidable arrangement, there are formidable various warriors further. That
makes things even difficult. So, the Droṇācārya might say that actually
Dhṛṣṭadyumna is not such a big warrior. Ok, if he says, even Droṇācārya says
that Dhṛṣṭadyumna is not a big warrior. There are many other big warriors. And
we have to be worried about them. Then, he says further. He gives a list of
other warriors.

        dhṛṣṭaketuś cekitānaḥ
        kāśirājaś ca vīryavān
        purujit kuntibhojaś ca
        śaibyaś ca nara-puṅgavaḥ

So, sometimes Dhṛṣṭaketu is confused with Dhṛṣṭadyumna. They are two
different people. So, Dhṛṣṭaketu was actually the, another warrior, who had also
fought over there. And there are various warriors. We will not go into the
histories of all of them now. Because that itself will become a whole separate
class. But essential point is "nara-puṅgavaḥ". They are all kings. They are all
formidable warriors. And we will have to contend with all of them.

        yudhāmanyuś ca vikrānta
        uttamaujāś ca vīryavān
        saubhadro draupadeyāś ca
        sarva eva mahā-rathāḥ

And he says, "sarva eva mahā-rathāḥ", they are all formidable warriors.
"yudhāmanyuś ca vikrānta", mighty of the Yudhāmanyu. "uttamaujāś ca vīryavān",
so they are formidable warriors. And then he talks about the Pandava's sons. So,
"draupadeyāś ca", this refers to the sons of Draupadī. So, each of the five
Pandavas, they had got one-one son from Draupadī. So, those fives sons are
referred to as "draupadeyāś". And Arjuna had also married some other wives. So,
one of them was Subhadrā. And through Subhadrā, he had begotten one child. And
that was Abhimanyu. So, now, all of them were of the ne..., next generation, one
generation below Dur..., Duryodhana. But they were all formidable. So, their
army, they give, they are given a mention over here. And among them, Abhimanyu
was fearsome. And that is why Abhimanyu is given a f..., special reference over
here. They are not just referred to as the sons of the Pan..., of the five
Pandavas. But they are referred to as "draupadeyāś". And then Abhimanyu is
referred to separately as "saubhadro".

        asmākaṁ tu viśiṣṭā ye
        tān nibodha dvijottama
        nāyakā mama sainyasya
        saṁjñārthaṁ tān bravīmi te

Now, he start thinking. Now, whenever the king speaks, at that time, people
will hear. So, although he is not the king, but he is effectively acting like
the king over there. Now, he is thinking, he, I wanted to make sure my warriors
are ready to fi..., will be ready to fight. I wanted to s..., trigger,
stimulate, inflate the fighting spirit within Droṇācārya. But he was thinking,
maybe I did something wrong. Maybe, if I glorify, if I talk too much about my
enemies' powers, instead of becoming invigorated to fight, people may think that
I am afraid. That is why I am talking about my enemies' powers. Therefore, he
says, no, people should not think that I am afraid. I am not afraid. So, he
starts speaking about his power. And then he says:

        saṁjñārthaṁ tān bravīmi te

For your information, I will speak:

        nāyakā mama sainyasya

Who are the leaders. Who are the main movers in my army. And:

        asmākaṁ tu viśiṣṭā ye

"asmākaṁ" means mines. And mines are so great that I will only speak about
viśiṣṭāḥ. I will speak only about the special people in that.

        tān nibodha dvijottama

For your emo..., information. "dvijottama", O best of the brāhmaṇas. So, he
wants to show that I respect you. But at the same time, "dvijottama", I will
also speak about other great warriors. So, in this way, he is trying to both
kindle the fighting spirit as well as managing, making sure that their
confidence is maintained. So, what, what he discusses in his, about his party
members, we will discuss in the next class.

Thank you. Srimad Bhagavad Gita ki jaya. Hare Krishna.
