Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SE6frmU1JEA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=9hdsitBBmp1iFO0VTNqCzbvtP918MTU0ODQ4NzM0M0AxNTQ4NDAwOTQz&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_054_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_38_to_46_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=SE6frmU1JEA

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita course. We completed the third
section of the first chapter, the first sect..., of the second chapter. The
first section was about Arjuna's surrender and inquiry, what should, what is,
that would dharma for me? Second section was from 11 to 30. That was Krishna
telling, soul is indestructible. Therefore, fight. Then, 31 to 37 was the
section by, Krish..., wherein Krishna said that because, so, because you do your
dharma as a ksatriya, then you will go to heaven and you will enjoy. So, the
compassion and the enjoyment arguments are now be..., have been countered. Now,
now, Krishna will talk about the Arjuna's fear of sinful reactions, that fear.
He will address it by telling how by working in Nishkam Karma Yoga, you can stay
free from all sinful reactions. So, let us look at that part. 2.38 onwards.
Yeah.

        sukha-duḥkhe same kṛtvā
        lābhālābhau jayājayau
        tato yuddhāya yujyasva
        naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi

So, "sukha-duḥkhe same kṛtvā". Being equipoised in happiness and distress.
"lābhālābhau". "lābhā". Again, and loss. "jaya", "ajayau". Victory and failure.
What is the difference between the two? You know "lābha" and "alābhau" are.
Low profit and loss can be in various endeavors. Jaya and Vijaya, it is also,
in profits and gains are like transitional. During a battle, we can have gains
sometimes, some loss sometimes. But "jayā" means eventual victory. "jayājayau".
"tato yuddhāya yujyasva". You know, s..., be equipoised among all these things.
"yuddhāya yujyasva". Fight for the sake of fighting. "naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi".
Then, you will gain no sinful reactions. S..., so, in 1.36, you know, Arjuna had
said:

        pāpam evāśrayed asmān
        hatvaitān ātatāyinaḥ

If I kill these aggressors, then I will get "pāpam". So, "naivaṁ". So, that was
"pāpam evāśrayed". "ahi", will get "pāpam". But he is saying, "naivaṁ pāpam
avāpsyasi". Krishna is responding over here, you will not get "pāpam". How?
Because you are working with detachment. You are fighting because it is your
duty. You are not fighting for victory. So, now, at this stage, Krishna is,
seems to have almost contradicted Himself. In the previous verse, He has said
that if you win, you will gain heaven. If you, if you win, you will get the
earth. If you lose, you will get the heavens. So, either way, you are gaining.
And, so, the, so Krishna has just now talked about the profit-loss calculation
and had said how practicing the karma-kanda level of religion, and therefore
doing the ksatriya dharma of du..., of fighting, would be best for him. So, he
had just now talked from profit-loss calculation point of view. And suddenly,
Krishna changes stack and says, do not think in terms of profit-loss. Think in
terms of d..., doing your duty. Give up all calculations of profit and loss.
Now, this seems suddenly very, a sudden change. Oh, ho..., a sudden, a, a, not
just a shift, but it is almost like a u-turn in thinking. Not in acting. Krishna
is telling, fight only. In both cases, in 37 as well as 38. But in the
motivation for fighting, there is a sudden and enormous change. Why is that?
Krishna is now taking, in the yoga ladder, Arjuna to, one step higher. Till now,
He was talking about karma-kanda. Now, He is t..., he, going to introduce the
concept of karma yoga. Acting in detachment. So, Srila Prabhupada explains in
the purport how he quotes the same verse which was quoted earlier. In the first
chapter, that, how we are not bound. A devotee is not bound to any forms of
obligation. "devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ". In the first chapter, he quoted
this verse. He quotes it again. So, now, you know, Krishna realising Arjuna's
bewilderment decides to explain what is happening. Why is Krishna speaking
contradictory terms? You know, first profit-loss calculation is known, give up
profit-loss calculations. So, Krishna explains, this is a very important
transitional verse in the, to, in the second chapter to understand the flow of
the chapter.

        eṣā te ’bhihitā sāṅkhye
        buddhir yoge tv imāṁ śṛṇu
        buddhyā yukto yayā pārtha
        karma-bandhaṁ prahāsyasi

"eṣā te ’bhihitā sāṅkhye", till now, I have explained through "sāṅkhye". Then,
"buddhir yoge tv imāṁ śṛṇu". Now, I will explain through the meaning, mean...,
meaning of "buddhir yoge". What will I explain? "buddhyā yukto yayā pārtha".
When you work with your intelligence. Then, "karma-bandhaṁ prahāsyasi". You will
be able to break through the bondage of karma. You will no longer have to
suffer. "karma-bandhaṁ prahāsyasi". We will break it apart. So, let us see what
happens. "eṣā te ’bhihitā sāṅkhye". So, so, now, here, there are several
important terms. There is "sāṅkhye". There is "buddhir". There is "yoge". And
there is "yuktaḥ". So, let us look at these words one by one. "eṣā te". So, what
is "sāṅkhye"? Till now, the word "sāṅkhye" has not been directly explicitly used
in the Bhagavad Gita. Now, of course, some tradition commentators referred to
the second chapter as S..., Sankhya Yoga. So, sankhya basically means analysis,
counting. Sankhya is sanskrit word. And sankhya is counting. So, that which, by
which, that through which, we count. So:

        eṣā te ’bhihitā sāṅkhye
        buddhir yoge tv imāṁ śṛṇu

That, now, till now, e..., e..., ex..., explaining things in terms of sankhya,
analysis. So, explaining, so, at 2.11 to 2.30 was the analysis. You are not the
body. You are the soul. So, counting them, elements of existence. So, we look at
the various elements. And then, we go beyond those elements to understanding the
soul. So, in this way, Krishna talks about sankhya. After He talks about
sankhya, you know, He talks at karma-kanda. And now, He is talking about a,
combining the two through buddhyā yoga. So, Prabhupada's purport focuses on many
themes. Now, most important is the clarification of the term "sankhya". We
discussed in our Isopanishad cla..., course how there are six different systems
of philosophy. So, among these six systems of philosophy, one of them is
sankhya. Now, sankhya i..., is propagated by Kapila. So, traditionally, there
are two understandings of who is this Kapila. There is an atheistic Kapila. And
there is a theistic Kapila. Theistic Kapila is actually the Kapila who is
talked about in the Third Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, especially. Whose
teachings to Devahuti come along. And then, there is the atheistic Kapila, also,
whose teachings are more widely known as, you know, as the sankhya. But both
teach sankhya. And Pr..., our Vaishnava acharya explained that, actually, the
atheistic sankhya, teachings are not f..., actually the, you know, in harmony
with the Vedic conclusions. So, Baladeva Vidyabhushana explains in his Govinda
Bhashya commentary that sometimes even the great sages, although they maybe
themselves learnt in s..., some ways, they come under the influence of the
illusory energy of the Lord. And because of that, they sometimes speak
philosophies which are not in accordance with the conclusion of the Vedas. So,
the atheistic Sankhya's teachings, atheistic Kapila's teachings are not credit
much. They are discounted by the acharyas who actually explain Vedic wisdom to
us. So, if we want to understand sankhya. We have to look at the theistic
sankhya. You know, that is taught by Kapila. Now, that sankhya, which Kapila
teaches, concludes in devotional service. After we analyse the words, w...,
a..., analy..., elements of material nature. Then, we move forward and try to
understand how those elements combined together. And how they all help us to
move closer to a deeper understanding of reality. Now, in the case of this
context, Prabhupada explains that the sankhya will ultimately conclude in
devotional service. Now, what is "buddhiḥ"? "buddhiḥ" means intelligence. So,
sankhya is more like analysis. "buddhiḥ" is internalised wisdom. Prabhupada will
explain in the tenth chapter that, you know, intelligence means to see things in
their proper perspective. And what is "buddhiḥ yoga"? This term will come again
in the tenth chapter, in the famous verse, 10.10.

        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ
        yena mām upayānti te

Krishna explains there how those who serve Him lovingly, He gives them the
intelligence by which they can come to me. So, buddhi-yoga ultimately, at the
highest level is, the intelligence, given by Krishna, by which one can return to
Him. Krishna has not yet referred to Himself directly in the first person in the
Bhagavad Gita as God. Of course, "śrī-bhagavān uvāca" is already there, is a
reference to Him as God. But Krishna has not directly referred to Himself as
God till now. So, in the f..., context of the flow of the Bhagavad Gita,
"buddhi-yoga" refers, not so much to Krishna as God, but a, a, till now, and,
you know, bu..., "buddhi-yoga" as the intelligence given by God, by which to
come to Him. But it basically refers to intelligence that enables once to do
yo..., to, y..., one to do yoga. Intelligence by which one connects with the
deeper reality of life. So, yoga is connection. You know, "buddhi" is
inteligence. "buddhi-yoga" refers here to the intelligence by which one
connects to the deeper realities of life. And, and as the flow of the Bhagavad
Gita will move forward, we will understand that the "buddhi-yoga", in its most
complete sense, is bhakti-yoga. So, now, here, we will have to understand the
subtle inner dynamics of the Bhagavad Gita. What do we mean by subtle inner
dynamics? Words, generally, do not have meanings that are frozen, permanently in
the dictionary. Words have meanings according to their context. So, the word
"buddhi-yoga", you know, it, depending on the subtle inner dynamics of the flow
of the Bhagavad Gita, assumes different meanings. So, as we move forward, as I
said, in 10.10, Krishna will explain "buddhi-yoga" is the intelligence by which,
you know, we can come back to Him. So, that is true. But because Krishna has not
res..., referred to Himself till now in the Bhagavad Gita. Krishna has not
referred to coming back to Himself, of, as the goal of life. So, in this
context, you know, if, from the point of view of the flow of the Gita, word
"buddhi-yoga" means, wha..., the "buddhi" by which one applies the knowledge
that has been given earlier. So, if one understands that I am not the body. I am
the soul. Then, what should one do based on that? So, one level is, I should not
be afraid of death. But I should look for a, a postnatal, a postmortem rather,
postmortem destination. What is going to me, happen to me after death? So, one
level of postmortem destination is heavens. But even the heavens are temporary.
So, higher than heavens is liberation. So, if one does punya, one will get
heaven. But if one acts with, with detachment, one will get something higher.
So, Krishna is going to take the discussion to one level higher by telling that.
Arjuna, you should act with detachment. So, "buddhi-yoga" here, in this context,
refers to using the "buddhi" that one come..., get, one gets from atma-jnana.
From the knowledge that I am not the body. I am the soul. And using that, do
yoga. Yoga is to realise the spiritual nature and relish at the spiritual level
of reality. So, that is not what is done in svarga. Because svarga, also, one
gets material enjoyment, better material enjoyment, religious material
enjoyment, far more long lasting material enjoyment than what is available here.
But still, it is material enjoyment. It is not spiritual. So, Krishna is telling
now how we will combine the two by which one will know how to work without
bondage. "karma-bandhaṁ prahāsyasi". You will be free from bondage by this. So,
Prabhupada explains in the purport that:

"Buddhi-yoga is therefore the transcendental quality of the work that we
perform."

So, "buddhi-yoga" is not just the work, but the transcendental quality of the
work. That means the motivation with which we are doing the work. Why am I
working like this? Am I working for Krishna's sake? Am I working for my own
enjoyment? When I understand that, then I act accordingly. Therefore, the
transcendental quality of the work that we perform, that is "buddhi-yoga". So,
then, after that:

        nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti
        pratyavāyo na vidyate
        sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya
        trāyate mahato bhayāt

So, "nehābhikrama-", now, Krishna, when He starts describing what is
"buddhi-yoga". First, He starts by glorifying it. What are the specialities of
this particular way of working? Whatever one attains, that attainment will be
internal, eternal. It will be internal. And so it will be eternal.
"nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti". In this endeavor, "abhikrama", "ma-nāśo ’sti", there
is no "nāśaḥ" that will happen. So, there will be no destruction. And there will
be no "bi...", "pratyavāyo na vidyate". There will be no destruction and no
diminution, also. Things will not decrease, also. "sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya".
That even if one does a little dharma.

        sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya
        trāyate mahato bhayāt

One will be freed from the greatest of sinful reactions. Not, a, sinful
reactions, not mentioned over here. "bhayāt". But ultimately, all fear is
because of the various kind of sins that we have done. And the reactions that we
are going to get. That is what is fearful in this world, ultimately speaking.
So, what, what is this referring to, actually? Now, Krishna has not explicitly
stated over here that the attainment of svarga is temporary. That He will state
later in 9.21. You know. "kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti". And there, He will
more explicitly contrast 9.21 to 9.22. Where He says, "ananyāś cintayanto māṁ"
for those devotees who constantly think of Him. Then, "yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham".
I prep..., I preserve what they have. And I provide what they lack. So, in this
verse, Krishna is not, because he has not talked about Himself till now, it is
not so explicitly devotional. B..., so, there, Krishna says, it is, I personally
protect for the devotees. But here, Krishna is talking in general for those who
are on the transcendental path that whatever they strive for, it will not be
lost. And whatever they achieve, that will s..., not only stay with them
forever. But it will save them from the greatest danger, also. So, we know
Ajamil. He just chanted the names of Narayana once. And he was saved from a
great danger. So, when we practice spiritual life, we are trying to gains that
which is eternal. So, everything else that we gain, we achieve it for a short
time. And then it is lost. But when we ch..., practice Krishna Consciousness.
Whatever, we, attraction to Krishna that we have, that will stay on forever,
lifetime after lifetime after lifetime. We will have it forever. That is how
actually we understand that Krishna Consciousness is transcendental. Its gains
are eternal. Now, of course, Krishna is not talking necessarily about Krishna
Consciousness over here. That is definitely there. But He is talking about the,
you know, the credits of aiming for a spiritual goal. You know, any attraction
that we develop towards the spiritual is greater, is hav..., having a greater
long-lasting effect than any attraction towards the material. So,
"nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti". That actually, whatever one achieves on the spiritual
path, that is never lost. That stays with one forever. And Prabhupada will quote
in the purport about how, whatever we do in the spiritual life, one will, will,
when, it will lead to our gain only. And he quotes this famous verse from
the Bhagavatam. "tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ". We quoted a similar theme in our
Isopanishad, also. How, what we do in the, the spiritual realm stays with us
forever. Now, let us move forward. And this will, this theme will explore more
in the Sixth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, what happens to a person after, you
know, practicing Krishna Consciousness. What if that person falls away? There is
no permanent fall. So, first characteristic, Krishna describes is that the
results will be eternal. But then, after describing the characteristics, He
describes the qualifications. What does one need to possess to actually be able
to do this?

        vyavasāyātmikā buddhir
        ekeha kuru-nandana
        bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca
        buddhayo ’vyavasāyinām

So, "vyavasāyātmikā buddhir". You know, one's "buddhir" has to be one-pointed,
has to be fixed. And "ekeha kuru-nandana". At one place. One place. "bahu-śākhā
hy anantāś ca". On the other hand, those people who are not fixed like this, in
one-pointed. Their, their intelligence has "bahu-śākhā". This, this, the
"bahu-śākhā". And how many "śākhā", in fact? "anantāś ca". Unlimited "śākhā"s.
For whom? "buddhayo ’vyavasāyinām". "avyavasāyinām". Those people whose "buddhi"
is "avyavasāyi", is not fixed in one place. So, here, we see that, Krishna is
telling Arjuna that he should become one-pointed. Indirectly, not directly
telling this. He is just telling by contrast. These people, their intelligence
is fixed. These people, their intelligence is multibranch..., multibranched. And
it is dissipated. See, when we want to do something, we have to focus. The more
we let our intelligence get splayed, distributed, it gets dissipated. Our
consciousness, if we splay it. I have to do this, also. I have to do that, also.
I have to do that, also. So, actually, when desires crowd our mind. Then,
dilemmas cloud our intelligence. When desires crowd our mind. I want to do this.
I want to do this. I want to do this. I want to do this. When desires crowd our
mind, then what happens? Dilemmas. Dilemmas. Oh, should I do this? Should I do
this? Should I do this? Should I do this? If I do this, this will happen. If I
do that, that will happen. Then, dilemmas cloud our intelligence. So, cloud
means, it may get very difficult for us to decide. Should I do that? Or should I
do that? So, therefore, we have to be, be focused. So, sometimes, we feel that I
have to do so many things. Sometimes, you know, some people want to travel. And
when they want to travel, you know, they want to take their whole house with
them in a suitcase. And now, if you want to put, put everything, after, say,
house in a suitcase, you know, it appears impossible. Because it is impossible.
Cannot full..., a, fut..., a, fit a full house in a suitcase. It is as, it is
simple to understand. That is, similarly, you know, if we have too many desires,
we cannot fit all of them in a twenty-four day. It is, i..., you know, if we
have so many things to do. If it seems impossible. That is because it is 
impossible. You know, we have twenty-fours in a day. And all of us have
twenty-fours. So, if we cannot do certain things, we cannot do certain things.
There is nothing we can do about it. It is just as simple as that. We cannot do
it. So, that does not mean we have to give up. Just as, when I understand that I
cannot put everything into my suitcase, does not mean I will not go to travel
only. No. Then, I have to decide what all should I carry in my suitcase. And
then, put the first things first. Similarly, you know, when we find it we are
getting overwhelmed. There are so many things to do. How can I do them? Then,
the first thing we have to understand is that I have to streamline. I have to,
you know, make things shorter. I have make things clearer. And make my
priorities. Streamline things. So, then, when, ok, these, these things are
important. You know, let me do these, these things first. So, generally
speaking, when we want to practice Krishna Consciousness, you have to be "ekeha
kuru-nandana". To the extent we are one-pointed, to that extent we can practice
Krishna Consciousness diligently. If we are not one-pointed, then we find it
very difficult to persevere in Krishna Consciousness.

So, Prabhupada's whole purport, it takes a very existing angle. You know, dr...,
it does not, Prabhupada does not focus too much on the purport in the second
part. "bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca". And "ekeha kuru-nandana". That
one-pointedness. Srila Prabhupada explains how do we get that one-pointedness.
You know, somebody may say that, my one-pointedness is, I want to climb Mount
Everest. And put my fly over there. Somebody may say, ok. My one-pointedness is
I want to become the olympic gold medalist for sho..., for 100 meter sprint, or
whatever. So, now, there are m..., any, any achievement that one wants to do,
one need one-pointedness. You know, in fact, we do not have to be fanatical. But
if you want to do anything wonderful in life, we have to be fanatically focused.
F..., what is the difference between being fanatical and being fanatically
focused? Fanatical means that, you know, one thing, everybody else is wrong.
Everybody else is bogus. Everybody else is illus..., is nonsense. That is
fanaticism. But, you know, one ha..., if one wants to achieve anything
substantial, one has to be fanatically focused. Fanat..., one has to focus on
one thing. You see, we are, when, say, a, s..., when an athlete wants to, even,
say, when, that person wants to become a cricket, wants to become a good bowler
or good batsman. You know, they have to spend hours, and hours, and hours
focusing. And sometimes, when, especially when people want to make it to the
top, they, they train themselves to be specialists. So, if a pl..., if a player
wants to become a cricketer. And he says, ok. You, you know, I will play a
little bit hockey. I will play a little table tennis. I will play a little bit
chess. And I will play a little bit cricket, also. And I will become a
cricketer. You know, I will become a world class cricketer. It will not work.
One may have other interests. But that is one passion that has to become
consuming, absorbing. Then, one will be able to achieve something. So, that is
the meaning of fanatical focus. Even, what to speak of only focusing on cricket?
One may have to focus on one aspect of cricket. You know, when I decide I want
to become a fast bowler. I want to become a spin bowler. And not just, I mean, 
people focus, it is not just I want to become a spin bowler. I want to become a
leg spinner. Or I want to become a, a medium pace bowler. I want to become a, an
opening batsman. So, you know, whatever that person takes, even within one game
of cricket, people often, they have to focus if they want to raise to the top.
So, same way with our studies, you know, it is, we cannot say that I will become
engineer, also. I will a become doctor, also. I will become a, a, a s...,
Chartered Accountant, also. I will become a lawyer, also. No. If I want to
achieve one thing, I have to focus. You know, if student chooses to become
engineer. At that time, the student closes the doors to becoming a doctor. So,
actually, we understand this with respect to the long-term perspectives of
material life. You know, we have to choose one thing to focus on. But the same
applies to spiritual life, also. You know, we have to become fanatically
focused. That means, we will decide, this is what I am going to do. Nothing
else. So, if you want to become devoted, if you want to advance in Krishna
Consciousness, then we have to gain a focus. You know, there are so many things
that are, need to be done in K..., Prabhupada's mission. And are, when, there
are many things that are important. Krishna wants the whole world to be
delivered. And he wants us to become instruments for Him. But how do we decide?
If we are just sitting. You know, how? This has to be done. That has to be done.
That has to be done. That has to be done. Yes, fine. But a serious K..., devotee
is defined by a sense of purpose and a sense of urgency. Sense of purpose.
Something has to be done. And urgency. Something has to be done soon. Something
has to be done now.

So, a t..., serious devotee of Krishna is defined by a sense of urgency and a
sense of purpose. And how do we get the sense of urgency and the sense of
purpose? That Krishna reveals His will through the spiritual master. So,
Prabhupada took Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura's instructions. Share Krishna
Consciousness with the whole world. Write some books, pub..., in the English
language. Preach in the West. He took these instructions as his life and soul. And
we know how Srila Prabhupada read Bhakti..., Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura's
purport on this. Make the spiritual master's instruction as your life and soul.
So, Prabhupada did that. And, you know, he, we saw that he got, he got
extraordinary success. So, now, we may or we may not be so fortunate to get a
specific instruction from the spiritual master. Now, the important point is that
to recognise that the spiritual master's instructions do not have to be specific
and personal for them to become the mission of our life. We have to understand
that, you know, the general standing instruction which Krishna has given us
through Srila Prabhupada is that we all have to become devotees. We all have to
love Krishna and help as much as possible others in loving Krishna. So, how we
do it specifically will vary according to time, place, circumstance. Now, we may
or we may not know at this stage how we are going to serve Krishna. But if we
keep exploring our interests, then, when we keep exploring our interest, we will
gradually find out. This is the thing which I am most comfortable with.
Generally, you know, how do we de..., find the service in this? We find, feel
internally comfortable and we are externally competent in doing that service.
So, yes, I like doing this. And I am, I am able to do it well. So, that is,
ba..., basically the pri..., principle of varnashrama. "varnashrama" essentially
means that we work on varana and ashrama. So, according to current ashrama which
we are in we do our spiritual duties. According to varana that we are doing we
do our material duties. Now, in Kali-yuga, determining our varana may be
difficult. Because there is so much mixing that has happened in the onward, the
dynasties over the c..., c..., centuries, over generations that it is difficult
for us to just, because of the birth, family that we are born in, to
automatically assume that this is my varana. Instead, what we should do is we
focus on our service with the guidance of senior devotees discussing what is the
service that is best for us. So, the way we apply these instructions "ekeha
kuru-nandana". We find out that, I, my goal is to become Krishna Conscious. That
is what we learnt from the scriptures. And then, we try to find out with the
guidance of Krishna and devotees, what is the best way we can serve Krishna
while we are in this world and use the talents and abilities that He has given
us for, you know, His glorification, for our purification, and for the benefit
of the world. So, "budd...", this is how we can apply "ekeha kuru-nandana".
Spiritual master's guidance does not have to come to us through personal
instructions. If it comes, that is wonderful. If it does not, then we, you know,
we learn it by ref..., studying the vani and connecting with Krishna internally.
And that is how we can also become "ekeha kuru-nandana". Now, the word
"avyavasāy" is very interesting in this verse. Actually, "avya...", "avyavasāy"
also means business. So, we, "avyavasāyinām buddhi" means business like
intelligence. You know, b..., bus..., a person who is a bus..., who into
business is always evaluating things in terms of money. Even if somebody gives a
birthday gift. The first thing is, ok, 225 rupees. So, if somebody goes to
somebody's house. This car, 7 lakhs. This. So, first thought that comes in is,
the mind is money. So, now, that is not necessarily bad. It it just the, the
point over here is to, you know, just indicate how one's priorities shape one's
perspectives. So, in money, money is the most important priority. Then, all of
one's perspetives become shaped accordingly. And one sees things as, but,
money-centered only. So, now, similarly, Krishna is saying that just as a
per..., you know, person, materialistic person, or business person would see
everything based on its financial potential. So, a devotee, a spiritualist
should see everything based on its spiritual potential. "vyavasāyātmikā
buddhir". Just see according to spiritual potential. Do not see according to
anything else. So, now, why is Krishna suddenly talking about these things? You
know in:

        nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti

and

        ekeha kuru-nandana

You know, Krishna is contrasting what he is teaching here with what he has
taught a few verses earlier. Until 37, he was talking about the karma-kanda
level. Now, He is talking about the karma-yoga level. So, this karma-yoga level
is higher than karma-kanda. And, that is what He is going to describe in this
section. So, He is contrasting karma-kanda and karma-yoga. So, let us see how He
contrasts. So, after describing about karma, karma-yoga, in 40 and 41. You know,
it can be karma-yoga. It can be bhakti-yoga, also. It, these characteristic
apply to all spiritual path. Now, He is, starts talking about, so, this
Prabhupada's purport centered on s...., serving the spiritual master. Now,
Krishna talks about karma-kanda. 

        yām imāṁ puṣpitāṁ vācaṁ
        pravadanty avipaścitaḥ
        veda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha
        nānyad astīti vādinaḥ

        kāmātmānaḥ svarga-parā
        janma-karma-phala-pradām
        kriyā-viśeṣa-bahulāṁ
        bhogaiśvarya-gatiṁ prati

So, Krishna is, you know, thinking, Krishna is telling Arjuna now, you may have
heard in the Vedas that actually one can go to svarga. And one can enjoy. And
that is what I was also telling you about. That if you, ok, if you think, you
fight in the war, if you, even if you die, you will get svarga. That is very
good. So, aim for svarga. Krishna is telling here, do not think about such
things. Why? Because these are all flowery words. "puṣpitāṁ vācaṁ". "yām imāṁ".
"yām imāṁ". These word. These words are the words which I myself spoke earlier,
a little bit earlier. Which are often spoken in the Vedas. The Vedas, as we
know, talk about karma-kanda. "puṣpitāṁ vācaṁ". They are flowery words. And who
speak such flowery words? "pravadanty". Who is attracted by this? "avipaścitaḥ".
"vipaścitaḥ" means who has discrimination. "avipaścitaḥ" means one who does not
have discrimination. What are the characteristics of such people?
"veda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha". That such people, they are not attracted. They are
"veda-vāda-ratāḥ". They think this is what the Vedas teach. So, we have talked
about "veda-vāda-ratāḥ" in the Isopanishad, Mantra 10. Where we talked about the
different kinds of avidya. Now, "nānyad astīti vādinaḥ". These people think that
there is nothing else taught in the Vedas. What is they thi..., think? What are
the "puṣpitāṁ vācaṁ"? He describes in the next verse. 

        kāmātmānaḥ svarga-parā

The are filled with "kāmā". And the desire is "svarga-parā". They want to go to
svarga. And what, what will they get in svarga? "janma-karma-phala-pradām". They
will get "janma". They will get, they will be able, they will get an auspicious
birth in heavenly planets. And they will get, they will be able to do wonderful
karma. And how will they get "janma-karma"? For to get that as a "phala-pradām",
they want to do "kriyā-viśeṣa-bahulāṁ". They want to do huge sacrifices. "kriyā"
refers to, you know, Vedic sacrifices, karma-kanda rituals. "viśeṣa",
specialised for gaining certain results. "bahulāṁ". Very opulent. And their
whole goal is "bhogaiśvarya-gatiṁ prati. They are attached to "bhoga" and
"aiśvarya". So, "bhoga" is sense gratification. "aiśvarya" is, you know,
opulence. So, they want, they want indulgence. And they want opulence. So, they
want sensual indulgence. And they want finan..., mate..., material op...,
financial opulence. And the "gatiṁ prati". This is their "gatiṁ". Now, Krishna
uses the word here "kāmātmānaḥ". So, it is as if like, "kāmā" is their "ātmā".
You know, sensual desires, lust is their "ātmā". They cannot think of anything
better than material enjoyment. "kāmātmānaḥ svarga-parā". So, because "kāmā" is
their desire, is the, their essential being. So, it is, now, it is not that they
do not have "ātmā". They have "ātmā". It is eternal. But f..., the, as we
discussed earlier, how the word "ātmā" also used in a met..., metaphorical
sense. It is used to refer to one's essential being. So, "kāmā", "ātmā", "mānaḥ"
here refers to, what is one's essential being? It is "kāmā". And because their,
their goal is "kāmā", then "svarga-parā". One thinks that in svarga I will get
much more enjoyment than what I can get over here. So, it is interesting that
what is taught in the Vedas, itself, Krishna says, that that is there. But those
who think that this is the conclusion of the Vedas, they are "avipaścitaḥ". They
are non-discriminating. They do not understand the actual conclusions of Vedic
literature. And that is why there is a progression in the Vedic literature.
Multilevel worship is being taught about in scope..., in scriptures. So, you
know, karma-kanda is one level. But beyond that, higher is jnana-kanda. And
beyond that is bhakti. We discussed, if you remember, the negative axis, those
here, and the positive axis. So, negative axis is karma-kanda. But karma-kanda
is taking people upwards from the negative axis. Zero is the jnana-kanda. Where
one rejects material form. And then, slowly starts coming to about spiritual
form. And then, after that, positive axis is bhakti. It is upasa-kanda. Which
ultimately cun..., cul..., culminates in bhakti to the Supreme Lord. So, in this
progression, in this hierachy, Prabhupada, as Prabhupada writes in the purport
that the Upanishads mark the beginning of transcendental life. In the Vedas,
primarily, karma-kanda is talked about. But in the Upanishads, one starts
talking about bhakti, you know, starts talking about transcendence. So, here,
Krishna is actually telling Arjuna, do not aspire for, you know, for po..., good
material results even in this material world. Even in better parts of the
material world. What to speak of on this earthly planetary system? They are all
temporary. Prabhupada writes in the purports of how, purport, how some flowers
and fruits may appear to be delicious. But internally, they may be poisonous.
So, one has to see, not with the eyes, but with one's intelligence. Similarly,
svarga may talk about mat..., sensual enjoyment. But what is talked about in
svarga, is, actually, you know, you know, toxic for the soul in many ways. It is
not toxic in the sense that the soul is doing bad karma. But still, the soul, it 
stays alienated from its spiritual nature. The soul says, you know, forgetful of
the eternal, joyful life with Krishna. And in that sense, it is unfortunate.
So, "avipaścitaḥ". So, those people who do not understand what it is that is to
be achieved, they suffer. Now, after that, Krishna describes, therefore, give up
this attachment.

        bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ
        tayāpahṛta-cetasām
        vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ
        samādhau na vidhīyate

So, "bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ". When one is attached to "bhoga" and "aiśvarya".
One is attached to, you know, sense gratification and material opulence. Then
"apahṛta-cetasām". One's consciousness becomes abducted. Kr..., Krishna has
heard Arjuna using the same ref..., use the same reference earlier, con...,
"lobhopahata-cetasaḥ". Arjuna is saying, actually, our consciousness has been
abducted by "lobha". And that is why we are contemplating killing people, like
thi..., killing our own relatives for the sake of wealth. But Krishna is saying
this whole calculation in terms of wealth and enjoyment, "bhoga" and "aiśvarya".
It is based on ignorance. And the whole idea, not that we want them. And we
should, they should not get it. But the whole calculation itself is based on
ignorance. So, "apahṛta-cetasām". And, so, that, every, that material
consciousness itself is the cau..., the ba..., is actually an indication, a
symptom of one having lost one's conscious..., you know, con..., lost one's
consciousness to the abduction by material desires. Con..., and then, when s...,
one's con..., consciousness abducted, even one cannot think clearly. And then,
"vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ". So, what Krishna had talked about in 2.41 that
one-pointed intelligence is no longer possible. "samādhau na vidhīyate". So,
when there is no one-pointed intelligence, then that transcendental destination,
"samādhau" is no longer achieved. So, you know, Krishna, by this contra...,
by this continuity of thought, from to 2.41 to 44, what is He saying? In 41, He
says that the, you have to be fixed. But those who are not fixed, they cannot
achieve the transcendental destination. Who are not fixed? He says, those who us
attracted to material things. And therefore, Krishna tells Arjuna in 44 that do
not become attracted to material things. Indirectly, He tells them that if you
stay attracted to material things, then you will not get the one-pointed
determination. This is actually very significant for all of us, in our spiritual
life, also. Actually, you know, w..., we have to, we all know how attachments
blind us. You know, but, we have to ask ourselves, you know, you know, how much
do I have to lose before I lose my blindness? How much do I have to lose before
I lose my blindness? What does that mean? We look at the example of Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, his blindness was not physical. It was intellectual. It was
spiritual. And that was caused by attachment. And time and time, so many people
tried to give him good advice. So, it was not just Vidura alone. Bhīṣma, Droṇa,
Sanjaya, his own assistant, then Gandhari, then Vyasa, you know, then Maitreya
Rishi, or Narada, also. If you look at the Mahabharata, so many people gave him
good idea, advice. But he just, you know, attachment had blinded him. And how
much did he have to lose before he lost his blindness? It was everything. You
know, he lost all his hundred sons. And he lost his dignity as he became old.
And as he, you know, he was doing nothing in his existence. He was just, was
nominally the king. He led the, all the soldiers. And all the attendance in the
court would call him, still call him king. But he had no power at all. And he
lost his dignity. Because of old age. So, Vidura, when he comes along and wants
to get Dhṛtarāṣṭra to cut off his material attachments. He says, you know, what
are you doing? What are you doing? He says. Staying in the house, like this.
Staying in the house, like this. What are you doing? He says, you are doing
nothng, but producing cough all day. And you are going to die miserably. Give up
the material attachment. Go away from home. And that is what he does. That is
what he does.

So, at that time, when he has lost everything that is dear to him. And then, his
body itself has let him down. Then, when the words come through of Vidura, they
cut through his illusions. So, fortunately, we do not, old, we all have, do not
have to lose so much to lose our blindness. Even though consequences of our
blindness, of our material attachments, especially the anti-devotional
attachments, you know, we have to, you know, use our spiritual intelligence
acquired by studying the Bhagavad Gita and the Vedic scriptures, to cut off
those attachments. One by one by one by one. If we do not cut off those
attachments, then we will have to pay for it. And what will be the payment? It
will be continuation in s..., one's suffering. Continuation in the misery of
material existence. So, how much will I have to lose before I lose blindness?
That is a very good thought for all of us to contemplate in our own spiritual
life. So that we can become prioritised. So, "bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ". So the, so,
now, "apahṛta" is a very, you know, graphic word. Af..., the word "apahṛta" is
used for abducting or kidnapping. Ab..., so, now, when a child is, say, coming
home from the school. At that time, some hooligans, some vandals come and catch
the child. And abduct. And take their child. And hold ho..., hostage demanding
some ransom. So, like that, our consciousness wants to go towards Krishna. We
are chanting Hare Krishna. We are practicing devotional service. And suddenly,
"kāmā" comes. "lobha" comes. And tuck. Just abducts our consciousness. We want
to chant Hare Krishna. And then, that is just, the consciousness gets abducted.
And then, you know, we just, you know, we just, our thoughts just go on, go
towards Krishna. We are in a fantasy world. Oh, if I do this, that will happen.
If I do that, that, that, that. And then, when our consciousness is held
ransome, held abducted, hostage, like that, then, what, what do lust and anger
demand us there r..., ransom? You know, ransom is the money that they are,
kidnappers ask so that they will release the person who is held in hostage. So,
they will, what they ask for as hostage is, you know, for r..., rans..., ransom
for the hostage is? Indulgence. So, what happens is, you know, you think that,
ok, this, this desire is troubling me so much. If I just indulge in it, you
know, then the desire will go away. And then, I will become peaceful. Then, I
can do what I want. So, when lust or greed holds our consciousness in, you know,
ho..., hostage. Then, the, the, we may feel, oh, just, this is troubling me so
much. Just let me get over it. Do it. And get over it. So, now, ac..., if it is
within dharmic limits. That is fine. You know, we can do it. But, you know, of
course, within a proper dharmic way. But when it is not. And even when it is at
times. If we just keep doing it indiscriminately, then, you know, we may get
some relief temporarily. But the release is not the same. But we may get relief.
But we do not actually get release. What is the difference between relief and
release? Relief means there is some trouble. And we get some relief from it.
Release means we become freed from it. So, if we want release, means freedom, we
will not get release indu..., just by, you know, indulgence. Because indulgence,
when the lust is troubling us. Come on. Do this. Do this. Do this. If we
indulge in it, then by that actually, the desire will become stronger. When the
desire becomes stronger, we will be in greater trouble. And, the next time, we
will have more difficulty in coming out. So, the, because the desire, because
strong, or, so just, so just like the kidnap, or they hold the child hostage.
And when they get the ransom. Then, what they do is. Oh, this person is filthy
rich. Next time, I will come again. And I will again abduct the child. So,
the parents will be doubling in guard to make sure that the child never gets
abducted like this. So, we have to be in gua..., on guard in our consciousness.
Never. I will not let my consciousness abducted like this. So, we have to all be
very careful. Otherwise with the mind can take us on a game. Where we get,
where, you know, ok, lust and greed, they can take us on a game. Where we just
keep paying higher and higher ransoms. And ultimately, we become completely
addicted, lost. Where even I, what is addiction? Even when we actually pay the
ransom, we indulge in it. But within a few moments, the desire comes back again.
And at that time, we are terribly entangled. It is very difficult to come out.
But of course, we can come out.

So, we have to redirect our attachment to Krishna. And Krishna, when Krishna
fills our mind, then, then nobody can abduct, you know, our mind. Lust and
anger, now, I am using the words consciousness and mind interchangeably over
here. Because a consciousness is directed towards, through the mind. The
mind, senses, and body are root for the consciousness. So, tuck. "prasaktānāṁ".
So, here, "cetasām" refers to the consciousness of the soul which is rooted in
the material world through the mind. So, if we fill our consciousness with
Krishna and services to Krishna. Then, prederences of Krishna is a deterrent. It
is the strongest deterrent for lust, and anger, and greed, and other anarthas to
abduct our consciousness. Just like when the child is there with a strong
bodyguard, a very powerful ex..., escort. Then, the thugs will not come over
there. Similarly, when Krishna is there with us, then no..., then nobody will
come. So, in this way, we can stay us, keep ourselves safe, protected from these
material attachments. But we can keep ourselves protected only when we, first of
all, understand there is a danger. So, that is what Krishna is warning. You stay
on in material existence if you do not give up your attachment. Because, you
know, lust and an..., this "bhoga" and "aiśvarya", lust and greed will abduct
our consciousness. Then, Krishna now will say that. That Arjuna gets a question.
But you are saying all this. But actually, all, isn't all this taught in the
Vedas only? You are saying this, so, so badly, it will lead to attachment. And
those who are, have this kind of use, are aru vaschatas. They are not very
intelligent. But they are following the Vedas. Krishna says, yes. But you have
to go beyond the three modes, go beyond the V..., Vedic preachings of all the
three modes. 

        trai-guṇya-viṣayā vedā
        nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna
        nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
        niryoga-kṣema ātmavān

"trai-guṇya-viṣayā vedā". So, the "trai-guṇya" is three modes. So, the Vedas
talk about subject matters which are related with the three modes.
"nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna". Oh, Arjuna. You should go beyond the three modes.
"nistrai-guṇyo". And "nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho". You should become b...,
bey..., si..., situated beyond duality. And you should be situated in
"nitya-sattva". So, then, this word is "sattva". That is goodness. The wword
"sattva" also means existence. So, you should be situated in spiritual
existence.

        ... nitya-sattva-stho
        niryoga-kṣema ātmavān

Without any concerns for yoga and "kṣema". You know, so, without any concerns
for protection and Pr..., as Prabhupada says, ideas of gain and protection. So,
so, gain is for the profit in terms of what we gain further. And protection is
in terms of pre..., preservation. What we have, keeping it. Do not worry about
these. Then, you should become "ātmavān". The word "ātmavān" is very
significant. What does it mean? "ātmavān". Like we have "dhanavan". That person
who has "dhana" is called "dhanma...", "dhanavan". And the person who is "bala"
is called "balavan". Str..., one who has wealth is "balavan". So, "ātmavān".
50:43
