Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZQDxR0CTQU0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_061_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_10_to_13_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=ZQDxR0CTQU0&redir_token=WirD2HGBxafA6T3v-cAodIKySbt8MTU0ODQ4NzU4NkAxNTQ4NDAxMTg2

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome to our Bhagavad Gita class. So, today, we will continue
with the discussion of the third chapter. We discussed till 3.9. We completed
the first section. The first section was about, you know, for Arjuna, karma-yoga
is preferable to, you know, jnana-yoga. So, let us look at the chapter overview
before we move forward. Yes. So, this is the section overview which we are
discussing. So, Kali-yuga, a, K..., KY can be Kali Yuga. But here, it is, KY is
karma-yoga. Karma-yoga is better for you as you are not qualified for
jnana-yoga. Of course, Arjuna is a pure devotee. And as a pure devotee, he is
more than qualified for jnana-yoga. But in this context where th..., the Krishna
is giving instructions at various progressive levels. So, at the level, at
which is, He is talking, He says that, you know, for one who is not qualified,
then jnana-yo..., practicing jnana-yoga can create disruption in society, can
make one hypocritical, and can, you know, make one's own livelihood also
difficult. The three reasons we discussed. So, now, therefore, you should not
practice karma-yoga. Now, we will discuss the second section today. You should
not practice jnana-yoga. That is the first section. You should practice
karma-yoga. So, we, remember, we discussed the spiral? Spiral was, ok, it was
like, do not practice jna..., actually, it starts, practice karma-yoga, better
for you, better than kar..., jnana-yoga is karma-yoga. And somebody says, ok, I
am not pra..., qualified for karma-yoga, also. Then, what should I do? Then,
practice karma-kanda. And you know, practicing karma-kanda, also, you will
eventually become elevated. And then, if you think that you are overqualified,
then more than qualified for karma-yoga, qualified for jnana-yoga. Still,
practice jnan..., karma-yoga to set an example for others. So, here, we will
discuss the situation when a, if somebody is not qualified for karma-yoga, then
what should one do? One should practice karma-kanda. So, here, Krishna describes
about karma-kanda. So, let us look at these verses. Hmm. Yeah. So:

        saha-yajñāḥ prajāḥ sṛṣṭvā
        purovāca prajāpatiḥ
        anena prasaviṣyadhvam
        eṣa vo ’stv iṣṭa-kāma-dhuk

So, "saha-yajñāḥ". With Yajña. "prajāḥ sṛṣṭvā". So, "prajāḥ". "prajāḥ" is
people. Living beings. All living beings. "sṛṣṭvā". Created. "purovāca". The
"purā". In the ancient time. "uvāca". Said. "prajāpatiḥ". So, "prajāpatiḥ". That
is the Lord of all creatures. So, different acharyas refer to this Lord of all
creatures as either Vishnu or Brahma. Prabhupada refers to this, as Brahma, as
Lord Vishnu over here. And actually, the way Prabhupada describes this,
Prabhupada says, does not explicitly mention who it is.

"the Lord of all creatures sent forth generations of men and demigods, along
with sacriﬁces for Viṣṇu"

So, h..., Prabhupada is not saying the Lord of all creatures sends sacrifices
for Himself. So, we could very well say that this is referring to the Brahmaji.
So, Brahmaji sent forth generations of mens and demigods. And he also gave
sacrifices, blessed them by saying. But then, Prabhupada also says that, his
whole purport focuses on Vishnu. He does not mention Brahmaji anywhere. So, in a
sense, we could tale, Prabhupada gives in such a way that both points can be
accepted. So, either it is Lord Vishnu who creates sacrifices and he, you know,
created demigods, and human beings, and sa..., and also created a system of
sacrifice. Or as a representative of Lord Vishnu, Brahmaji did it. In essence,
the consequence is the same. So, "prajāpatiḥ". What did "prajāpatiḥ" say? "anena
prasaviṣyadhvam". So, by this, become prosperous. Be more and more prosperous.
"eṣa vo ’stv iṣṭa-kāma-dhuk". This, let this be your "kāma-dhuk". So,
"iṣṭa-kāma-dhuk". "kāma" means desires. Here, he..., "kāma" does not have a
negative connotation. That "kāma-dhuk", "kāma" means basically whatever are your
requirements. What are your needs. Whatever are your, you know, whatever are
your necessities in life. "kāma-dhuk". And it is, let this be the provider of
your "iṣṭa-kāma-dhuk". Whatever your desire, let provided. So, what is this
referring to actually? You know, Krishna is telling that the system of Yajña is
there right from the beginning of creation. So, when creation is made, just like
when parents beget a child. They arrange for taking care of the child. So,
similarly, when the Lord creates all living beings, he c..., makes arrangements
to care for them. What is that arrangement? That arrangement is the system of
Yajña? So, Yajña, it is said, is y..., "eṣa vo ’stv iṣṭa-kāma-dhuk". Let this be
a fulfiller of your desires. So, there is, in these verses, Krishna talks about
the system of cosmic cooperation between the devatas, the Supreme Lord, and
human beings. So, we will discuss this cosmic cooperation system a little later.
Here, let us focus on the point that the, when the Lord creates, He resent to
send the living entities into a wilderness. We see this principle of how the
Lord arranges. You know. In natu..., through nature. Anyway, when the child is
born. When the mother gives birth to an infant. At that time, that same Lord who
sends through the mother's womb, a child into this world also arranges through
the mother's breast to provide for milk for the child. Similarly, we see that
there are so many different species in nature. And they have their own kinds of
food. Not all living beings can eat everything. But these different living
beings are under normal conditions get their food, whatever it is. So, how do
they get that? That is arranged by the Supreme Lord. So, in general, if we look
at the Universe as we discussed in "oṁ pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam". The, now, the first
classes in our Bhakti Shastri course. This universe is perfect and complete. So,
the Lord has arranged to care for the needs of living beings. Now, the lower
living beings, lower means, those who do not have spiritual faculty developed,
the non-human living beings, they do not have to act in any karmically
responsible way. They largely act according to their instincts for the sake of
eating, sleeping, mating and defending. In human life, we have the advanced
spiritual consciousness. And therefore, w..., w..., w..., because we have that
freedom to choose. So, we also need to eat, sleep, mate and defend. But we have
the capacity to regulate that. And when we regulate that, by regulating our
eating, sleeping, mating, defending, we can choose to redirect our desires
towards K..., spiritual reality. Towards ultimately Krishna. So, for human
beings, also, Krishna provides for the necessities. But along with that, human
beings also have the responsibility to discharge their duty as human beings. So,
that duty is d..., material, of course. Taking care of our family members. And
taking care, serving our, you know, relationships at a horizontal level. But
along with that, there is also vertical relationship. We have to serve the
Supreme Lord. And that system for serving the Supreme Lord is through the
arrangement of the universal government. So, through this system, we move
forwards upwards and serve the Lord. So, "anena prasaviṣyadhvam", by this
system, Krishna says that your desires will be fulfilled. So, when we do Yajña,
our desires are fulfilled. So, let us look at how this happens. But in this
purport, Srila Prabhupada focuses primarily on the purpose of creation. And how
Lord Vishnu is the ultimate goal of creation. So, the purpose of creation, so,
the material creation, by the Lord of creatures, Prabhupada, so, here, he seems
to say it is Brahmaji. Here, he says, Vishnu, Lord of creatures is Vishnu:

"is a chance offered to the conditioned souls to come back home – back to
Godhead."

That is the ultimate purpose of creation. And the, at a spiritual level, the
goal of life is to know Lord Vishnu, Lord Krishna. Prabhupada quotes "vedaiś ca
sarvair". And we have to return back to Him. And then, Prabhupada quotes this
beautiful verse from the prayers of Śukadeva Gosvāmī.

        śriyaḥ patir yajña-patiḥ prajā-patir
        dhiyāṁ patir loka-patir dharā-patiḥ
        patir gatiś cāndhaka-vṛṣṇi-sātvatāṁ
        prasīdatāṁ me bhagavān satāṁ patiḥ

So, the relationship of this verse with the B..., current Bhagavad Gita verse
and discussion is the second glorifying appetite for the Lord. "yajña-patiḥ".
So, here, we are talking about Yajña. And Prabhupada quotes this verse to see
how the Lord is the "patiḥ". "patiḥ" means master, husband, or Lord. So, he is
the "śriyaḥ patir". He is the Lord of the goddess of fortune. Who is beautiful.
"yajña-patiḥ". The Lord of Yajña. "prajā-patir". So, the word "prajā-patir" is
also used in this verse. You know, and the word "prajā-patir" is used by
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, also. And "prajā-patir" is the master of all living beings.
"dhiyāṁ patir". He is the Lord of intelligence. "loka-patir". He is the abode of
all the planets. "dharā-patiḥ". He is the, you know, He is the Lord of all the
p..., lokas. And He is the Lord of the Earth, also. "pa...", "dharā-patiḥ".
Then, "patir gatiś cāndhaka-vṛṣṇi-sātvatāṁ". And that Lord has manifested so as
the master of the "cāndhaka-vṛṣṇi-sātvatāṁ". These are all variou..., various
dynasties in which Lord Vishnu had appeared, a..., in which Lord Krishna had
appeared. "prasīdatāṁ me bhagavān satāṁ patiḥ". "prasīdatāṁ" means please be
pleased oh, dear Lord. "me bhagavān satāṁ patiḥ". You are the "patiḥ", the
master of the "satāṁ", the devotees, the transcendentalists. So, here,
Prabhupada is quoting this verse to point out that "prajā-patir" refers to Lord
Vishnu. Lord Vishnu is the "patiḥ" of everyone. Of course, Vishnu and Krishna
are the same. So, now, then he says that it is this "patiḥ" who has manifested.
"yajña", "prajā-patir". And he has given a system of Yajña. And Prabhupada
quotes that, in Kali Yuga, we practice the system of "saṅkīrtana-yajña". This
will be something which Srila Prabhupada will repeatedly talk in this verse, in
this section of the Gita. So, he quotes the well-known verse about Lord Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. 11.5.32 in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

        kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ
        sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam
        yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair
        yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ

So, "kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ". "kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ" means this Lord is in same
category as Krishna. "tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ". But its complexion is not like Krishna. It
is different complexion. "sā...", "sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam". So, "āṅgā", his,
his asso..., his limbs, "opāṅgā", his sub-limbs, his "āstra"s. All these are
what? "pārṣadam". So, he has his associates with whom he comes. And what does
he, so, what does he do? "yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair". So, he teaches
"saṅkīrtana-yajña". And the "su-medhasaḥ". The intelligent people, "medha" is
intelligent. "su-medha" is those who have good intelligence. "yajanti". They
worship him by performing "saṅkīrtana-yajña". So, he has come and taught
"saṅkīrtana-yajña". And, a, we can do "saṅkīrtana-yajña". And by that, we can
worship him. And we can fulfill the purpose of Yajña. So, here, what is the
point being talked about again? The point is that through Yajña, our needs get
fulfilled. Yajña is the means by which we harmonise with the Supreme Lord. And
Yajña is the means by which our material and spiritual needs will get fulfilled.
You know, let us try to understand how this happens. Let us look at a couple of
other verses. Then, we will discuss the philosophical point more. So, the main
point here is to recognise that the "prajā-patir" ultimately is the Supreme
Lord. So, how can it refer to Brahmaji, also? It can refer to Brahmaji. Because
Brahmaji is a representative of the Supreme Lord. And he is the secondary
creator. Some acharyas refer to him as Brahm..., Brahm..., Brahmaji. But it can,
as Prabhupada says, it refers to Vishnu. So, this is a difference in detail. But
the essential principles remain the same. And then, after that:

        devān bhāvayatānena
        te devā bhāvayantu vaḥ
        parasparaṁ bhāvayantaḥ
        śreyaḥ param avāpsyatha

So, "devān bhāvayatānena". So, "anena". The word "anena" was used in the
previous verse, also. "anena" is referring to this. This sacrifice. So,
"b...", "bhāvayatā". Devatas become satisfied by the practice of this Yajña. "te
devā". Then, those devatas. "bhāvayantu vaḥ". They will satisfy you. So, this is
system of cosmic cooperation. You perform Yajña, so satisfy the devatas. And
when they are pleased, they will please you. And "parasparaṁ bhāvayantaḥ". And
in this way, satisfy each other. "śreyaḥ param avāpsyatha". And by this,
ultimately, you will attain the supreme auspiciousness. "śreyaḥ param".
"Prosperity will reign for all". That is Prabhupada translates it. So, now, let
us try to understand this whole system from a perspective of the current world
view. You know, today, you know, scientists are almost like the priests of
society. You know, they decide this is acceptable. This is unacceptable. So,
there are some scientists who say that we cannot believe in God. But however, we
have to understand that actually there is no conflict essentially between
science and religion. Although, that is often portrayed. Science and religion.
Actually, there is an eternel conflict between materialism and spirituality.
Science is basically a tool. Science is just like we have a map. You know, when
I look at a map, depending on what the map is used for, I will see the political
features of a country. Ok, this state's boundary ends over here. This state's
boundary ends over here. Or if the map is a physical map, then I will see, ok,
there is this mountain ranges over here. There is plato over here. River over
here. So, it is a map. Now, ju..., a map in many ways is actually value
neutral. A map does not tell what is good or what is bad. So, science is
basically a map. It is a way of looking at the world. So, unfortunately, science
has been hijacked and monopolised by atheists. So, there are atheists. And there
are spiritualists. So, of course, not all materialists have to be atheists. But
essentially, the battle is between materialism and spirituality. Materialism can
be equated with atheism. And because that is how materialism ultimately leads to
atheism. You know, the, so, there is no ulti..., higher reality in materialism.
Matter is the ultimate reality. Temple is the room for God. So, atheists have
monopolised and hijacked science for their purposes. So, today, that means
scientists, say, peo..., people say that, actually, if a, you are scientific,
then you cannot believe in God. If you are scientific, you cannot believe in
soul. If you are scientific, you cannot believe in many of these things which
today's researchers talk abou..., which today, which many of the scriptures talk
about. Now, this sort of hi..., hijacking, monopolisation of science by atheists
is entirely unwarranted. You know, sometimes, Srila Prabhupada may give strong
statements against s..., scientists. You know, but his point is that science
should be used to glorify God. So, science is, criticism is not per say of 
scientists, is, so, the criticism is per say of atheists. So, now, are all
scientists atheists? No. Not necessarily. Many scientists are in the field of
science for the sake of earning a livelihood. They also feel that through
science and technology, they can contribute something to society. You know,
through providing comforts and things like that. And there are some scientists
who are outright aggressively, fanatically atheists. And these people think
that, you know, religion is the greatest evil in society. And they will say
that, G..., you know, the concept of God is a virus that corrupts the minds of
people. And they are on a campaign against God. So, these scienti..., these kind
of atheists, fanatical atheists, right wing atheists, we can say, they are in a
minority. They are there. No doubt. And they are vocal, also. They quite
aggressively do propaganda to convert people to the religion of atheism. So,
apart from these people, there, in general, science is a tool, like a map.

Now, science can be used to look at the world. Now, depending on the
precon..., say, on the preexisting biases of the people, they will pursue things
accordingly. Now, there has been a lot of evidence, for example, for the
existence of soul and reincarnation. Which has come from various sources. So, if
science is used to study that. Then, science can be used to actually point
towards spirituality. So, currently, science focuses on studying materialism and
promoting materialism. But science can also be used to understand and, you know,
promote spiritual principles. So, we have past life memories. We have near-death
experiences. We have these phenomena of consciousness. And all these actually
indicate that the soul is different from the body. And the soul moves from one
body to another. So, these are things which are not unscientific. You know,
these have been talked about in science. And there is a, there is good amount of
scientific evidence for these things. So, you know, the point i..., we will not
go into the scientific evidence here. There are articles which I have written on
my website. And I have given a..., the talks, also. There we will be these, a,
there, these have been talked about. Here, our focus on the point that is this
whole conception of demigods, is it scientifically acceptable? It is one thing
to say that there is a Supreme Lord. That there is God. Even the conception of
God, many scientists feel that, it is not scientific. Not many scientists again,
it is many atheists. And people in general are influenced. And they think that
if I have to believe in God, I have to give up science. No. Science is simply a
tool. And as a tool, it can only look at material things. So, science in and of
itself can neither prove nor disprove the existence of God. So, when it can
neither prove nor disprove the existence of God, then how do we, you know, know
anything from science? See, there are inferences. You know, we see design in
the universe. From that, we can inference, infer that there is the existence of
God. The design is so intricate that it cannot have happened by chance. It
requires supervision. For example, here, Krishna will talk about rains. So, when
we talk about rains, you know, what is the phenomena? He, scientists may be able
to explain to us how things happen. But b..., if we look at the details, you
know, then we may say, how do rains occur? Actually, even the Sun evaporates
water. Clouds are formed. You know, the clouds move along. And wherever the
clouds condense, the rains fall over there. You know, there is no Indra, you
know, predominating God for rains. There is no Vishnu. It is a simple mechanism.
The Sun evaporates and then condenses clouds. You know, so, now, we may say,
this m..., this may be the mechanism. But if you go into integrities, if
scientists try to make one, one little cloud in the laboratory. They say, it is
extremely difficult. You know, we evaporate the water. And then try to make it,
them cloud. And then through the laboratory, may guided way to move to some
other place. And then, to get it rain. It is very very difficult. So, in fact,
some scientists tried something like artificial rains.

So, I have written an article on my website. Artificial rains, imaginary gains,
real pains. So, Aritifical Rains. Imaginary Gains. And Real Pains. So, in India,
they had tried to do some artificial rains. At that time, you know, thi..., this
was written. So, now, the point here is that, it is a long article, I will not
go into all of it. The important point is, when they used the word like
artificial rains, we have to understand what they actually do. Just like when
they use the word artificial life. Artificial rains, actually, it is not that
artificial rains are created. You know, it is simply clouds that are there. And
the clouds are there in the sky. And actually, among all the clouds, there is
only some cloud that are rain-bearing cloud, water-bearing clouds. Are those
white clouds not water-bearing? So, if there are white clouds in the ky, n...,
then not much can be done. So, when we say artificial rains, all that is done
is, there already clouds in the sky. But somehow, the clouds are not pouring
down the rains. So, clouds are not condensing. So, what is done is certain
chemicals are put in the clouds, by which rains come down. So, this is actually
called cloud seeding. You try to get the clouds to produce rain. So, it is not
artificial rains in the full sense of the word. Because the water is not
artificially evaporated now into clouds. Only pre-existing clouds are condense
so that rains come about. So, now, even in this, if we look at what is actually
done, you know, m..., the entire mechanism is so complex. We cannot do it
ourselves. Even when artificial rains are to be done. Actually speaking, there
is a cloud in the sky. And the cloud produces rains. We do some seeding. And
some rains come. Still, actually, there is very little control where the rains
will fall. You know, the water just falls in a river. There is a particular area
where is, there is drought. And then, we seed to the clouds. And the rain comes.
The rain just falls in the rivers, and the river water flows away. Now, if it
falls in a lake, that is good. It will be saved. If it just falls on the hard
concrete surface, it just goes bury, just goes, just flows away into the gutter.
So, the water is lost. So, it is very very controlled precisely where the clouds
will rain down. Not only that, actually speaking, you know, the amount of water
that is present in, the cloud, an average clouds, that is not so much, as to
make this whole operation economically viable. And that is why, most countries,
even a, countries like America have considered this artificial rains to be
economically unviable. So, the point is that, even with our best technology,
trying to do this is not easy. And not only is it not easy, it is also not
viable. It is not economically viable. It is not really productive. So, but the
point is, even with the best of our technology, we cannot control where the
rains will come. We cannot control, we cannot produce the rains if the clouds
are not there. We cannot pro..., control the quantity of the rains that will be
there. You know, so, there is very little we can control, actually. So, how does
this whole thing happen? If we look at the phenomena in a more technical way,
carefully thinking about how it is happening. Now, it is a miracle of
technology, how cloud is produced. We have the water getting evaporated. And
then, basically, there are certain chemicals, and wa..., wa..., the water may,
performs, certain chemicals are present in the atmosphere. And those chemicals
along with the water evaporate. They mix. And there are some dust particles and
other things. And they form a cloud. And what is a cloud, basically? A cloud is
like a mobile airborne water tank that is made of aircraft-proof technology. You
know, designers of WT, a, Word Trade Center's, they could not make any aircraft
proof. The, the tow..., tower also, they were, marvels of design, they collapsed
when an aircraft collided with them. But we, an entire airplane can go, right go
through a cloud, and there is practically no leakage. See, you know, what kind
of water transport company can make any, any water tank, which is
aircraft-proof? So, the cloud itself is a miracle of technology. First miracle
is that it is made o..., it is practically aircraft-proof. Second miracle is that it
is made with such ordinary and readily available raw materials. Generally, this
world, we, the more sophisticated we want to do something, the more, you know,
rare, and complex, and expensive raw materials are required to make that. But
in nature, just using a naturally available raw materials in the atmosphere
along with water vapor. This mobile massive airborne water tank is formed. And
then, the pivoting balance is, especial volume temperature balances are su...,
adjusted in such a way that the rains fall at a particular place. The rains do
not fall at a particular place.

So ho..., now, we may know mechanism by which, how, this is happening. But the
mechanism in and of itself is not the complete explanation. You know, when we
say, something happens automatically. Automatically does not mean the absence of
a controller. Automatically simply means the absence of the awareness of the
controller. For example, you know, if a child is having an automatically run
toy. Then, the child is coming to the room and sees, this toy is just moving
around. Moving around. Moving around. Moving left. Moving right. Moving. How is
this toy moving automatically? No. Maybe, there is some remote. Which is being
cont..., which is controlled in the toy. And that is how the toy is moving. Or
maybe, somebody has wound the toy, and that is how the toy is moving. So, there
is surely some controller somewhere. You know, the only thing is, when, whenever
we say something is automatic, for example when we quote, near a, you know, near
a, say, five-star building, five-star hotel. Then, as soon as we come near, the
door opens. Hey, this door is opening automatically. No. What do we mean by
automatically? We do not see any controller nearby. But all that it means is,
there is a programme, you know, by which the control is done. So, there is a
controller. Only thing is we are not aware of that controller. What does that
mean? There is a se..., there is some kind of sensor. These sensors a hu...,
approach if a human being. And as soon as human being comes near that, then the
sensor senses. And then it, process certainly words, activates certain
motors. And then the door opens. So, automatically simply means that we are not
aware of the controller. There is a controller, definitely. Similarly, when we
look at nature. Nature seems to act automatically. But automatically simpl...,
so, means that we are not aware of the controllers. There is a complex mechanism
over there. And this mechanism is overseen by the Supreme Lord ultimately,
through the agency of the devatas. So, actually speaking, there is a whole
system of complex mechanisms. So, the scientific explanation and the scriptural
explanation, they are not contradictory. They are complementary. Contradictory
means they oppose each other. Complementary means they both work together. So,
now, sometimes in the, in some television programmes, or some movies, we might
see some simplistic representations. So, Indra is throwing his vajra. And then,
tuck, tuck, tuck, tuck, tuck. Rains start coming. Rains start coming. He says,
this is all hindsight. This is all mythology. How can such a thing happen?
Actually, there is a whole mechanism. So, the point now is that that is simply
for the sake of depiction. Now, nowhere in the scripture, it is said that what
we see in movies, is a praman. So, the scriptures are also where that there is a
mechanism. But the point of the scriptures is, they do not go too much into the
material mechanisms. They focus on the persons who are overseeing the mechanism.
That means when we want to understand nature. When we want to adjust nature. We
can do it in two ways. One is that we try to, you know, supplicate. Supplicate
means, so, there are t..., two ways of trying to change nature, is supplication
and manipulation. Supplication means, supplicate means to pray, to beseech. So,
we understand that controlling the various phenomena in nature, there are
certain beings. And we pray to those beings. We do "Yajña"s. So, for example,
when we, when a person wants a bountiful harvest. So, they want good yield of
crops. So, at that time, they will do Yajña. And then, they get rains. So, what
is happening over there? Supplication. So, we suppli..., we supplicate the
devatas. Ask the devatas. Please provide us rains. That is supplicative. And the
other way is manipulation. Supplication and manipulation. Manipulation means, we
do not look at the persons who are controlling the deva..., the mechanisms of
nature. We focus only on the mechanisms of nature. And try to, ok, this is
mechanism by which this happening. Let me try to, you know, let me try to rig
this mechanism. Let me try to change this mechanism for my purposes. For
example, now, if there is a gang of, you know, pirates, a gang of thieves, say.
Who are staying in some forested area. And they want water supply. They are,
now, they see, ok, there is this pipeline, and the pipeline goes to this
village. And in the pipeline, water comes. So, one way is that, they can go to
the government. And they say, you know, we have got a, we have got a community
over here. We have got fifty people, hundred people, five hundred people,
whatever their gang is. And please provide over supply to us, also. So, then,
the government person says, what are you doing over there? And then, you know,
if they are not criminals, if so, they were some tribals who are law-abiding.
Then, the government says, okay, you have this community. Ok. They apply. They
fill the necessary forms, do the necessary, you know, requests and whatever
procedures are there. And then, a pipeline comes to them, also. So, this is
supplicative. Yes. There is a system. We, you know, go to the concerned
authorities who are in charge of the system. And get there water supply.

The other is, ok, what is this system now? Ok, the, the whole system is that,
there is a pipeline which goes like this. And through the pipeline, water goes.
So, what we will do is, we will create a hole in that pipeline. Put our own
pipe. And surreptitiously, we will bring water to our, our locale. And that is
how we will have water. So, what is happening over here? This is manipulative.
So, when we, you know, look at only the mechanisms with..., without looking at
the beings who are controlling those mechanisms. And then, we try to intervene
and use things for our own purposes. Then, that is manipulative. So, what is
happening in artificial rains is that they are taking the, there is a mechanism.
Ok, this is how clouds are formed. And cloud use rains, then, a, clouds condense
and the rains fall. So, what we will do is, somehow, a cloud is there in the
sky. But a cloud is not giving rains, only. So, it happens sometimes that a
cloud is for summer days, the clouds are there in the sky. And there are dark
clouds, also. But they do not give rains. And there are some cases in some
countries where the cloud is in one state. And then, the cloud is, because of
the natural flow of the way, it is moving toward another state. And what the
state, the first state does is that it does seeding. And it gets the rains. And
in the second state, oh, that was our cloud. It was meant to come to our state.
Why did you take it? And in the few cases, there have been court cases. You know
this is on. Just as we have intellectual property rights. We have cloud property
rights. This cloud is our property. How did you take it? So, it is so ab...,
absurd. So, the idea is, we think that, ok, the cloud is just hanging over
there. That mines. It is there for f..., the taking, only. So, I can just take
it. So, this is manipulative. So, the essential difference between these two
approaches is, one is manipulative. One is supplicative. So, interfering with
the process of nature, that is manipulative. And understanding the higher beings
and harmonising with them, that is supplicative. So, these two approaches, as I
said, are not contradictory. They are complementary. Yes. That means if it, they
have got a supply. Yes, there are certain agencies. There are certain
authorities who are in charge of water supply. So, if we approach them. They
will arrange for c..., water to come to us. On the other hand, we are, also
see. There was a pipeline over there. Now, if I tap the pipeline. And if I, you
know, divert the water, that is also one way I can get water. So that there is
a mechanism for the water supply, does not mean that there is no, there is no
a..., authority controlling the water supply. So, both are complementary. Now,
moving foward, you may say, sometimes. Somebody say, may we not belo..., we do
not believe in all these things. But whether we do not believe in things or
n..., these things or not, the fact remains that we are enormously dependent on
nature. We may say that we, human beings, we have got so much power. We have
conquered space. We have conquered nature. But we still remain dependent on
nature. So, here, you can look at some statistics, so, here:

"The extent of humanity’s dependence on nature is best illustrated through the
medium that is valued the most in modern society – money. In the science
magazine Nature, issue dated 15 May, 1997, researchers from the University of
Maryland presented the world with a “bill to nature” for $16 trillion to $54
trillion US dollars per annum for the natural resources and raw materials that
humanity takes from nature:"

So, what all do we take?

"food, water, air, lumber, rocks, metals, jewels, oil and so forth."

So, this is the bill, na..., so, "$16 trillion to $54 trillion US dollars per
annum". It is an astronomical amount. And this does not include even the Sun
ri..., so, if we consider our Sun bill:

"Our cosmic bill to the sun is far more staggering. American scientist Dr. Edwin
Kessler has calculated that, if we had to pay 5 cents per kilowatt-hour (a
relatively cheap price) for the energy provided by the sun every day over the
state of Oklahoma (which covers an area of about 200 thousand km2), the cost
would be around $60 billion per day!"

Per day, it would be sixty billion dollars. Just think, how much will be per
month, then how much will be per year. And this is just for one state. So, the
fact remains that there are higher, there are, that we are dependent on nature.
And if want, if we were to pay a bill to nature, we would immediately have
become bankrupt. So, now, can we just imagine that, ok, all this is, are
automatically provided by nature. As I said, automatically means that there is
no materi..., there is no awareness of the controller. But there is a
controller. We are simply not aware of that controller. Now, going forward, is
there some empirical way in which we can verify the existence of higher beings?
Actually speaking, the important point is not empirical verification. The
important point is spiritual transformation. So, as devotees, we should not, you
know, have a simplistic notion of this. So, the simplistic notion is that, so,
as the devotees often say, we do kirtans, and then the rains come. That is ok.
It does happen. But it is not just some playing of kartals and singing of some
songs that produce us rains. You know, what produces rains is the principle of
harmonisation with the Supreme Lord. So, as devotees, our primary focus i..., we
do not want to do some kirtan to get rains. You know, we want, our goal of
sankirtan is, is to purify our hearts, to develop love for Krishna. And to the
extent by sharing Krishna Consciousness, people learn to live in harmony with
God. Then, to that extent, the rains will come. Natural necessi..., natu...,
natural necessities will be provided for. But still, there are ways in which
this can be understood. So, many scien..., many researchers, you know, have
pointed out that, actually, there is, empirical evidence for consciousness
affecting nature. So:

"‘Consciousness controls nature’ is the working principle of the New Age
gardeners, who seek communion with their plants and crops as a means for higher
yields. A vivid example of New Age gardening is the famous Findhorn farm
community in Scotland, which grows amazing flowers and vegetation on barren,
sandy soil."

So, this Findhorn community. And then, similarly, there are other communities.
There are other, anyway, are a, is Perelandra in Virginia. A, so, the point is:

"These days any trendy urban bookshop can supply at least a few “deva gardening
manuals” – The Deva Handbook: How to work with Nature’s Subtle Energies, or
Plant Spirit Medicine, or Garden Notes from the Nature Devas (helpful hints that
enable you to communicate and learn on the devic level to heal the earth)"

So, here, the point is that those who try to understand that there are higher
principles, higher beings, who actually are in control. And if we try to
harmonise with them. Then, we can live more fruitfully in this world. Now, this
is not some mythological belief. This is a philosophical truth. And that
philosophical truth can also be experientially verified. If we purify ourselves
and share the method of purification with others. So, now, what exactly happens
when we do Yajña? The technicalities are very difficult for us to understand
because the principle of devatas and how the devatas are worshiped, that is all
subtle. See, we have, we often have very simplistic understanding of things. You
say, where is heaven? Heaven is up. Well, that is true. But what does up, up
mean, actually? You know, up is not a simplistic up. Because say, everybody on
ear..., every people, everyone on the earth say that heaven is up. So, Indians
say heaven is up. Americans say heaven is up. But In..., the earth is round. So,
India and America are on opposite side of the earth. So, the up for India and
America is two opposite sides. So, where is up actually? So, that up is not a
simplistic geographical up. In the Vedic cosmos, there is a vertical dimension.
The vertical dimension points to a karmic y-axis. And on this karmic y-axis,
there are different planet which are at different levels. So, in the Svarga Loka
is above. In the Fifth Canto of Cosm..., Bhagavatam, there is a description of
Vedic cosmology. And in that description of Vedic cosmology, there is a mention
of multiple levels of the universe. So, these distances which are given and the
hierarchy of the planets, that is not simplistically geographical. That is,
there is a higher karmic dimension. And on that dimensions, the different
planets are positioned in different ways, you know, at different levels. So, the
Svarga is higher in the sense that higher karmic qualification is required to
ascend to Svarga. So, we should not have, you know, very simplistic notions
about what the Vedic teachings are and what the Vedic world view is. So, in
the Vedic world view, the essential point is that we are all striving to
harmonise ourselves with the cosmic government. And the y..., Yajña is the means
by which we harmonise. So, we discussed in the previous class about th...,
essence of Yajña is the principle of sacrifice. So, just like in a, you know, in
a, say, credit card, a, card sy..., a system of banking. You know, we put in
money and then we get a credit card. The credit card from useful for many
purposes. So, the method of exchange is not, it can be variable depending on the
economy. The system of economy, the culture, and such things. But the principle
of exchange is universally understood. So, the, it is Krishna is talking here
about the principle of exchange.

        devān bhāvayatānena
        te devā bhāvayantu vaḥ

We satisfy the devatas. And the devatas satisfy us. So, we put money into the
bank. And the bank gives us a credit card. So, this is the system of exchange.
So, sy..., the same way, the system of Yajña. That is exchange. So, Prabhupada
explains, the performance of Yajña is like paying the tax to the cosmic
government. So, when we pay the tax to the cosmic government, then the
government gives us results. It, government gives us rewards. And what are the
rewards? The rewards are in terms of the necessities of life which they provide.
So, this is a whole c..., profound system. And when we do saṅkīrtana-yajña. In
Kali Yuga, the recommended form of Yajña is saṅkīrtana. So, when we do
saṅkīrtana, we are harmonising with the system, universal system of government.
So, when we do this Yajña, what exactly are we doing? Yes. We are chanting. We
are dancing. We are singing. But essentially, along with that, those are the, a
means by which we are harmonising with the Supreme Lord. So, our goal is, you
know, that like, I earlier was talking about, say, a, say, there is a community
of thieves, lawbreakers. And, you know, there, there is no water supply coming.
Now, if they want water supply, what should they do? If, if, if, say, there is a
community of hundred rubbers living in some forest. And there, two, three of
them start deciding that we want to pay the water tax. We want to become
law-abiding citizens. So, will that alone lead to water supply coming over
there? It may not, may not. You know, overall, if the whole law, a whole
community decides to reform itself. Then, water supply will be provided by the
government. So, similarly, in today's world, if some devotees start chanting
Hare Krishna in a place, say, where there are droughts. Will rains come? They
may or may not. It depends. You know. Depends on the karma of the people over
there. The amass karma that is there. And various factors are there. On the
other hand, so, you know, so, our goal is not just that we do not want to do
Yajña to counter the law of karma. The law of karma is that actions produce
reactions. So, if, so, if there are shorta..., the shortage of water, that is
because people have done certain bad karma because of which they are having
shortage of water now. So, our goal should be, you know, to provide people
proper philosophical education. And to en..., encourage them to reform
themselves. So, when they stop doing bad karma. Then, the nature will start
pro..., providing, it, necessities. And in that way, there will be
harmonisation. with nature and the provision of necessities. So, who, our focus
is not on doing Yajña to provide rains. Our focus, a, is on doing Yajña, on
chanting and glorifying the Supreme Lord by which people learn to live in
harmony with the cosmic government. And then, rains will automatically follow.
So, this is the system which Krishna talks about.

        devān bhāvayatānena
        te devā bhāvayantu vaḥ

Let us look at the next verse. So, Prabhupada quotes this f..., well-known
verse in his purport from the Śrutis.

"āhāra-śuddhau sattva-śuddhiḥ sattva-śuddhau dhruvā smṛtiḥ smṛti-lambhe
sarva-granthīnāṁ vipramokṣaḥ"

So, he sa..., what "āhāra-śuddhau". When we offer our food in Yajña and we take
this, the "āhāra" becomes "śuddhau". When the "āhāra" becomes "śuddhau", then
"sattva-śuddhiḥ". Our existence become, a, pure. When "sattva-śuddhau dhruvā
smṛtiḥ". Then, our memory becomes purified, sanctified. "smṛti-lambhe". When our
mem..., memory is sanctified. Then, "sarva-granthīnāṁ vipramokṣaḥ". When we
start remembering Krishna, we start remembering spiritual reality, then we are
no longer attached to material things. And then, "sarva-granthīnāṁ", all
material attachments, "vipramokṣaḥ", we become liberated from them. So:

        iṣṭān bhogān hi vo devā
        dāsyante yajña-bhāvitāḥ
        tair dattān apradāyaibhyo
        yo bhuṅkte stena eva saḥ

So, "iṣṭān bhogān". When we give to the devatas, you know, devatas, "hi vo
devā". Devatas are in charge of the various necessities. "iṣṭān bhogān". Our
necessities. Desired necessities. "dāsyante". They will provide.
"yajña-bhāvitāḥ". When we satisfy them by Yajña. "tair dattān". "tair dattān"
means that those things which we are given. "apradāyaibhyo". So, if we do not
offer them back to the devatas as "naivat". "yo bhuṅkte stena eva saḥ". So,
Krishna says that if we do not participate in system of cosmic cooperation, then
we become thieves. "yo bhuṅkte stena eva saḥ". Such people are thieves. And,
just as, we discussed, you know, those who take the water supply, but do not pay
the taxes. They are considered thieves. So, like that, if we do not satisfy the
devatas, then we become thieves. So, now, if we look at the various Vedic
sacrifices, you, i..., sometimes, it seems as if the devatas are dependent on
the "Yajña"s performed by us. So, for example, Seventh Canto, Hiranyakasipu
says, if you stop all the "Yajña"s, then what will happen is, the devatas will
starve. And when the devatas starve, then they will all become weak. And we kill
them in battle. And that is how I will become Supreme. So, are the devatas
dependent on, you know, for their needs on human beings? Actually, Svarga Loka
and the Lokas of devatas are far more opulent, far more, you know, neut..., far
more, you know, su..., sumptuously provided from, for them by the earth than the
earth is. So, you know, if we, we say that the devatas a..., are dependent for
their food on the earth, on us, earthly beings, then it is like saying that,
say, the wealthiest country in the world, say, America, is dependent on a poor
country like Somalia. So, you know, that is not proper. You know, if we look at,
otherwise, in the scriptures, you know, when Indra, his Yajña is stopped by
Krishna. You know, Indra is not considered, oh, my Yajña is stopped. I will
starve to death. I will starve to death. What will I do? No. Indra's con...,
Indra gets angry because he feels he is dishonored. Similarly, when Lord Shiva
is not offered section of Yajña, in the Fourth Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, in
the Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth Sec..., Sect..., Chapters. It is all
pastime comes along. So, there, Pārvatī, satish, her anger is not, oh, my
husband has starved to death. She says, my husband is disrespected. That is the
feeling. So, the point is that esse..., acknowledgement of authority. It is just
like when a, you know, when a wo..., when a worshipable guest comes to the,
comes to ou..., our place, sekam. Then, we offer that guest maybe a garland. We
may do some aarti. Now, it is not that that garland and aarti are, a, are
necessities for that person. It is not that if these are not offered, the person
will die. But that is the way we respect that person. So, similarly, the, the
performance of Yajña, it is not a necessity for the devatas. It, the, it is a
way in which we respect them. And, just as when a, when a, very s...,
worshipable guest comes to our place. You know, we need to offer respect and
worship. Because that will purify us. And if we do not do that, then it can be
offensive. So, same way, if we do not, a, offer Yajña to the devatas, then it
can become offensive from our side. So, therefore, it is not that devatas are
f..., are like nutritionally dependent for, on, for, on ea..., earth. No, it is
a part of a system of cosmic cooperation. And if we do not ser..., a, play our
part, then it is a dishonor for them. And ultimately, it is a disrespect for the
Supreme Lord. Because we are not a, doing our part in the cosmic government.
Now, of course, Krishna told the Vrajavasis to stop doing Yajña. You know, not
because He wanted disrupt that system. But He wanted to check Ar..., A...,
Indra's pride. Devatas should take respect on behalf of the Supreme Lord. Not
that they think that they are the Supreme. So, because Indra was temporarily
thinking that he is all in all. So, Krishna wanted to curb his pride. But
Krishna, He does not, does not disrupt the system of Yajña. In fact, He
encourages the system as we will see over here. So, if one, we tr..., try to
enjoy separate from the Yajñic system, then "yo bhuṅkte stena eva saḥ". Such a
person is a thief. So, now, Prabhupada talks about the "pañca-mahā-yajña". There
are five different kinds of "Yajña"s which are performed. And these "Yajña"s are
meant to ultimately help people get elevated. 

So, actually, why are the "Yajña"s required? There are f..., five different,
there are different, five primary ways in which people can perform inevitably
bad karma. You know, when we light a fire, at that time, some living beings
killed. When we walk along, some livng beings get killed. When we put a pot of
water, there may be some living beings that may get killed. So, like that, even
in our normal day-to-day activities, when we use a motor and pestle, at that
time, some living beings get killed. So, the specific reason which living beings
can get killed, that a..., there are five general ways which are talked about in
the Vedic culture. And those can apply as per "mutatis mutandis", means, being
necessary adjustments to, according to its culture, to our situation. The point
is that we all suff..., o..., we all inevitably commit violence. And if you want
to avoid the karmic consequences, then we have to do these, these kind of
"Yajña"s. So, of course, the, in Vedic culture, they were doing, do the pancavya
yajna. So, now, in Kali Yuga, we do saṅkīrtana-yajña. So, now, Prabhu..., now,
we will come to a verse which Prabhupada would quote quite often.

        yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ santo
        mucyante sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ
        bhuñjate te tv aghaṁ pāpā
        ye pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt

So, "yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ". "śiṣṭa" means remnants. "ā...", "āśinaḥ". "āśinaḥ" means
to accept or to eat. "santaḥ". "santaḥ", the devotees. The saintly people.
"mucyante sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ". "mucyante" is to become liberated. "kilbiṣaiḥ" is
contaminations or sins. So, by taking the remnants of Yajña, the saintly person
become f..., persons become free from all sinful reactions. "bhuñjate te tv
aghaṁ pāpā". So, "aghaṁ". "aghaṁ" is sin. "pāpā" are the sinners. So, who are
the sinners? "ye pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt". Those who, "pacanty" is those who cook
food for "ātma-kāraṇāt", for their own th..., purposes. So, those who try to eat
food for their own purposes, the, co..., cook and eat food, they consume sin
only. So, the point is that, actually, in all cultures, there has been some
acknowledgement traditionally, that we should offer some kind of prayer to
higher being. So, Christians may offer grace, they fold their hands and pray.
Oh, yes. Actually, we should serve the Supreme Lord. So, we thank the, thank God
for providing us food. So, like that, in different religions, there may be a,
may, different traditions, there may be in different ways of acknowledging that
the food that we get is by the arrangement of a higher being. It does not come
just by our own efforts. Our efforts are important. No doubt. But they are not
all important. So, Yajña, so when we offer food to Krishna, what are we doing?
We are acknowledging Krishna, actually, I have no capacity to produce food. So,
you have provided me this food. And I am grateful to you for that. So, in that
way, when we offer the food to Krishna, "yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ". When we accept the
food that we offered to Krishna, then w..., we acknowledge Krishna's mercy on
us. And by that acknowledgement and by the devotional connection that establish
through that acknowledgement, then Krishna freeze us from sinful reactions.
"yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ santo". So, that is why the devotees, a, try, a, take food
that is offered to Krishna. Now, when we talk about prasad, there are multiple
standards of prasad. The hi..., best standard of prasad is, the food is cooked,
food is, is cultivated, the grains are cultivated by devotee farmers. Then, the
grains are transported by devotee business men. The devotee, the gra..., f...,
coo..., f..., grains are then cooked by devotee cooks. And then, the grai...,
the food is served by devotees. And then, when food is honored by devotees. So,
that is the best standard of prasadam. If that is not possible, then we have
devotees cooking food. And devotees honoring food. Of course, among those who
honor, there can be non-devotees, also. They also become purified. So,
generally, prasad is not just food that is offered to Krishna. Prasad is food
that is cooked to be offered to Krishna. So, in general, we try to take prasadam
that is cooked with the intention, of..., of..., offering to Krishna. In some
situations, if not possible, so, you know, at least, we should offer the food
that we take to Krishna. Now, when we offer Krishna that food, then it becomes
free from sinful reactions. So, vegetarianism is important. But vegetarianism
not all important. Vegetarianism in and o..., in and of itself does not free us
from all sinful reactions. And vegetarianism does not purify us. It does
minimise the sinful reactions that we get. And also it minimises the huge amount
of violence that happens, a, today, nowadays, through the meat-packing
industries. So, all that can be minimised and avoided, you know, even avoided if
people shift to vegetarian diet. But the important point is that, you know, even
if the food is vegetarian.

        bhuñjate te tv aghaṁ pāpā

Actually, one is eating sin if one is not offering the food to Krishna.
Therefore, you know, it is important that, as devotees, we offer the food to
Krishna. So, Prabhupada adopted different strategies. You know. It was Peter,
Peter Burwash was a famous tennis player. And when Prabhupada met him,
Prabhupada too..., saw that he was very influential. Prabhupada told him that you
elevate the global consciousness. And he gives subtle sattvic principles. You
know, he talks about vegetarianism. He talks about caring. He talks about
responsibility. And he did not talk about, Prabhupada told him, you th..., about
vegetarianism. Like that. But then, you know, Prabhu..., so, those who were in a
position where they would commit more. You know, for example, there was a book
PQP..., Perfect Questions Perfect Answers. So, there, Bob Cohen met Srila
Prabhupada. And he said Swamiji, I am a vegetarian. So, Prabhupada, you know,
told him, monkeys are vegetarians. What is big deal about it? So, he, so for
him, from a western background, being a vegetarian is q..., quite remarkable
achievement. And he was proud of that. So, Prabhupada acknowledged that. But at
the same time, he said, you know, there is nothing great about that. The point
is that, we have to raise ourse..., higher and become conscious of Krishna. So,
as devotees, the practical way in which we take, we apply this principle of
Yajña is through taking prasad. So, in the Vedic c..., context, in the
karma-kandi context, the principle of Yajña would apply in a different way.
There would be fire sacrifice, you know, and through that, the remnants of the
fire sacrifice, whatever they were, they would be taken as prasad. So, now, in
our situation, we have the deity. And when we offer prayers to the deity. We
offer the bhoga. And then we take prasad. So, you remember earlier we discussed
about how there is a principle of Yajña. And there is a form of Yajña. The
principle is we offer for the Lord's pleasure what we could have used for
ourselves. So, when we cook, we primarily cook, because it is for the Lord's
pleasure. And then, we take for ourselves. So, in this way, we can all, so, stay
freed from sinful reaction. Not only will we stay freed from sinful reactions,
we will become purified and elevated by the potency of "yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ", the
remnants of Yajña, that is prasad. We will continue in the next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
