Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cx_AITanQlo
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_062_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_14_to_19_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=Cx_AITanQlo&event=video_description&redir_token=QN8HanUiK7XedYoiADIB-JaysyB8MTU0ODQ4NzYxNkAxNTQ4NDAxMjE2

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita part of, course of the Bhakti
Shastri part. So, now, we are going to discuss the third chapter. In the last
class, we discussed about how the Vedic understanding of the universe being
controlled by conscious beings, the devatas, is not contradictory to the
scientific understanding of the universe operating according to mechanisms.
Mechanisms and persons are not contradictory, but complementary. So, you know, I
would like to conclude that section by giving you one more additional example to
illustrate how both of them can be complementary. Let us look at the verse
today. And then, we move forward to that section. Yes.

        annād bhavanti bhūtāni
        parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ
        yajñād bhavati parjanyo
        yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ

So, "annād bhavanti bhūtāni". All living beings subsist on grains. And where do
grains come from? The word "annāt" can be used generically for all food. Or it
can be used specifically for grains. Both are valid uses. "parjanyād
anna-sambhavaḥ". So, rains come, a, so, grains come from rains. So, "parjanyāt".
"parjanyāt" was also the name of the father of Nanda Maharaja. "parjanyād
anna-sambhavaḥ". So, they are, they were dependent on cows. Cows needed grass.
So, in that sense, the names related with nature are natural in such settings.

        parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ
        yajñād bhavati parjanyo

So, where do, you know, where does grains come from? Where do grains come,
grains come from? Yajña. And "yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ". Yajña comes from karma.
This and the next verse are related. So, we will discuss both together. Let us
s..., look at the next verse, also.

        karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi
        brahmākṣara-samudbhavam
        tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma
        nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam

So, "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". So, he..., the ka..., where do, which karma
comes from? Karma is prescribed in the Vedas. So, here, the word "brahma" refers
to Vedas. "brahma". The word "brahma" can have many meanings. So, in 3.15, here,
it refers to the Vedas. So, "brahmākṣara-samudbhavam". So, "akṣara". refers to
the Supreme Lord. The Lord is infallible. That Lord never falls. That Lord never
deteriorates. So, "akṣara". So, the "br...", the Vedas come from the Absolute
Truth, "akṣara", "ak...", "tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma". Therefore, that
all-pervading brahma. "nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam" is always situated in Yajña.
So, now, this last part is something interesting which I will come to. But let
us look at the cyclic sequence which preceeds that. So, we are currently looking
at the second section of the Bhagavad Gita. First section was kar..., Kali, a,
karma-yoga is better for you as you are not qualified for jnana-yoga. Second
section was if you are not qualified even for karma-yoga. Then, practice
karma-kanda. So, we are di..., discussing this section. So, let us look here
now. The cycle of sacrifice. So, looking back at the two verses which we have
just discussed. So, "annād bhavanti bhūtāni". So, "bhūtāni" is here. How do the
li..., the, where, where do the living entities get the substance from? From
"annāt". And then, "parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ". Rains produce grains. "yajñād",
"yajñād bhavati parjanyo". Yajña produces, you know, rains. And then, "karma".
"brahma". Then, "yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ". That Yajña comes from karma. We will
discuss this cosmic connection a little later. But just let by cycle. "karma
brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". So, "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi" means that karma is
"jn...", a, told to us in Vedas. So, now, you know, the, Krishna does not
complete the cycle over here. But in the next verse, He uses the word "evaṁ
pravartitaṁ cakraṁ". "cakraṁ". So, the "cakraṁ" is completed when the living
entities come to know about Vedas and live according to the Vedas. So, the cycle
which Krishna describes is still over here. But the, how it gets concluded, when
the living entities learn to live according to Vedas, do their karma, and
perform Yajña. So, yesterday, we discussed about this point here, how Yajña
produces r..., r..., rains. Now, to understand this further, how the mechanistic
explanation, mechanist explanation and the personalist explanation are not
contradictory, but complementary. The mechanist means, mechanist, there is
mechanist means, mechanical based on mechanics. So, there is mechanist
explanation. And there is personalist explanation. Personalist means there are
person being, persons who are in charge. So, let us consider a billiards board.
A, in billiards, there is a long rectangular table with holes at various
corners. And the, there is a long stick which the players use. And they are
meant to hit the balls with the sticks. And the goal of the game is that the
balls should go into the holes. Now, if somebody had a top view of the came...,
of the billiards board using a camera. Then, within the billiards board, one
will practically never see the players. All that one will see is the sticks.
Tuck. The stick is moving forward. The stick is hitting this bunch of balls. And
this goal, balls are moving in this direction. That ball goes into the hole. The
stick hits this ball. That ball hits that ball. And that ball sends that ball
into the hole. Like that. So, th..., if we just looked at the billiards boards
itself. All that we would see is the interaction of sticks and balls.

Now, if we apply the scientific, you know, a, mode of analysis to this. You
know, the moment of all the balls along the surface of the billiards board, will
be according to the laws of mechanics. So, if a particular ball goes into a
hole when a stick hits it. Then, we can find out, oh, this stick must have,
this stick hit it this force, at this angle and that is why this ball went into
the hole. So, as far as the laws of mechanics are concerned, they are valid. At
the same time, you know, the laws of mechanics offer a correct, but not complete
explanation. Why correct, but not complete? Because the balls are going into the
holes, not just because, you know, the, they are being hit at a particular
force, hit with a particular force by the players. That is there. The particular
quantity of the force is there. But why are the players hitting at that force
with that angle? That is because they have particular training. They have
particular expertise. And they have particular desires. Ok, I want that ball to
go into the hole. So, if I hit this ball like this, it will grace that ball and
that will go into the hole. Like that. So, the point is that there are, there
are mecha..., there is, the mechanist explanation is correct. That yes,
according to certain laws of mechanics, the balls will go into the holes when
they hit in particular way. But along with the mechanist explanation, there is
the personalist explanation, also. The personalist explanation is that there are
persons with skills and desires who are playing the billiards game. And they are
hitting the balls, and, with the sticks in particular angles. And that is why
they are, the balls are going into the holes. So, both these explanations are
complementary. They are not contradictory. Now, similarly, rains falling because
of particular mechanisms. Say, the water getting evaporated. And the water
condensing through the medium of the clouds at the appropriate change of pivoty.
That mechanism is correct, but it is not complete. So, the mechanist and co...,
personalist explanations do not have to be contradictory. They can also be
complementary. Now, so, "yajñād". "yajñād bhavati parjanyo". Going back to this
chart. "yajñād bhavati parjanyo" Now before that, that is what. "yajñaḥ
karma-samudbhavaḥ". What does, "yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ" means that, you know,
the karma is not just our worldly obligations. And, a, actually, our, it is our,
k..., part of our karma is to do Yajña. In, you know, today's society, many
think that it is their duty to take care of their family members. To take care
of themselves. To do duty, d..., do this to, you know, their relatives. And they
think, this is, this is what is our duty. This is what God has told us to do.
This is what we will do. Yes, that is definitely true. That we sh..., that we
have to do. But that does not come, that is not the complete scope of our
duties. Actually, the taking care of the, you know, you know, l..., du..., the,
one's children, say, is something which even animals do. You know, taking care
of family members is something which even animals do in many ways. So, you know,
the birds take care of their babies. So, th..., you know, that, and that alone
does not complete the scope of human duties. You know, human duties involve
rising to a higher level. Where we take care, not just of others' bodies. But
take care of others' souls, also. And when, also, when we take care, not just of
our bodies, but our own souls, also. If we are just taking, our, care of the
bodies, or our own bodies and the bodies of our loved ones. Then, we are doing
our duties. But we are not doing our complete duties.

So, Srila Prabhupada explains that, you know, f..., a mother's, or a parent's
love for his children is natural and necessary. But it is not spiritual. It is
natural and necessary. What is the meaning of natural, necessary? Natural means
when a couple, they unite and give birth to a child, by the arrangement of
material nature, they, you know, develop affection for that child. So, by the
arrangement of nature, their affection is created. It is natural. And it is
necessary. Necessary means that such affection actually enables us to, you know,
live in this world. In many tim..., in many species when the, you know, young
ones are born. At that time, they need the care of their parents. Without that,
they will not be able to grow. So, that is necessary. So, by the arrangement of
nature, what is necessary is also arranged for through the feelings for
affec..., affection that are there. So, this is in no ways meant to minimise the
sacrifice that the parents do for the children. That is definitely true. That
they do sacrifice and that is laudable. At the same time, that does not make it
spiritual. Spiritual is that which is connected with the soul. Or, you know, you
know, as researchers have studied nature, you know, the study of the natural
behavior of animals of living beings in the natural habitats is called as
ethology. So, ethologists have found that a..., animals behave in fascinating
ways. For example, as we were bird, and this bird, when, you know, it unites
with the she-bird. And then, they will, the bird becomes pregnant. She-bird
becomes preg..., and then, they both search around and find some good hollow in
a tree. And then, they put the, a, bi..., the female lays the eggs, and puts
them. And then, they cover the eggs. And they keep, a, they, they cover the
eggs. They cover the hollow in the hole itself with some proper covering, mud,
and you know, some brem..., branches, and brambles. So that no snakes appear to
just can go inside and eat the eggs. And then, after that, the she-bird keeps
coming and wo..., looking at them. And when the eggs are to be, hide, she comes
and stays inside with the birdlets, with the eggs. And the he-bird cops and
keeps giving a food to the she-bird. And then, as the birdlets, you know, eggs
hash and the birdlets come out. Then, the he-bird has to get more and more food.
Because now, food is needed not just for the mo..., for the she-bird. But it is
also needed for the birdlets. And when the he-bird gives food. The she-bird
first gives foods to the birdlets. And then, takes herself. And then, after
that, when, you know, the birdlets start becoming bigger and bigger, and they
need more food, then the bird comes and tells his she-birdlet. It is too much
now. I cannot do it. You also have to take a job. Come out now. So, then, we,
they will become double when they become couples. You know, the, the she-bird
also comes out. And then, they c..., cover up the hole in the tree, you know,
keeping only a small out, opening so that they can drop food. And then, what do
the she-bird and he-bird? They go out and search for food. And now inside, some
eggs have hashed earlier. Some h..., eggs have hashed later. So, the eggs that
have hashed earlier, those birdlets are bigger. The other birdlets are smaller.
So, naturally, when the parent birds come and drop food into the hollow, the
bigger birdlets are able to catch it. When the bigger birdlets catch it, they do
not devour the food themselves. They first give it to the small birdlets. And
then, later on when the small birdlets are fed, then they take the food
themselves.

So, we see this affection among family members, there in nature, also. At one
level, we can say it is so touching and moving. That there is a spirit of
sacrifice even in animals, lowest species. So, and if it is not there in human
specy, that is so unfortunate. That, but another level is that if we live only
at that level, then we are actually not practicing spiritual life. We are not
actually living at a human level. Because hu..., privilege of human life is to
explore and relish our spiritual avenue. So, therefore, karma is not just taking
care of our family members. You know, a, so, our duty is, are not just taking
care of our family members. It is important. We have to do that. But we also
have to connect with God. So, that ho..., we discussed about our horizontal
relationship and vertical relationships. You know, only in human form can we
pursue the vertical relationship with Krishna. So, it is a special privilege.
And the performance of Yajña essentially is the opportunity to, is a means by
which we can pursue the vertical relationship. So, Yaj..., when we perform
Yajña, then Yajña enables us to acknowledge the higher authorities centering
ultimately on the Supreme Being, Krishna. So, therefore, "karma", "yajñaḥ
karma-samudbhavaḥ". So, "samudbhavaḥ" means bor..., o..., born along with that.
You know, concomitant with that. So, along with karma, is Yajña included. So, we
should not think that, you know, when we go to a temple. Or we chant some holy
names. We are doing some favor to God. You know. Actually, I do not have to do
it. But just to be a good person, I am doing it. It is a part of our, you know,
our duty as human beings to take care of our material as well as our spiritual
side. So, "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". That is why from where do we know, come
to know about akarma? The, we come to know about akarma from shastra. Therefore,
it is said "brahmākṣara-samudbha...". "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". So, we move
back "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". So, karma comes from the Vedas. Karma comes,
kar..., the, the, when we want to know about akarma, we cannot know it by our
speculative efforts. We have to seek the scriptural wisdom to know about what
are the, you know, what are the duties that we are expected to perform. Now, in
this whole cycle, actually, the Lord is the source of everything. Specifically,
you know, th..., ultimately, the Lord is source of all living beings. The Lord
is the source of nature. The Lord is source of the Yajñic rituals. The Lord is
source of the scriptures. But specifically, the Lord is not visible to us. The
Lord is not directly visible to us. Because the Lor..., Krishna, the Supreme
Lord is spiritual. Whereas we ar..., are currently at the material level of
consciousness. So, therefore, the spiritual realm and the material realm, what
is the connecting link? That is the scripture. You know, the, the spiritual
realm becomes accessible to us at the material realm through scriptural wisdom.
And the scriptural wisdom is not just theoretical. It is transformational. It
gives us, you know, practical processes of yoga, by which we can raise
ourselves, transform ourselves to rise from the material level to the spiritual
level. So, that is why, although Krishna is the source of everything. In this
context, it is said that "brahmākṣara-samudbhavam". That the "brahma", the
scriptures come from the Supreme Lord. "brahmākṣara-samudbhavam".

So, why scriptural wisdom? The Lord becomes manifested. So, the, now, let us
look at the last line on this verse. We said we will come back to it.

        tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma
        nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam

So, "sarva-gataṁ brahma" means that brahma is present everywhere. The Absolute
Truth is there everywhere. "sarva-gataṁ brahma". But how do we come to know
about that brahma? "nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam". He is always, you know,
accessible to us through Yajña. "nityaṁ yajñe". So, that means, the human
beings, they can access the Absolute Truth through the performance of Yajña. Let
us look back at the cycle once again. So, here, we see that Krishna, the akṣara
is the source and goal of everything. But how will He be accessible to us? He is
not visible to us. So, He has given the Vedas. And in the Vedas, our prescribed
duties are given. And the prescribed duties that connect us with Kr..., Krishna,
with Him is Yajña. So, therefore, by the means of Yajña, we become connected
with the Absolute Truth. "tasmāt".

        tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma
        nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam

So, Yajña makes the, a, makes the universal accessible to us. That the Absolute
Truth is "sarva-gataṁ", is universal. But the universal becomes accessible to
us through Yajña. Now, when we understand this point, we recognise the
importance of Yajña. Oh, the Lord is there everywhere. But how do we perceive
Him? So, Yajña offers us the means to perceive Him. So, what this essentially
Yajña involve? We discussed Yajña essentially involves sacrifice. When we
perform sacrifice for the pleasure of the Absolute. We give up what we can,
could have used for our pleasure for His pleasure. And in this way, we connect
with the Absolute Truth. So, Yajña makes the universal accessible to us. And
therefore:

        tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma
        nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam

The, always, that are, c..., all-pervading Absolute i..., become..., is
accessible to us as Yajña. So, after we understand this cycle. So, we
participate in the cycle through Yajña. And when we participate in the cycle,
through, by doing Yajña, then the cycle continues. Then, we get grains. And that
is how we are able to survive. So, just like, what do we mean by cycle? You
know, the government gives water supply. And the government tells the citizens
rules to follow. When we follow the rules, and we pay the taxes. So, from the
government, the water is coming to us. And from us, taxes are going to the
government. And when this goes on cycle. Now, if we stop paying the taxes. Then,
what happens? The government stop giving water. So, there is, for the cycle to
go on, we have to do, keep doing Yajña. We have to keep paying taxes. Similarly,
the devatas are providing us necessities. And when we do the "Yajña"s, then the
cycle keeps going on. So, the, looking at, so that means, now, this is a, a, we
will look back at the cycle. First, let us understand this simple cycle. You
know, there are, there is the higher universal government. Which involves
devatas, you know, are, who are headed by the Supreme Lord. This is Vedic
government. And we are the citizens. Especially human beings are expected to, a,
co..., abide by the laws of God. You know, animals, they do not abide by the
laws of the state. You know, if there is a red signal. And then, a donkey is
going around the signal. The donkey will just walk through the signal. And there
is a young person on a motorcycle. You know. And that person sees, oh, I also
go. Waits the red signal. Red signal, zzz, goes through it. And then,
immediately, the police man will blow the whistle. And stop. Stop. Stop. And
then, he may give him the ticket. He may give the ticket to him as a fine. He
says, you know, but the donkey was walking through. You did not fi..., fine him.
Why are you fining me? He says, because you are a bigger donkey. Phew. The
donkey is not expected to follow rules. We are expected to follow rules. So,
actually, the point here is that the donkey does not have the higher
intelligence. We human beings have the higher intelligence. So, we are expected
to perform Yajña. And thereby, we will get the necessities that we are ordained
to get. That we are expe..., a, that we are, not ordained, that we need for our
living. And the cosmic arrangement gives us. If we maintain the cycle. So, now,
how is this sim..., this simple cycle which Krishna has talked about, devatas
satisfying us, and we satisfying the devatas? How is this related with this
particular cycle, more complex cycle which we see over here? Actually, it is a,
it is, same continuation, essentially. But we come to know, the way, we
practically implement the cycle is, the role of the devatas is in ensuring that
"parjanyāt" is provided. And for us, for us living beings, we need food. So, in
a sense, we could say that, this part, "parjanyāt", this refers to how the
origin may come. That is the devatas. And the whole remaining part, from
"bhūtāni" to Yajña. From "bhūtāni", Vedas, karma, and Yajña, this is our part.
So, when we do these three things. We understanding the Vedas, understand our
karma and do the Yajña within that. Then, we are cooperating. And the devatas,
what do they do? They are in charge of the rains. And they give the rains by
which we get grains. So, in this way, the cycle is maintained. Now, Krishna
tells in the next verse what happens if one does not maintain that cycle. Before
we go into that, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport quickly.

So, Prabhupada quotes, Prabhupada's essential point here is that the devatas are
not the supreme. The Supreme Lord is supreme. And devatas are just parts. So, he
quotes from Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa about how Supreme Lord is yajña-puruṣa. And
everybody is benefited by Him. You know, everybody is, He is the Supreme
Beneficiary. He is the Lord of the devatas. So, then, Prabhupada says how when
we take prasad, then we pro..., protect ourselves from the vacci..., from the
infection by material nature. See, prasadam is like a vaccine. So, He says one
who does not do so. That means one who does not take prasad:

"continues to increase the volume of sinful action, and this prepares the next
body to resemble hogs and dogs , to suffer the resultant reactions of all sins."

And then, "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". Prabhupada quotes in this purport o...,
from the, Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad. It is a famous verse. He says how the, you
know, the scriptures come from the Lord. So, here, Prabhupada is quoting for
this point. "brahmākṣara-samudbhavam". So, the brahmana, the scriptures come
from the Absolute Truth. So, how do we understand this? He is quoting from the
this:

        asya mahato bhūtasya niśvasitam etad yad ṛg-vedo yajur-vedaḥ sāma-vedo ’tharvāṅgirasaḥ.

So, "asya mahato bhūtasya niśvasitam". So, from the breathing of the great
Personality of Godhead. "mahato bhūtasya niśvasitam". "niśvasitam" means
breathing. You know. So, from His breathing, the, you know, the Yu..., the Vedas
come out. So, that means, now, Prabhupada quotes over "Brahma-saṁhitā" how is,
the Lord can do anything. You know, With any of His senses, He can do any of the
activities. So, even by His breathing, sound can come out. Now, Krishna will
tell about what will happen if we do not follow this cosmic cycle.

        evaṁ pravartitaṁ cakraṁ
        nānuvartayatīha yaḥ
        aghāyur indriyārāmo
        moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati

So, "evaṁ pravartitaṁ". "pravartitaṁ" means that which is established. So, the
cycle, the "cakraṁ", that is established by the Vedas. "nānuvartayatīha yaḥ".
"anuvartaya", "anuvartayati" means that which is followed, adopted. "na",
"anuvartayati" means not followed. "yaḥ". That person. That person is "aghāyur".
That person's life is filled with "agha". "agha" means sin. "indriyārāmo". And
what is that person doing? You know, he is trying to delight in the senses.
"indriyārāmo". And what happens to like, such a person? "moghaṁ pārtha sa
jīvati". So, "mogham" is waste. The word "mogham" will come again in the
Bhagavad Gita. On several occasions. Most famously, it comes in 9.12. Waste. So,
"moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati". Such a person's whole life goes in vain. So, one does
so, follow cycle. Such a person, that person's life is filled with sin. Lives
for sense gratification. Lives in vain. Now, you know, people generally have a
definition of sin, that is relative. So, for example, you know, there is sin.
And there is crime. So, crime is that which is considered to be legally wrong.
And sin is that which is considered to be religiously wrong, a, morally wrong.
So, you know, when the scriptures are the govern..., governing laws for, are
the governing guide books for the state, then crime and sin will be the same.
Because the government will act according to the scriptures. But when the
government is not acting according to scriptures, then crime and sin need not be
the same. And when the crime and sin are not the same, then often that which is
a sin, may not be considered to be a crime at all. For example, today, in most
countries, abortion has been legalised. So, abortion is actually nothing, but
cold-blooded murder. And the tragedy is that, you know, there is a systematic
program of disinformation. Disinformation means giving, not giving proper
information by which people do not come to know that the abor..., a, there is a
whole process of abortion which involves killing of a child. So, many times,
when the, when the prospective abortion, those who want to abort, they are
shown a, pictures, using sonography or the technology of how the child is, you
know, in the womb and how the child may be killed. Then, it is, they often
change their mind. No. I cannot kill. This is my child. So, actually speaking,
it is a sin. It is a grievous sin. But unfortunately, according today's laws, it
is not considered sin at all. So, Prabhupada, especially considered cow
slaughtered and abortion to be grievous sins that current society is performing.
And because of which, there are tremendous karmic reactions coming up as
consequences to this. So, there are documentaries, mainly "The Silent Scream"
and others which show, you know, how the child is killed. So, some, you know,
there are various methods in which abortion is performed. But in many cases,
say, there is a, you know, clamp-like object, you know, which is inserted into
the womb. And when the infant is so small, the infant sees that something
is coming into that womb, becomes terroristic and moves to the other co...,
extremity of the womb. And then, that clamp-like object is, comes and tries to
catches, catch the chi..., and the ch..., the embryo escapes. And then, the
clamp-like object comes in, tries to catch it again. Of course, now, there is
the abortionist, the doctor who is holding on. And trying to find. And again,
the clamp-like object comes. And again, the child escapes. And again, the
clamp-like object comes. And again, the child escapes. But it is a small space.
And the child is small. Child is, does not have any energy. So, then, the,
finally, tuck. The clamp-like object catches the child, usually, they catch the
neck of the child. And then, crush. The child's body is tender. So, the neck is
crashed. The whole neck just cramps. And then, the clamp-like object often has
some sharp parts. So, by which, and the hands are c..., a, the tiny hands will
be there. Hands will be cut off. Legs will be cut off. And then, they are all
meant small parts because they have to brought out from the womb. And finally,
the head is crushed into small, small pieces. And then scrought out. So,
actually, it is very ghastly. So, when we see it, we understand it is so, so
brutal.

But what happens is, by today's laws, it is considered to be legal entirely. So,
of course there are situations. For example, when the mother's life is in
threat. You know, it is a genuine threat. Then, abortion can be accepted.
Because you know, there is, if one person's life is a threat to another person's
life, then the person can protect oneself. And there, it is not so much killing.
As it is self-defense. So, it is a different situation. It is exceptional
situation. In most situations, actually, the mother's life can also be
preserved. And the child, the child can also be brought out even if there is
some danger. The doctors manage carefully. But that is the situation when, you
know, when at that time, for one, protection, we need full care be done. But in
other situations, it is actually very, a, very distressing. You know. What
happens. Very horrifying, also. But unfortunately, crime and sin are divorced in
many ways today. And because of this, most people go on doing immoral sinful
activities. And they think that everything is such subjective. Ok. You believe
that is wrong. So, you do not do it. We believe it is right. So, we will do it.
So, with this kind of, you know, social value set, which peoples have, people
have, you know, life becomes, you know, filled with sin for people. So, "aghāyur
indriyārāmo", the, a, the scriptures do not necessarily ban or reject all sense
gratification. You know, there i..., there is dharma, artha, kama. So, kama is
also one of the "puruṣārtha"s. And kama, when it is done within the precincts of
dharma, it is perfectly acceptable. So, in fact, we will see that in chap...,
seventh chapter, oh, Krishna says, I am kama. Which is not contrary to dharma,
pri..., principles. So, when we talk about this, the point here, important point
is that, Krishna is saying "aghāyur indriyārāmo". So, that, when people engage
in sense gratification without considering the scriptures, without considering
the mo..., higher laws of God, then that is "aghāyur". That makes their life
filled with sin. "aghāyur indriyārāmo". You know, so, today, people, they
neglect the scriptures. They neglect the Yajña. They neglect the, you know,
performance of their duties to God. And then, they seek enjoyment. That
enjoyment, what happens? They, they want "indriyārāmo". Now, if you see, the
previous verses, Krishna has said, whatever, "kāma-dhuk". He has used the word
"kāma-dhuk earlier. So, whatever are our desirable things, that will be provided
by nature. If we see, the demigods, it is not that they have to all live like
ascetics. Indra, there are apsaras in his court. Indra can also have sense
gratification. And the asuras, they also want sense gratification. But the
difference is:

        viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva
        āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ

You know, devatas seek sense gratification, while following the laws of the
Absolute Truth. You know, those are the guidelines of the Supreme Lord. The
asuras defy those guidelines and seek enjoyment thereof. So, therefore, there is
a radical difference between the two. And that difference has to be bridged. So,
how do you bridge it? By, you know, not changing God's laws to bring them to, in
conformity with God's laws. But by elevating human understanding, so that it is
able to harmonise itself with the divine revelation. Now, Krishna says, if one
does not live like, if one just lives, seeks enjoyment, "indriyārāmo". One seeks
sen..., sense gratification, without, you know, understanding and harmonising
with the, you know, will of the Lord. Without doing Yajña. Then, "aghāyur". That
person does so many sinful activities. And when that person does sinful
activities. Then, what, what is the result? "moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati". The whole
life is "moghaṁ". "moghaṁ" means it goes waste. Why does our life go waste? So,
from the spiritual perspective, when a person does not seek the Absolute Truth.
Then, that person simply continues on cycle of birth and death. So, when we saw
in the Isopanishad how such people are called as "ye ke cātma-hano janāḥ". In
third mantra of Isopanishad, we discussed about how these are the killers of the
soul. The same point. "moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati". These people live in vain. They
live in vain. Why do they live in vain? Because they do not know what is the
ultimate goal of life. And they do not care to know. And they live in defiance
and violen..., violation of the will of the Supreme Lord. So, Prabhupada quotes
in the purport, the mammonist philosophy. The mammonist philosophy is:

"“work very hard and enjoy sense gratiﬁcation” is condemned herein"

So, we do not agitate, yes, it is not that we cannot enjoin. But there has to be
harmonisation with the wa..., will of God. So, Prabhupada writes nicely where:

"The yajña system is planned in such a way that sensory conscious persons may
satisfy their desires without becoming entangled in the reaction of
sense-gratiﬁcatory work."

So, you know, that means when there is dharma, artha. And then, there is kama.
Then, one does not get entangled so much. Gradually, one will get purified, and
elevated, and ultimately liberated. And then, now, w..., within these "Yajña"s,
within these "Yajña"s, there are multiple "Yajña"s which are done for different
devatas. But ultimately, the Yajña Isvhara is Lord Vishnu. So, for example, when
we talk about s..., fire sacrifices, if we look at, say, you know, the daksha
sacrifices which is mentioned in the Fourth Canto of the Srimad Bhagavatam. So,
when Satī comes, she sees that, oh, there are, you know, there are shares for
all the devatas. But there is no share for, you know, my Lord, for Shiva. So,
she feels enraged by that. You know. Now, the point is that, that all the
devatas get their sacrifice s..., shares. But ultimately:

        ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ
        bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca

In the Ninth Chapter, Lord Krishna will tell how He is the "bhoktā" for all the
Yajñic rituals.

        ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ
        bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca

Hmm. So, He is the "bhoktā". He is the ultimate goal for all the "Yajña"s. So,
there, He will talk more about Yajña little bit more. 9.23-24. He says about how
He is the "bhoktā". And even when other Gods are worshiped. Ultimately, it is He
who is being worshiped.

        ye ’py anya-devatā-bhaktā
        yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ
        te ’pi mām eva kaunteya
        yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam

That, you know, when the other devatas are worshiped, they are also pe..., I am
being worshiped. But I am being worshiped improperly over there. So, the point
is, all the "Yajña"s are ultimately meant to help one to become God conscious.
And if one does not become God conscious, that means Krishna conscious, then
one's, one does not fulfill the purpose of Yajña. So, so, here, Krishna
concludes, He in..., He gives instructing, instruction by contrasting. So,
first, He has said that, through Yajña, then we will stay bo..., free from
karmic bondage. Then, He has said, the devata said, there was, you satisfy the
devata. They will satisfy you. You will be satisfied. You will live happily in
this way. And you let in "śreyaḥ". That was 3.10-11-12. And now, He is saying,
3.16, He is giving the alternative trajectory. If you do not do this, then what
will happen?

        aghāyur indriyārāmo
        moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati

That one will live in vain. So, after describing this, now, let us go to the
next section of the Gita. So, the next section is, 17 to 24. Krishna is telling
Arjuna, if you are qualified for jnana-yoga, still practice karma-yoga to set
example. So, now, Krishna is, so, remember the spiral that we discussed. So,
Krishna is telling, practice karma-yoga. That He says, if you are not
practice of kar..., you know, practice karma-yoga, if you are not practicied...,
satisfy..., qualified for karma-yoga, then do karma-kanda. By that, you will
come to the sta..., stay from bon..., free from bondage. And you will also
get your material satis..., fulfilled. But if you think that you are qualified,
not just for karma-yoga, but for jnana-yoga, still practice karma-yoga to set an
example for others. So, let us look at the point of setting an example for
others, now.

        yas tv ātma-ratir eva syād
        ātma-tṛptaś ca mānavaḥ
        ātmany eva ca santuṣṭas
        tasya kāryaṁ na vidyate

"yas tv ātma-ratir eva syād". "ātma-ratir". So, one who, who has "ratiḥ".
"ratiḥ" means attachment, attraction. So, whose "ratiḥ" is inwards. "ātma-tṛptaś
ca mānavaḥ". One who is satisfied internally. "ātmany eva ca santuṣṭas". So, and
a man who delights within. Such a, one who is se..., se..., illuminated within.
One who delights within. "tasya kāryaṁ na vidyate". Such a person has no duty.
It is interesting now. What does it mean such a person has no duty? Here,
Krishna is now talking about a person who is, who has transcended the scope of
duty. You know, in this world, as long as we take something from someone, we are
expected to give something back. And that is how we get a, we live in a
reciprocal world. We are, we, in society, we take some things to others. And we
are expected to give some things to others. So, for example, the parents take
care of the children. And then, the children grow up. The children are also
expected to help their parents, take care of their parents. So, there is jn...,
there is the principle of reciprocity. When we take some thing from someone, we
are expected to give them back to that person. So, we take things from devatas.
And we are supposed to do Yajña for them. Now, Krishna is saying, if somebody
is self-satisfied. Somebody is not seeking anything externally. Then, for such a
person, "tasya kāryaṁ na vidyate". For such a person, there is no duty. "yas tv
ātma-ratir eva syād". So, one who is internal, that is why the word "ātma" comes
three times. You know. Self. Self. "ātma-ratir". "ātma-tṛptaś". "ātma
santuṣṭas". So, when the person is turned inwards. That person is satisfied
inwards. The person is illuminated inwards. So, at that time, the person does
not seek anything externally. So, when we do not seek anything externally, then
we are freed from all external obligations. "tasya kāryaṁ na vidyate". Such a
person, there is no duty. So, elevated stage. Who has come, who can come to this
stage? Actually, the jnani-yogis are expected to be at this stage. The
jnani-yogis renounced the world. And go to the forest for practicing meditation.
And when they practice meditation, through that meditation, introspective
meditation, they expect to transcend their material existence. And return back
to the spiritual realm of existence. So, now, Prabhuada, you know, cuts down to,
brings this now practical level. He says that:

"Such a Kṛṣṇa conscious person is no longer interested in material activities
and no longer takes pleasure in material arrangements like wine, women and
similar infatuations."

So, the point is, one does not need anything material. Now, Krishna says, yes, such a
person does not need to do duty. But now, He will twist this argument. And say,
yeah, but there is no reason for him to not do the duty, also.

        naiva tasya kṛtenārtho
        nākṛteneha kaścana
        na cāsya sarva-bhūteṣu
        kaścid artha-vyapāśrayaḥ

"vyapāśrayaḥ". So, "naiva tasya kṛtenārtho". So, for "kṛtena", "ārtho". "kṛtena"
means to do, by the discharge of duty. "arthaḥ" is purpose. Now, that person has
no purpose to fulfill by doing the duty. "naiva tasya kṛtenārtho". But then,
"nākṛteneha kaścana". "akṛtena", "iha". But at the same time, that person has no
reason to not do duty, also. That, for that person is transcendental. So, du...,
doing duty, or not doing duty, both are equivalent. Why is that? "na cāsya
sarva-bhūteṣu". Such a person, for all living beings. "kaścid
artha-vyapāśrayaḥ". Does "ar...", "artha-vyapāśrayaḥ". That person is not
dependent on any other living being. That person does not take shelter of any
other living being. So, here, Krishna is talking about "sarva-bhū...",
"sarva-bhūteṣu", "vyapāśrayaḥ". This is not referring to the Absolute Truth. So,
here, Krishna is not talking about bhakti. He has not introduced bhakti so much,
in this chapter. Although there is an indirect reference by, to the Supreme Lord
in 3.9 by Yajña. Work for the purpose of Yajña. But there is no direct reference
to "mam" till now in the third chapter. So, here, "sarva-bhūteṣu" does not
in.., include the Supreme Lord. Yes, all of us are ultimately dependent on the
Supreme Lord. But here, He is talking about, not the vertical interactions, the
horizontal interactions. So, because this person is self-satisfied. The person
is not taking anything from anyone. So, therefore, "na", "kaśc...",
"sarva-bhūteṣu".

        na cāsya sarva-bhūteṣu
        kaścid artha-vyapāśrayaḥ

So, that person does not need anything from anyone. So, that person does not,
therefore is not dependent on anyone. This is not a brahmana. You know, a
brahmana is a still part of society. A brahmana gives knowledge and takes
charity. So, "yajña-dāna-tap...", so, there are various duties that a person
does. "yajan yajan pathan pathan nad parigraha". So, the Yajn..., the brahmana
does these activities. And they are important. "yajan yajan" perform, person
p..., person performs Yajña. And then, goes to the places and where the
yajamana, where the person wants to do Yajña, you know, wants him to do Yajña.
And he does the Yajña, also there. "pathan pathan". Himself studies scriptu...,
brahmana studies scripture. And they teach scripture, also, to others. And then,
"badhana", they do charity. And then, "parigra". They accept charity, also. So,
when the brahmanas, normally, they receive charity. But if they get lot of
charity, then they may give the charity back, also. So, generally, in
sacrifices, when big sacrifices are performed. When the king comes, for example,
Dushet Mahārāja performed the sacrifice. So, at the end of the sacrifice, the
brahmanas that were present, Dushet Maharaja expressed his gratitude to them.
And he says, that, you know, you have performed you have come to my place and
honored me by, you know, gracing this place and by performing the sacrifice. So,
as a charity, I give my whole kingdom to you. So, now, Dushit Mahārāja, fully
confident, that the brahmanas were not interested in the kingdom. Are those, he
was ready to give the kingdom like that. But actually, he is ready. When the
king is, you know, sees that it is by the arrangement of the Lord that I have
given the, I have been given the kingdom. And I should use it in the Lord's
service. So, the brahmanas are seen as a representative of Lord. So, he gives
the full kingdom. And what do the brahmanas do? They say, Vishvamitra and other
rishis who were, are there. They say, yes, you know, we accept this gift. But we
have no need for this kingdom. So, we will give it back to you. And you rule it
according to principles of dharma as given in the scriptures. So, this is the
vedanta parigraha. So, these are brahmanas. So, the point which I am making is,
Krishna is not talking here about brahmanas. Brahmanas are also within the fold
of varnashram. And they also have to do exchanges. So, they do something for
others. And they get something for others. Here, Krishna is talking about a
renunciate. The person who is, you know, the, who is either a sannyasi or is
entirely outside the f..., sannyasis are almost outside the varnashram fold.
They are the topmost. But from the topmost, they are moving further outwards.
So, the sannyasis are there. And they are practicing, you know, they, a, so,
those who renounce the world, and so, they practice jnana-yoga. So, they can
attain liberation. So, they are not taking anything from anyone. They do not
need to give anything to anyone. So, now, Prabhupada explains, you know,
so, Prabhupada is explaining all this on the devotional perspective. And he
says, such a devotee does, devotee does not have to discharge any of the
obligations.

"A Kṛṣṇa conscious man does not take shelter of any person – man or demigod.
Whatever he does in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is sufﬁcient in the discharge of his
obligation."

So, this means that, the Krishna Conscious person, you know, is, th..., there
are horizontal obligations. There is vertical obligation. So, if one is having
no horizontal reciprocations, then one can just focus on the vertical. And one
can start interacting with the Absolute Truth. That, for a devotee, the,
devotee knows the Absolute Truth is Krishna. The transcendentalist may not know
the Absolute Truth is Krishna. Then, they will focus just on their conception of
brahman at that time. And gradually, by the mercy of devotees and Supreme Lord,
they may develop a clear understanding of what that Absolute Truth is. So, next
verse:

        tasmād asaktaḥ satataṁ
        kāryaṁ karma samācara
        asakto hy ācaran karma
        param āpnoti pūruṣaḥ

"tasmād". "tasmād" is therefore. So, why therefore? In the previous verse, it is
said that this detached person, the, it d..., it makes no difference to the
detached person whether to do duty or to not do duty. Therefore, you know,
"asaktaḥ satataṁ". Therefore, Arjuna, while staying always detached. "kāryaṁ
karma samācara". So, do your "kāryaṁ". Do your prescribed duty. Why? What will
happen by that? "asakto hy ācaran karma". By performing work with detachment,
with "asak...", "a...", "asaktaḥ", you know, with detachment, "param āpnoti
pūruṣaḥ". You will attain the Supreme Absolute Truth. "param āpnoti". So, in
this way, what Arjuna is being told is do your duty. So, Krishna is telling over
here to Arjuna that, see, yes, if you think that you are so self-satisfied that
you do not need a kingdom. You do not need to be with your family. You can just
go in a jungle and be satisfied there. Why? But then, also, it is better, the,
so, then, actually, we are so self-satisfied, if you are so transcendental, then
it should make no difference to you whether you are in the forest, or whether
you are in a city. So, so, somebody, we, so, Krishna is exactly turning around
the same argument. The same point, which is, you know, I am so transcendental
that I do not need to do any duty. Yes. So, if you are so transcendental, then
doing duty will also not make any difference to you. So, somebody may say, I am
so transcendental that I do not want to, you know, I, I do not want, I, to, say,
do, go to co..., sometimes, so, what happens is some young students come. And
they feel, oh, our college studies are so troublesome. We have to do so much
studies. And give exams. And pass exams. We just join full-time. We are feeling
so attracted by Krishna Consciousness. So, now, it, in general, it indulge, a,
education is important. Education is based for st..., so, strong career, for
stable career. So, generally, a, devotees are encouraged to complete their
education. And then join if they want to. If they join prematurely, if they have
some difficulties later, then, you know, then, they may have problems in
settling back in a career. And more importantly is that, actually, one cannot
just, you know, change the trajectory of one's life based on just some feelings
that come along. You know, one may find material life difficult. So, one may
think I will become a renunciate. But then, what, if one finds problems in
renounced life, also. Then where will one go at that time? So, actually, it is,
you know, frustration with material life is not a sufficient qualification for
spiritual life. Frustration in material life alone will not lead us to spiritual
life. Frustration with worldly life will, does not lead to renounced order.
Actually, there has to be positive attraction for spiritual life. And that
positive attraction is, you know, is tested and demonstrated by sustained
commitment. So, the positive attraction, if somebody says, I want to feel, be
fixed in service to Krishna. Then that, what will, how is, how real is that
desire? It is tested and demonstrated. So, tested means it is for myself, it is
a test. You know, yes, a, today, I may feel frustrated in material life, so I
start sp..., practicing spiritual life. But then, day in day out, month after
month, year after year, steadily when we practice. So, it is test. It is a test
for us. And it is a demonstration for others. It is tested and demonstrated. So,
you know, when that is there, then one can, if one so desires, renounce the
world. And focus on spiritual life.

But then, the point is, so if somebody says, I am so transcendental. I do not
care for my studies. Then, fine. If you do not ca..., if you are so
transcendental, then whether you study or not will make no difference to you.
Isn't it? Just study then. Set a good example for others. So, actually, here,
Krishna is turning the argument around and saying to K..., Arjuna that, yes, for
that person who is so transcendental, you know, the externals do not matter.
So, because the externals do not matter so much, so whether that person is in
the forest or in the city, that will not make much difference. So, better be in
the society. "tasm...". And now, act over there. So, now, in the next three,
n..., n..., Arjuna, Krishna will give, after this, examples. He will give the
example of Janaka. Then, He is giving his own example. And then, He will again
reiterate to Arjuna, you should act. But here, He is giving the general
principle which He will demonstrate in the next verse. "tasmād asaktaḥ satataṁ".
Therefore, always being detached. Stay detached. But do your work.

        kāryaṁ karma samācara
        asakto hy ācaran karma

So, if you act with detachment, then what will happen? Here, for the first time,
Krishna is talking about "param āpnoti pūruṣaḥ". He will attain the supreme
destination. First time means, the, He is using the word "param". And in a
sense, He is referring to Himself. It is not a direct reference. Who is the
supreme? The supreme is Krishna. Krishna is not using "mam" over here. But
still, "param āpnoti pūruṣaḥ". So, one will attain the supreme. So, Krishna is
saying that, just by doing one's duty, one can attain the supreme. And how
should one do the, one's duty? Detachment. He said, but Kr...., now, Arjuna
may got a question, but I have seen that most people, if they want liberation,
if they want, then they renounce the world. So, Krishna says no. No. There are
examples of people who are in the world. And they also attain liberation. So,
let us look at that now.

        karmaṇaiva hi saṁsiddhim
        āsthitā janakādayaḥ
        loka-saṅgraham evāpi
        sampaśyan kartum arhasi

"karmaṇaiva hi saṁsiddhim". By performing karma itself, "saṁsiddhim", perfection
was attained. By whom? "āsthitā" was attained by "janakādayaḥ". By Mahārāja
Janaka and others persons like him. "loka-saṅgraham evāpi". Therefore, for the
sake of "loka-saṅgraham". "sampaśyan kartum arhasi". "sampaśyan". "sampaśyan"
means see systematically. Consider. So, "loka-saṅgraham" is setting an example
of others. "saṅgraham" actually means accumulation or maintenance. So, maintain
the "loka"s. How are the "loka"s maintained? By proper example. So:

        loka-saṅgraham evāpi
        sampaśyan kartum arhasi

Therefore, considering that, you should act properly. So, he is saying that, in
the past, also, there many people who were liberated. By doing their prescribed
duties. So, do not think that, the prescribed duties cannot bring liberation. By
doing one's prescribed duties, also, one can move forward. And as one keeps
moving forward steadily, by performance of prescribed duties, eventually, one
becomes liberated. Eventually, one attains liberation. So, in this way, by, you
know, telling Arjuna that it is not the activity that causes bondage. It is
actually one's internal mentality. If one is detached, then one will not be
bound. But on..., if, one, while being detached, one does one's duties. Then,
one will be able to set a good example for others, also. So, he is saying,
therefore, for "loka-saṅgraham", please do your duties. And in, from the next
verse, Krishna will give his own example. And this is the first point, first
place in the Bhagavad Gita where Krishna will talk about His supreme position
explicitly. You know. He has hinted at it in 2.61. But here, He will talk about
m..., a little more m..., directly in 3.22 and 23. Let us discuss that in the
next class.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
