Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3SlX46bHCMU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=PT0WVL7jcbHM1_HYWF4S7ghK8jV8MTU0ODQ4ODI0NEAxNTQ4NDAxODQ0&v=3SlX46bHCMU&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_082_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_06_Text_14_to_18_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the Sixth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. We discussed in the last class, up
towards this 14. You know, into the middle of ashtanga-yoga. So, I will look at
some of the concepts of ashtanga-yoga, which our, indirectly pointed to. For
example, "brahmacarya" is there. "aparigrahaḥ" is there. So, we will look at
these concepts. So, in ashtanga-yoga, there are eight stages. Yama. Niyama.
Asana. Pranayama. So, in Yama and Niyama, there are further elements. There are
five elements, each of them. So, we will look at those five elements. And we
will also look at, you know, what they involve. And what fruits they provide.
So, let us look at this. So, hmm, what are the frui..., so, ahimsa, satyayam...,
satyam, asteya, "brahmacaryaṁ", "aparigrahaḥ". These are the five elements of
Yama. Now, these elements were referred to by Krishna, r..., you know, in this
section. He had talked about "aparigrahaḥ." in 6.10. Then, He talked about
"brahmacaryaṁ" in 6.14. And like that, He has been talking about these. So, when
He is talking about these, you know, you know, a, so, in general, He is talking
about specific elements. So, the Bhagavad Gita is not a systematic analysis of
the path of yoga. Here, Krishna is assuming that the yogi, that the
transcendentalist always know, already knows about yoga. There are specific
books for ashtanga-yoga. Like Patanjali Yoga Sutra. And there are other books,
also, which talk about yoga. Patanjali is, Yoga Sutra is the most famous. And,
you know, so, these books give a general knowledge about yoga. You know. And
the Bhagavad Gita does not go into the technicalities. Bhagavad Gita gives
general outline of yoga. Not a technical detailed analysis of yoga. So, in
general, the B..., goal of the Bhagavad Gita is not to exhaustively delineate
any one path. Its goal is to help understand, understand, Ar..., Arjuna
understand which is the best path. So, with respect to bhakti, also, you know,
the Bhagavad Gita does not go into an exhaustive delineation of bhakti. You
know. The way we see 64 elements of bhakti being talked about in Nectar of
Devotion. We do not see anything like that in the Bhagavad Gita. Why? Because
the Bhagavad Gita is in many ways an emergency book. It is spoken on the
battlefield. It is not spoken in a gurukula, where a guru can at leisure
instruct the disciple in the technicalities, ev..., everything. And the, it is
also spoken according to the level of the audience. So, Arjuna, he knows about
the various paths. He knows about bhakti. He knows about jnana. He knows about
ashtanga-yoga. So, Arjuna's question is not what he should do. Arjuna's question
is not what is a particular path. His question is what should I do? That means,
which path should I follow? So, it is like, in one sense, we may have career
counselling. You know, student has just finished a ten standard. And deciding.
Should I take art? Should I take commerce? Should I take science? So, at that
time, when the career counselling is offered, you know, what all is taught in
arts, since not ex..., or in commerce, or in science, is not exhaustively
described. You know, there will be separate course for that. And the student can
choose that. You know. If the student is interested. What will be off..., told
at career counselling is, the pluses, minuses of the various, ca..., ca...,
career options. So that the student can make an intelligent and well-informed
choice. Like that, there are various yoga, a, yoga ye..., ladder, wake-up paths.
And the Bhagavad Gita, it basically tells Arjuna, it is like a ca..., it is like
a, n..., not a career counselling. It is like, we could say, a, a yoga
counselling center. You know, which yoga had to follow. Life counselling.
Which yoga one should follow in one's life. And for that purpose, Krishna
analyses various yoga paths in principle. What are their pluses? What are their
minuses? And then, He tells, what is the path? Is, this is the best for
Arjun..., Arjuna.

So, the, we will see, as the flow of the Bhagavad Gita moves forward, Krishna
will, you know, focus on the paths involving action more. Then, the path
involving renunciation. And among the paths involving action, karma-yoga and
bhakti-yoga. Krishna will recommend bhakti-yoga. So, that is, as we move forward
in the flow of the Bhagavad Gita. But suffice it to say, right now, Krishna here
focuses, you know, not the detailed analysis of any path. He focuses on the, you
know, general principles of the pluses and minuses of those paths. So, that is
why we do not see these five elements talked about. It is just, the reference is 
there. So, ahimsa. Now, ahimsa means non-violence. The, ahimsa will be mentioned
later on in the Bhagavad Gita, also, in several places. And Srila Prabhupada
will also explain about ahimsa, you know, in his purports on several occasions.
A yogi especially, when, you know, in the material, when we are in the material
world, to some extent, ahimsa, ahimsa is inevitable. Even when we eat food, some
grains are ca..., you know, some germs, and some microscopic organisms, and some
small organisms, they die. But beyond that, ksatriya has to kill. But if a
person is taking, you know, practicing yoga, renunciation, then the path of
yoga. At that time, that person should follow ahimsa. In general, the Vedic
culture encourages that person to cause minimum violence to others. But even
then, some violence may sometimes be required. So, ahimsa means, no violence to
others. That is one of the yamas of, you know, the path of yoga. Now, Patanjali
describes each of these yamas. And also describes, what is the result of
following those yamas. So, what does he say? When we practice y..., ahimsa, then
what is the result of that? By the practice of ahimsa, others give up their
enmity to you. So, then, we, you know, when people feel us as threats. When
people feel that we will commit violence to them, then they become, tend to
become violent towards us. If they see that, ok, we are not going to be violent,
then, in many ways, their violence to us decreases. It can go away, also. So,
the practice of ahimsa will lead to others giving up their enmity. In satyam.
That is ahimsa, satyam, "aparigrahaḥ". Satyam means speaking truthfully. So,
satyam is, actually, recognised as a virtue. You know, i..., in all religions.
And it is an important moral principle, also. People who habitaully speak lies
to get their way, you know, eventually find that their ways b..., obstructed
by the lack of trust which others have. You know. If people who speak lies, they
eventually w..., you know, others find out those person not trustworthy. You
know, we can fool some people some of the time. Fool some people all the time.
Or this is all people some of the time. We cannot fool all the people all the
time. So, bec..., you know, people eventually find out. Even if they do not
exactly catch us, they will realise that, this person is, you know, place around
with the truth. Playing games with the truth. And they do n..., cannot trust us.
So, satyam is an important virtue. You know, even mater..., even in, as for
mundane morality. So, in yogic morality, also, it is important. So, satyam. And
interestingly, what, Patanjali says that, when we speak truth, what is the
result of that? When we speak the truth, what we speak will become, will be
endowed with the power, and will come true. So, what we say will be endowed with
power. And will come true. That is satya-vratah. So, satya-vratah means
satyavat, satya-sankalpa, satya-vratah. Like that. There are many verse which,
you know, are used to glorify those who are connected with the truths.

Satyavat means those who, you know, satya-sankalpa refers to one whose desires
come true. So, one of, that is one of attributes of the Lord. Whatever He
desires, happens. satya-sankalpa. Satyavat means that person who speaks the
truth. satya-vratah. One who takes a vratah. And keep the vratah true. So, like
that, there are many verse, so, the person who speaks the truth, or, or the
person, whatever that person speaks, that becomes true. So, that is the power
that comes in the powe..., the speech of a person. If the person speaks
cautiously, seriously, then that person ena..., you know, helps others to also,
you know, rec..., that, that sort of s..., you know, garb, careful speech helps
others, also, to respect that person. And it is not that we want respect for
ourselves. But we are representing Krishna, who is the ultimate truth. So, we
need to speak truthfully. Then, asteya. Asteya means, steya is to steal. So, we
can remember it from steya. English word is stea..., steal, also, a ste..., same
sound is there. So, asteya means non-stealing. So, when does not, one does not
try, just, a, steal the wealth from others, then what happens? That person
acquires true wealth. That is the fruit that the Yoga Sutra said. True wealth
is, ultimately spiritual wealth. But wealth comes to us, brahmacarya. So,
brahmacarya means, we discussed, at one level, not indulging in sex. And another
level, it is living spiritually. So, when one, you know, practices brahmacarya,
one acquires power. So, the, so, basically, the human being has power. As
spiritual being, also, we have power. Now, when a person engages in sex. That
energy gets dissipated. Apart from all the social complications, emotional
entanglements, physical debilitation, medical sicknesses, that can happen
because of indiscriminate sexuality. You know, you know, sex..., but beyond
that, actually, there is a subtle power. So, that power, you know, which we
have, if it is, it is dis..., if it is dissipated in sex, then we lose it. So,
but if it is conserved, then it becomes manifest in other ways. And it manifests
as creativity, as concentration, as clarity. As, you know, you know, basically,
the person becomes intellectually radiant, and spiritually potent by the power
of brahmacarya. That dharana shakti and vira..., vicara shakti, vani shakti. All
these things. You know, Prabhupada even said that, you know, one of the reasons
why Gandhi was so successful in his, you know, in leading India towards
independence, although he had no weapons was that, he, although being a
householder, he practiced brahmacarya. And that gave him power. So,
"aparigrahaḥ". "aparigrahaḥ" is a fifteen. "aparigrahaḥ" means one does not, you
know, you know, possess things unnecess..., one does not have a possessive
mentality. So, when one does not have that possessive mentality, then, you know,
one is able to see things truly. Otherwise, one is just caught in, you know, can
I get this? Can I get this? Can I get this? So, then, whatever we are getting,
we start seeing things deeply. We see, ok, this, this is how, this thing came to
me by my karma. And this thing, now, I have lost because of my karma. So, we see
the actions of karma. We not, we do not see the things just as events. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, when Haridasa Thakur departed, he says, Lord Krishna being
merciful to me, gave me the association of Haridasa Thakur. And Lord Krishna
being independent now broke that associaton.

So, we just do not see things as events. We see things in their broader
connection. So, like that, we get insight into the causes of events. And the
karmic causes of events. We start understanding things from a deeper
perspective. So, when we are not caught up in just trying to possess things.
Then, we can see things from a deeper perspectives. This is the fruit of yama.
Then, now, let us look at the fruits of niyama. So, yama and niyama are the
first two aspects of bhakti, of ashtanga-yoga. So, niyama has five aspects.
Sh..., Shauca. Santo..., Santosha. Tapa. Svadhyaya. Ishvara-Pranidhana. Shauca
is cleanliness. So, cleanliness, Prabhupada explains, means that, you know, we
take a bath. We keep ourselves clean. And Prabhupada would often quote, you
know, quo..., correlate. Or link physical cleanliness and internal cleanliness.
You know, say, by chanting Hare Krishna, we cultivate inner, internal
cleanliness. Here, of course, the focus is in niyama. The focus, if you see, is
on Shauca. Cleanliness. Suci is a very important quality. So, b..., what is the
reason for talking about so much cleanliness? You know. As devotees, we want
cleanliness. Because when we take the trouble to clean the body, we become
aware, that forces us to become aware of how clea..., unclean the body
inherently is. You know, when we are just, you know, people, inevitable, body
is sweats they just put some, you know, some, you know, perfumes. And something
like that. They just try to, you know, deny and conceal the unclean nature of
the body by using artificial ways. Then, they stay on, on the illusion that the
body is very pleasant. And the body is very enjoyable. But when we are, when we
follow strictly ru..., rules and regulations, like devotees bath several times
a day at times. So, that way, what happens by that is, we are forced to become
aware. This body is so unclean. And then, you know, by that, by the
conscientious effort, it, cleanliness. One, when one understands this body is
actually unclean. So, then, one becomes detached from the body. So, cl..., so,
cl..., the, the, you know, discipline of cleanliness brings detachment. Then,
similarly, Santosha. Santosha means satisfaction. So, now, you know, what does
satisfaction mean? See, i..., in general, whenever and wherever we live, you
know, there will always be people who have more things than us. And people who
have less things than us. So, we kee..., we have a choice. We can look at people
who have m..., more things than us. You know. Ok. I have got two-wheeler. That
person has got a four-wheeler. I have a two BHK house. That person has got
a three BHK house. You know. I have got a simple cellphone. That person has got
a smartphone. So, we can compare. And then, this comparison is like the cancer
of the mind. This comparison keeps us perpetually miserable. Now, in certain
situations, for functional requirements, we may need more things. And if we need
more things, we engage, the, acquire them. But beyond that, by making m...,
things, itself, you know, the focus of our thoughts, we erode our mental energy
by that. And we find ourselves unnecessarily irritated. Unnecessarily envious.
Unnecessarily, you know, dissatisfied. So, how do we get satisfaction? You know,
satisfaction comes by not thinking about the things that will cause
dissatisfaction. We think of other things. So, satisfaction is a, we may say,
general thing, I am feeling satisfied. I am not feeling satisfied. So, we often
think of satisfaction as a condition. However, satisfaction is not just a
condition. You know. Satisfaction is also a choice. Satisfaction is also a
decision. It is not just a condition or an emotion.

I feel satisfied. That means what? Oh. The emotion of satisfaction is there
within me. So, but it is not just an emotion or condition. It is a choice and a
decision. So, choice and a decision means, ok, this is what I will be satisfied
with. I am not going to think about more things. Because the quest for material
improvement is actually endless. You know, we can just keep improving our things
materially. And thinking, oh, this is got, I got this. I got, you know, you
know, this kind of computer. Now, let me get that kind of computer. I got this
kind of, you know, iPod. Now, let me get a more expensive iPod. And so many
things, like that, you can keep, that, the quest for material improvement is
endless. So, unless we ourselves put a stop on it, we will not, you know, ever,
you know, we able to redirect our energy from material things towards Krishna.
You know. Certainly, we have to live in the material world. And we may want to
have a particular standard of living. That is fine. Aas per our socioeconomic,
sociocultural circles, we can choose a particular standard that we want to live
on. But once we decide that. That has to be realistically decided. It is not
that if I want such a s..., if I earn a particular amount, I, and I think I will
have a house, I have a house, which puts me in a loan for 35 years. Getting that
house. Then, I have, I am just taking a loan which is beyond my capacity. And
then, I am subjecting myself to unnecessary anxiety. So, satisfaction does not
necessarily mean that one cannot have ambition. Satisfaction simply means that
one has to have, you know, one has to be clear about one's priorities. Many
times, people think satisfaction means, oh, I will become, there will be nothing
exciting after in my life. But actually, a devotee can have spiritual ambition.
A devotee can have ambition to make spiritual advancement. To learn the
scriptures. To share scriptural message. To get more and more people to come
closer and closer to Krishna. So, that ambition can be very purifying. Very
vitalising. You know. There is nothing as satisfying for a soul as, you know,
being able to be of tangible service to Krishna. There is nothing satisf..., as
satisfying for our heart, as seeing that our life is making a difference in
others' lives. Or, not just difference in terms of our immediate circle. But in
terms of others. Even we sh..., share Krishna Consciousness with others. And we
see that they are actually becoming happier. Their life is becoming transpond,
positively. When the sublime satisfaction that comes by that is f..., is among
the most enriching experiences of life. So, we all need something to look
forward to, something to be excited about. Ma..., so, ma..., materialistic
society makes us excited about materialistic things. But actually, the pursuit
of materialis..., things is, you know, is agitating. And the achievement of this
material things is anticlimax. It never lives up to the hype. So, rather than
that, pur..., rather than pursuing that which will end in a disappointment. We
turn and focus on Krishna. And focus on serving Krishna more and more. Santosha
is a choice. Ok. This is what I will be satisfied with. I am not going to go
further in this direction. Then, tapa. Tapa means austerity. Shauca. Santosha.
Tapa. You know. Tapa can be of various types. It, generally, Krishna talks a...,
Prabhupada would talk about austerity, you know, the fasting. So, tapa,
whatever austerities we do, you know, the austerity removes the impurities. And
it helps us to become, you know, strong at the level of the body and the senses.
Strong, not in terms of enjoying sense gratification. But strong in terms of
stamina and stability for that use.

Svadhyaya. Shauca. Santosha. Tapa. Svadhyaya. Ishvara-Pranidhana. Svadhyaya is
studying of scripture. Now, it is interesting. What is the result of studying
scripture? That leads to connection with God. When we study scripture, by the
study of scripture, we become connected with God. So, how does that happen? You
know. By the conn..., by the study of scripture, we understand that there is a
higher reality. And that higher reality is ultimately centered on Krishna. And
the scriptures, so, Svadhyaya is not just any ordinary study. If somebody says
that, every day morning, I do Svadhyaya of the newspaper for one hour. That is
not Svadhyaya. That is simply entertainment. You know, so, you know, we do not
learn much by studying these paper. You know, even, we may have to read the
newspaper to stay in touch with current event. But we do not have to spend
hours on that. Just a current, quick look at the headlines. You know. That is
often enough. More than enough what we need to know. You know. But Svadhyaya
refers to study of scriptures. Study of books that help us to, you know, move
towards hi..., life's higher realities. So, Svadhyaya, i..., that leads to,
m..., you know, connection with God. We start, when we study scripture properly,
then we develop shastra "cakṣur". And these eyes of scripture. And that, by, we
c..., by that, we can see the hand of Krishna. We can see the world as Krishna's
energy. And that is a very spiritually enriching mission. And then, last is
Ishvara-Pranidhana. Ishvara-Pranidhana. Pranidhana means surrender. So, by
surrender to Ishvara, what is the result? One gains samadhi. Samadhi. Samadhi is
the ultimate goal of yoga. That is the eighth stage. And he says that, by
Ishvara-Pranidhana, one will eventually come to the stage of samadhi. So, that
way, the primary purpose of the practice of spiritual life is, a, to attain
Ishvara-Pranidhana. To att..., to attan surren..., you know, attain the love for
the Lord. That is the stage of samadhi. And beyond. And Ishvara-Pranidhana
takes us to that. So, now, we will see clearly that yoga involves devotion. The
ashtanga-yoga process, here, the yogi may not be having a deity and worshipping
the deity. Yogi may not be having, you know, direct devotional activities that
we see. But the idea of a Supreme Being to whom we have to, on whom we have to
meditate. It is a central part of yoga. It is an important limb in niyama.
Ishvara-Pranidhana. So, now, some people say that their, the whole process of
yoga is, you know, is non-devotional. So, we have to understand that yoga, it is
not just one monolithic body. It is not that when people think of yoga,
everybody thinks about the same one set of things. See, the proce..., just as
there have been many, you know, m..., many bhakti thinkers, many mayavadi
thinkers, there is, there are many thinkers on yoga, also. And different people
have come up with different conceptions of yoga. So, in the Vedanta Sutra,
Vyasadeva, and in our Sampradaya, Baladeva Vidyabhushana, when they write the
commentary on the Vedanta Sutra, actually, they refute yoga. When yoga is used as
an independent body of knowledge. And then, yoga a..., tends to take a person
towards a non-personalistic conclusion. Towards a monistic conclusion. You know.
Where one thinks that one will merge in an Absolute Reality. M..., m..., so,
that kind of yoga is refuted. But that is not the only kind of yoga that there
is.

There are many books that talk about yoga. There are many scholars who have, not
just contemporary scholars, but throughout history, who have written about yoga.
Patanjali was one of them. Patanjali, there are many indications from his, you
know, his, you know, stru..., statements in Yoga Sutra as well as in other
places. That actually, he, he was a vaishnava. He was a devotee. And he has not
spoken specifically and directly about Lord Vishnu or Lord Krishna. Because the
process of, the book of ashtanga-yoga, the book of Patanjali Yog..., Yoga, Yoga
Sutra is primarily manual for yoga. And in this book, he just gives a knowledge,
about, he says, ok, one should, you know, surrender to Ishvara. So, he assumes
that his readers know who is Ishvara. He is not focusing there on giving
exhaustive knowledge of Ishvara. He is ha..., he is, when he writes a book, he
has a particular fo..., purpose. So, the purpose is that he wants to outline the
process of yoga. And in that, he, he takes the, he takes it, does, the audience
knows what is yo..., Ishvara. And how one should do Ishvara-Pranidhana. So, he
does not go into the technical detali..., details of all that. So,
Ishvara-Pranidhana is an important element. And it indicates the bhakti element.
So, now, some yogis may think that this bhakti element is transitional. That
means we meditate on this Absolute Truth now. And after meditating on the
Absolute Truth, eventually, we will learn that I am the Absolute Truth. But
there are other yogis who understand that Absolute Truth is the, is the, not
just the object of meditation transitionally. Transitionally means, for the time
of sadhana. But the Supreme Lord is the object of meditation eternally. And
those yogis are, you know, many are personalists. So, they can even attain, you
know, li..., m..., liberation and shantaras sign in the spiritual world. Like the
trees meditate on the Supreme Lord as He performed various pastimes. So, they
can attain shantaras perfection. Or if they get association of devotees. And
they get involved, inspired to practice active devotional service. Then, they
can get further elevated, also. So, now, in the Bhagavad Gita, we looked in five
poi..., in sev..., 6.14, the last part was C and D.

        manaḥ saṁyamya mac-citto
        yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

So, that refers to this limb of Ishvara-Pranidhana. Now, that refers to, how, by
surrender to Ishvara. Meditating on Ishvara, one moves forward towards
perfection. Now, you know, these, when we look at these eight limbs, yama,
niyama, asana, pranayama. So, actually speaking, these are things which are
required in any, every path. For example, if we have a, you know, it is again
very sim..., very contemporary example, maybe not entirely precise. But
illustrates the point of how th..., in one, some ways, these eight principles are
universal. You know. There are, suppose, there is a football match. Hmm. Or
there is a cricket match, say. Then, there is a batsman. So, there is yama and
niyama. Yama and Niyama. There are dos and donts. There are certain things the
batsman can do. The batsman should wear a helmet. Batsman should carry a bat.
And when the bowler comes and bowls. And the batsman hits. And the fielder is
closed by one of the..., look at, keep, at dovetail the catch. The batsman
cannot go and tuck. Swing the bat at the, you know, f..., k..., fielder's head.
You know, the bat is made to only hill..., hit the ball, not the fielder's head.
So, there are certain things which are supposed to be done. So, this is not
supposed to be done. So, there are rules. Dos and donts. There are c..., rules
for individual conduct. And there are individuals, who do also g..., group
conduct. So, if we see here, niyama, generally, people, the, two ways of looking
of yama and niyama. Yama is donts. Niyama is dos. So, niyama is these are all
positive. Shauca. Santosha. Tapa. Svadhyaya. Ishvara-Pranidhana. What all we
should do. Niyama. Another way of looking at niyama is that niyama is the rules
for individual discipline. You know, cleanliness is something which I have to do
individually. Contentment is generally to have individually. This is what I do
myself. Whereas the ni..., a..., yama is generally seen in terms of what all I
should not do. You know. Oppo..., so, that is why, in, in three of these, we
have "a". A..., do not do ahimsa. Do not steal. Do not, you know, have
possessive mentality. And then, satyam and "aparigrahaḥ", they also have the
negative idea that do not speak lies. That do not indulge in sexu...,
indiscriminate in sexu..., sexuality. So, now, another way of looking at this
is, yama is, yama, rules of group discipline. That means how one should interact
with others. So, I should not be violent towards others. I should not lie to
others. I should not steal others' possessions. So, fir..., so, the niyama are
rules for individual discipline. Yama, rules for group discipline. Either way,
there is yama and niyama in c..., in any activities. There are s..., there are
rules in cricket. And then, there is yama, niyama, asana. So, when a batsman is
about to bat, the batsman has a particular p..., stance. So, particular a...,
that is not exactly asana like a yoga asana. But it is a particular stance. And
different batsman have different stances. How they will stand. They will stand
near the crease, away from the crease. And like to be mis..., stretched away the
bands. It is, maybe, touching the ground. Or raised up. So, they all have their
different postures. Their stands recorded. That is asana. And then, pranayama.
Pranayama basically, it is breath control. But the purpose of breath control is,
is focus of energy. You know, when our breath is, restless, then we, our
concentration gets dissipated. You know. Mind runs here and there. So, at,
pranayama refers to the channelising of energy. And then, there is pratyahara.
So, when the batsman is bowling, maybe it is the large bowl of the cricket
match. And you need six runs to win the match. So, all the players around
attends. And the fans are cheering. Some are cheering. Everybody is in great
anxiety. So, what does the batsman have to do? Pratyahara. You know. Shot out
everything else. You know. Do not see anything else. Let us shot out all the
sense objects. And then, as the bowler starts bowling, then, what happens is,
the batsman goes into dhyana, dharana. Just s..., see nothing else, except the
ball coming. And as the ball comes, batsman swings the bat. And as the batsman
swings the bat, the ball and the bat meet. And the ball just goes, shoots over
the boundary for a sixer. And then, the batsman attains samadhi, you know,
becomes relentful. So, you know, samadhi, so, actually, of course, this samadhi
is temporary. There is little, there is some pleasure that is there. But the
point is that these eight activities, which are there, they can be applied to
any process in general.

Yama. Niyama. Asana. Pranayama. Dhyana. Dharana. Prat..., you know, saty..., so,
Pratyahara. Dhyana. Dharana. Samadhi. And Bhaktivinoda Thakur has described in
an essey how these can be applied even in the processes of deity worship. So, we
have rules and regulation for deity worship. And we have all these even for
deity worship, also. So, the point is, that these are generic principles. Which
can specifically apply to the path of yoga. And they can apply to other paths,
also. So, we look at how we can apply these in our, you know, sadhana-bhakti.
So, now, Pat..., you know, it is described in the Yoga Sutras, also, in the Yoga
literature that, you know, the mind moves forward. So, the mind moves upward,
upwards towards higher and higher states of contemplation. And it has talked
about five states. So, what are these five states? Let us look at these fives
states in mind control. These are m..., these are called as mudha, kshipta,
vikshipta, ekagrata and niroddha. So, ekagrata was what Krishna has already used
in the Bhagavad Gita in this chapter itself. He used ekagrata in, you know, the,
I think, the eleventh verse. Hmm. Actually, he will use niroddha in the
nineteenth, in the nineteenth, twentieth verse, also. Because these are, h...:

        upaviśyāsane yuñjyād
        yogam ātma-viśuddhaye

        tatraikāgraṁ manaḥ kṛtvā

"ekagrata". So, "manaḥ". What is, what do we have to do with the mind?
"eka-agram". We make it "eka-agram". And then, after that, Krishna will talk
about "yatra caivātmanā...". So:

        yatroparamate cittaṁ
        niruddhaṁ yoga-sevayā

H..., so, this is the twentieth verse.

        yatroparamate cittaṁ
        niruddhaṁ yoga-sevayā

So, "niruddhaṁ". This word, "niruddhaṁ", that is there. That is actually one of
the stages in the control of the mind. So, "niruddhaṁ" actually is the, among
the highest stages. So, let us look at these stages now. Yeah. So, what are the
five stages in mind control? We have muddha. Then, kshipta. Then, vikshipta.
Then, ekagrata. And then, niroddha. So, the muddha is the word, I, like, we have
the word muddha. Muddha means one is foolish. So, muddha is the consciousness,
state of mind, when one is foolish. So, one is deluded, as in slaved. Laziness.
Or dullness. Then, kshipta is when one is agitated. As in stress or mania. That
person is hyper agitated. You know, when people are working and have too much
work pressure. And f..., oh, that I have to do. That I have to do. That. And
they are not, they are, the mind is running on overdrive. You know. But they are
not able to function properly. Because their mind is so much filled with
the anxiety. Like we see the fan, when the fan moves round, and round, and
round, and round. But it gets nowhere. It is stuck at one place, itself. So,
like that, sometimes, our mind moves round, and round, and round, and round.
Round. Round. I will do that, also. That, do that. I will do that, also. Do
that, also. And, but I will do this. No, I have to do that, also. It is round,
and round, and round, and round. So, that is the kshipta stage. So, it is just
in, you know, hyperactive stage. Where it is not doing anything productive.
Then, vikshipta is the stage where the mind is distracted. So, you know, in
muddha, the mind is practically not thinking of anything, only. Very lethargic
stage, it, lost somewhere. In kshipta, it is hyperactive running everywhere and
the, here and there. But not doing anything. In vikshipta, the mind is trying to
concen..., we are trying to concentrate. But the mind is getting distracted. So,
that is a, is distracted as, say, in a lecture, in a noisy environment. So, if
somebody is in an environment which is distracting. At that time, person is
trying to concentrate. That is vikshipta. So, b..., you know, v..., v..., that
means there is a desire to concentrate. But there is not the cap..., you know,
but one is not able to concentrate. Then, there is gradually affair from comes
to ekagrata. Ekagrata means concentrated. At that, when one is concentrated, one
is, focus is, students are studying for an exam. And normally, when students
studying exam, f..., if it, exam is one month away, three months away, six
months away, then, they will say. Ok. Let me watch a cricket match. Then, we
watch a movie. Let me, you know, they have a break. So, at that time, they may
be in the previous stages. The muddha, vikshipta, muddha, kshipta. But when the
exam comes close. Then, ekagrata. They say, there is, the exam is just two hours
away now. Then, you know, completely absorbed. Let me study. What is this? What
is this? What is, you know, absorbed in it. So, there, they control the mind.
So, that is ekagratam. And then, beyond that is niroddha. Niroddha means
controlled. So, at that stage, you know, so, in concentrated, also. You know. I
am, I am studying. And then, you know, so..., there is some..., somebody comes
and talks. He say..., I do not have time. Go away. So, one is consciously, you
know, striving. Concentrating. Hey, your favorite movie has been released this
week. You know. Forget it. There is nothing. No. I am not going to watch it. I
have to study. So, there is the resolution by which other thoughts come. But one
does not care about other thoughts. One focuses on. That is ekagrata. But
in niroddha, actually, others, no attraction to other things, only. Naturally,
one is attracted to the mi..., you know, to the spiritual truth. To the
spiritual reality. And at that time, you know, the mind's inclination towards
other things itself is lost. That would, Krishna will talk about in 5.20:

        yatroparamate cittaṁ
        niruddhaṁ yoga-sevayā

"uparamate". "uparamate" means the mind just becomes, it is, you know, you know,
it just ceases. Its material mental activities cease. See, first, we have to
cease our physical material activities. Physically, at the material, we do not
act at the material level for sense gratification. But even after we stop acting
physically, at the level of sen..., you know, physically, for sense
gratification. That means we do not indulge in sense gratification. Still, the
mind is always fantasising about sense gratification. But at the level of
niroddha, the mind even stops fantasising about sense gratification. The
cessation of material activities. And, of course, this is moving up the negative
axis, of that, one comes to zero. And then, beyond that, for a devotee, there
are so many positive spiritual emotions. Which the devotee pursues on the
spiritual path. So, the, that is a whole different, you know, level of reality.
Here, Krishna is talking about moving up from the negative axis towards zero.
So, this is niroddha stage. So, we are gener..., now, discussing the broad terms
in the process of samadhi. Hmm. In the process ashtanga-yoga. Now, let us look
at the Gita verses. So, now, Krishna is telling that if one keep practices in
yoga, in this way, what happens?

        yuñjann evaṁ sadātmānaṁ
        yogī niyata-mānasaḥ
        śāntiṁ nirvāṇa-paramāṁ
        mat-saṁsthām adhigacchati

So, "yuñjann evaṁ". When one is engaged thus. "sadātmānaṁ". Constantly, one
engages oneself. Body. Mind. And soul. Prabhupada uses the word "ātmā" to refer
to both these things. All three things. And how does one do it? The yogi, even,
you know, the, you know, yogis have to do it. "niyata-mānasaḥ". They control
the mind. Then, what do they get? "śāntiṁ". They get peace. "nirvāṇa-paramāṁ".
The sup..., the, you know, a, so, supreme cessation through..., so, cessation of
material existence. And "mat-saṁsthām". "mat-saṁsthām" is they become situated
with M..., Me, next to Me. "mat-saṁsthām", in, m..., may work in the spiritual
sky. Let me know. "adhigacchati". They attain. So, Krishna is hinting over here
that the ultimate reality is involving Him, also. So, it is not necessarily
impersonalist. So, the ya..., "śāntiṁ nirvāṇa-paramāṁ". So, many, m..., scholars
uses this to refer to the brahmayoti. Now, but, the word "mat-saṁsthām" does not
allow such a simplistic explan..., you know, interpretation or reduction of
everything to impersonalism. But the point is, Krishna is talking about an
ultimate reality in which, which the yogi attains by the practice of yoga
sadhana. And then, Prabhupada understan..., Prabhupada talks about how the
ultimate truth is Krishna. And it is that Krishna whom we have to attain. So,
what is this "mat", "mat-saṁsthām"? Prabhupada makes a, Prabhupada refutes the
point that "nirvāṇa-paramāṁ" means void. So, first point he makes is that, what
is the goal? "nirvāṇa-paramāṁ". "nirvāṇa" means cessation of material existence.
So, cess ..., that means, you know, you know:

"One who seeks an improvement in health or aspires after material perfection is
no yogī according to Bhagavad-gītā."

That person may be called yogi by a, today's definition. Today's conception. But
according to Bhagavad Gita, the purpose of yoga is "nirvāṇa-paramāṁ". To enter
ma..., en..., to ent..., material existence. And then, what happens when we
en..., in material existence? Do we enter into a void? No, Prabhupada says.

"Nor does cessation of material existence entail one’s entering into “the void,”
which is only a myth."

That person:

"There is no void anywhere within the creation of the Lord. Rather, the
cessation of material existence enables one to enter into the spiritual sky, the
abode of the Lord."

So, Prabhupada would say sometimes about the void is, that, actually, you know,
you know, there is no void, void, anywhere in the creation, except in the head
of the voidists. Except in the head of the voidists means that they just do not
think. And it is seriously enough. So, actually, the ultimate, the reality is so
beautiful, ultimately. You know. Even material reality is so beautiful. So,
where has it come from? Has it come from a void? No. The scriptures explain that
has come from a spiritual reality. That is even more beautiful. Now, material,
mater..., material reality, of course, it has a beautiful side. And it has a
dreadful side, also. So, there is a beauty of nature which we see, when we go to
mountains. Or we go to lakes. Or, you know, we go to forests. But then, along
with that beauty of nature, there is also beautiful nature. There is dreadful
nature. You know. There is mountains. There can be a, landslides. There can be,
you know, earthquakes. In the, you know, oceans and the rivers, there can be
floods. And there can be tsunamis. And in the forest, there can be dangerous
animals. You know. There can be a, accidents. So, the nature has both sides.
There is beautiful, the dreadful side. But we ju..., cannot say that the nature
does not have beautiful side at all. So, the idea that ultimately everything
comes from a void, it c..., cannot explain the beauty. The variety. The glory
that is there in the material nature. The idea of void is, ok, for those who
feel, oh, this material world is a piece of misery. And we want to go beyond
misery. But it does not, it is only involving negation of the negative. It does
not involve, you know, you know, underst..., comprehension of the positive. So,
both are required. When a patient is sick, then negation of negative. Removal of
the disease has to be there. But after that, there has to be understanding of
the positive, also. Without that, you know, one does not get a complete
understanding. You know, the void:

        nirvishesha-shunyavadi
        pashchatya-desha-tarine

As Prabhupada's pranam mantra. So, Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur would tell a
story that once a child, hmm, he had got cataract in the eyes. So, then, the
father was wondering what to do. So, one uncle came along. And said, you know,
child has got cataract in the eyes. Simple sol..., and child also in pain. And
child was not able to see, also. There is a simple solution. Blackout the eyes.
Throw them away. He said, what? And uncle said. Yeah. They do that. This pain
will stop. Second, another uncle came along. He said. You know, what, child has,
child has got cataract. And child is always in pain. Kill the child. No more
problem of that. What? You know, third uncle came along. He said, you know,
cataract, is it? Ok. We have to do a surgery. Remove the ey..., remove the
cataract. And the child will be alright. So, he says that this refers to the
impersonalists, the voidists, and the devotees. The impersonalists, they say,
oh, actually, we are in this world. And we are suffering. The more we get
attracted to things of this world, it is the more our suffering increases. The
more our attachments, the more our miseries. So, then, they say that. Ok, why
are we having, you know, miseries? Oh, because, you know, there are forms in
this world. There are, there are so many attractive sense objects. So, reject.
All the sense objects are false. And what makes sense object..., se..., and, you
know, s..., what makes the sense objectives, sense objects attractive is their
form. So, therefore, all forms are false. And all personalities false. So, then,
just so the eyes are the cause of pain, just black out the eyes. So, like that,
form, personality, relationships, activities, they are cause of pain. Just
reject all of them. That is impersonalism. Then, the, you know, voidism is, you
know, you know, pai..., just like the child is having pain, kill the child
itself. So, like that, voidism is, ok, you are, you are having suffering. You
know, existence is suffering. Therefore, end existence itself. End existence
itself. But the devotee has the un..., you know, devotee understanding is,
vaishnava understanding is the last analysis. Oh, the pain is because there is
cataract in there. Remove the cataract. And the, heal the eye. So, like that,
you know, the problem is our self-centered godless living. When we want to
e..., en..., you know, when we want to here attracted to forms. We want to enjoy
separate from Krishna, then our attraction to the forms, our relationships, our
activities, our, our, all these cause bondage and suffering. But when we connect
them with Krishna, they do not have to cause all these things. They can, in
fact, become the s..., our activities can become the source of liberation. And
the more a devotee chants. The more a devotee glorifies Krishna, the more that
devotee moves forward in spiritual life. So, that way, the correct understanding
is, n..., na..., "nirvāṇa-paramāṁ" is there. Yes, there is "nirvāṇa". But after
"nirvāṇa", what is there? There is real liberation into the activity, into the
life and relationship with Krishna. It, there is the real life of the soul. Now,
you know, perfection, Prabhupada writes in the perfec...:

"perfection of the yoga system is the attainment of freedom from material
existence and not some magical jugglery or gymnastic feats to befool innocent
people."

To not, it is not, the goal is not to befool some people. It is, the goal is
actually to, you know, befool people by s..., doing some s..., feats which I
cannot do. Prabhupada called the yoga acti..., yoga activities as childish. You
know, he was saying, why childish? Sometimes, you know, one child is able to do
something which other children are not able to do. And other children, oh,
suppose, one child is able to, you know, you know, there, child is playing. And
that child is, you know, strong enough to hit the sixer. Other children are
playing. And none of them are able to hit the six.., sixer. That child becomes a
hero. Oh, you are able to do that. You know, they are like that. Other people,
none of them are able to do, you know, say, there are people do yoga. And they,
one particular asana. Say, you know, which involves twisting the body, no one
is, nobody is able to do that. One person is able to do. Oh, you are so great.
He says, what is so great about twisting the body? Yes, if it promotes health.
And as an exercise, it is done, then it can be understood as a physical
activity, is not a spiritual activity. So, real spiritual pur..., purpose of
yoga is to get liberation from material existence. Now, Krishna is, in this
pro..., in this m..., you know, chapter, m..., Krishna is actually going up and
down. That means, Krishna starts from the yoga sadhana. And he goes to yoga
perfection. So:

        yogī yuñjīta satatam
        ātmānaṁ rahasi sthitaḥ

That is where he started from 16.10. And He talked about the:

        mat-saṁsthām adhigacchati

That is perfection. Then, again, Krishna goes down. And he starts from yoga
practice. He will go to perfection again. So, from 16, you know, a set of
verses, where till 23, He will go towards the yoga perfection. And then, again,
He will start talking from 24 about yoga sadhana. And then, again, He will go in
32 to yoga perfection. So, in this way, Krishna gives us the process in doses.
And while giving the process in doses, he d..., he points to a higher and higher
levels of perfection, also. So, now, the, Krishna will start again from the
basics over here. And what does He say over here? That the, how should a yogi
practice sadhana?

        nāty-aśnatas tu yogo ’sti
        na caikāntam anaśnataḥ
        na cāti-svapna-śīlasya
        jāgrato naiva cārjuna

"nāty-aśnatas". One should not eat too much. "tu yogo ’sti". "na caikāntam
anaśnataḥ". And nor should one fast too much. "asnatas". One should not go
without food too much. "na cati-svapna-silasya". And one should not sleep too
much. "jagrato naiva carjuna". Nor should one stay awake for too long. So, here,
Krishna is recommending balance. You know, Prabhupada would say that, if you
sleep too much, you become lazy. If you sleep too less, you became crazy. You
know, because, we just cannot think clearly. So, the sa..., same way with
respect to eating. If we eat too, if we eat too less, then we will not have
energy to serve Krishna. And our mind will constantly be thinking of food, food,
food. On the other hand, if we eat so much, if we eat too much, then the purpose
of eating is to get energy. But then, often, we, if we eat too much, then our
energy will, goes in just digesting that food on sleeping. We do not have, we do
not feel energised by that. So, do not eat too much. Do not eat too little. Have
balance. And these purports are, very sen..., you know, very beautiful,
Prabhupa..., very instructive here. So, Prabhupada first says, do not eat too
much means. Do not meat. And then, he talks about here, he says:

"One should not sleep more than six hours daily. One who sleeps more than six
hours out of twenty-four is certainly inﬂuenced by the mode of ignorance."

So, now, this is a broad general statement. And as, you know, devotees, we
always try to sleep less so that we can do mo..., get more and more things done.
At the same time, if the goa..., it is, the goal is not less sleeping. The goal
is more service. So, if we find that we are sleeping five hours. Or we are
sleeping five and half hours. And six hours. And then, we find that all the
time, we are just la..., you know, restless. Half awake. I am not able to
concentrate. Then, if we need six and half hour sleep. Seven hour sleep. Or
maybe, five and half hour sleep instead of five hours. Whatever. So, six hour is
average. Some people who are doing lot of physical activity. Or whatever other
reasons are there. If they need more sleep, the point is that we should do more
and more service. And we should be qu..., having quality attention. Quality
attentiveness so that we can do the service well. Otherwise, we will not be able
to, you know, offer our, you know, do things properly, offer our best while we
are awake. So, the idea is that devotee naturally wants to decrease the time
spent on the body. So, in generally, in general, the serious, you know,
spiritualists are miserly. Miserly about what? Miserly about giving time to the
body. You know, miser is one who does not spend money. So, if somebody goes and
asks money from myself. What you want it for? What you want it for? Ok. Miser
will try to get, you know, I give as less money as possible. That is a miserly
attitude. So, devotees can be miserly about giving time to the body. So that
does not mean that we have to not give time. You know, we should, we should not
give time to spend time too lavishly on the body. We think, ok, is this really
required? This required. How much time should be required for this? So, that
way, when we are, we are careful, fru..., you know, we are frugal about
spending time on the body because we understand this body is a vehicle. And
this, not necessarily a process of denial. If I am going by car, I have to take
care of the car. I have to fuel, fuel it. I may have to put air in the tyre.
Then, you know, sometimes, it may require some servicing and maintenance, also.
But then, the purpose of the car is to go. It is not that the purpose of car
is just, sit, sign next of the car. And just washes the car for hours to, you
know, how beautiful the car is. That is not the purpose of the car. The purpose
of the car is to take the car to a destination. So, like that, the purpose of
the body is not to take care of the body. Yes, we want to take care of the body.
So that we can use it for its purpose. And the purpose is to, you know, move
towards Krishna. To make spiritual advancement. And of course, we have to live
in this world. So, we also have worldly professions. And our wordly profession
can also be spiritualised if we connect our whole life towards Krishna. And make
Krishna the purpose of our life. So, the, Krishna here talks from the negative
point of view. Do not do this. Next verse, Krishna will talk from the positive
point of view.

        yuktāhāra-vihārasya
        yukta-ceṣṭasya karmasu
        yukta-svapnāvabodhasya
        yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā

So, Krishna is saying, "yukta". Now, till, you know, "yukta" can, the word
"yukta" can have many meanings. Hmm. The word "yukta". Earlier, it is, when we
used to say, yo..., you know, it is, it is coming from the word yoga. In the
Bhagavad Gita, these three words are used quite frequently. Yoga. Yogi. And
Yukta. So, all three are coming from the same root. And essentially, it means
connected. So, "yukta ity ucyate yogī". Well-situated. That is what it had come
earlier in this chapter, in 6.8. So, here, Prabhupada translates yukta as
regulated. Regulated. So, one who is not, you know, extravagant. But is
regulated. "yuktāhāra-vihārasya". One who is regulated in the eating. And then,
"vihāra". "vihāra" is entertainment. So, now, we may wonder, if the yogi is in
the jungle, what entertainment is there? Actually, even the yogi can take
breaks. Yogi is sitting in, you know, doing meditation. Now, when the yogi is
trying to do meditation. At that time, it is not easy to concentrate all the
time. And actually, sitting in an asana and doing meditation is hard work. So,
one may need a break. So, the yogi can go for a walk. Look at the beauty of
nature. So, that is fine. So, that is yukta. So, when Bharat Maharaja, he saw
the deer running around. And then, he saw that deer was downing. So, you know,
for him to see the deer and to want to care for it, that is not wrong. So, in a
regulated way, yukta, yogi should also be aware of what is happening around. And
to take in the beauty of nature. And to get oneself refreshed by that is also a
part. You know, that is ok. So, "yuktāhāra-vihārasya". So, then, beyond that,
"yukta-ceṣṭasya karmasu". "yukta-ceṣṭasya karmasu" means that whatever work one
does, karma, "ce...", and whatever one endeavor, one does that, in that, that
should be regulated. "yukta-ceṣṭasya". So, sometimes, people, they may take up
jobs which require them to work for fifteen, sixteen hours a day. Now, in some
cases, you know, when there are pr..., project deadlines and unavoidable
circumstances, one may have to work that much. That is just unavoidable. But in
general, if we choose a career which involve that kind of work, then, you know,
we are letting, we are causing our material life and spiritual life to come in a
head-on conflict. You know, we want our material life and our spiritual life to
go in parallel lanes. You know, we have time for our material life. We have time
for our spiritual life. So, if our material life starts taking the time, you
know, from the time meant for our, from our spiritual quota. Then, that is
undesirable. So, then, we may have to choo..., you know, we may have to
reshuffle our career plans. And choose a vocation that helps us that, you know,
have a, ha..., have an origina..., have an intelligent balance. So,
"yukta-ceṣṭasya karmasu". Working, you know, excessively hard is not only
detrimental spiritually. It can be detrimental materially, also. You know,
people get in a too much stress. And, you know, it is sometimes, the people's
biological clock get up..., upset. You know. People have night shifts. And they
have to work at all times. So, you know, now, where it is absolutely essential,
devotees do not have to do this, cannot run away from responsibilities in the
name of transcendence. But when we have to choose, we can think in the long-term
and decide what kind of career should I choose so that I can balance?
"yukta-svapnāvabodhasya". And one is regulated in one's sleeping, also. Lord
Krishna has talked about earlier. Then, Krishna says, when is, one is regulated
in this way, then what happens? With the, such regulation, when one practices
yoga. Then, "yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā". "duḥkha-hā" means the hies distraction.
Ha..., hanti. Distraction. "duḥkha-hā" refers to the ending, the distraction of
misery. So, actually, for yoga practice, to bring about the distraction of
misery, this is required. What? Regulation in our material activities. If there
is no regulation in our material activities. Then, there are, you practice of
yoga is not very focused. And if the practice of yoga is not very focused, then
it does not lead to, you know, fruitful results. And that is why liberation does
not come about. The cessation from misery does not come about. So, as devotees,
if we are sleeping too less or sleeping too little. And we are not having any
co..., time for chanting, and somewhere, some, while traveling around, just
squeezing some time, and managing some rounds here and there, distracted. And we
are not really putting our heart into things in our spiritual life. Then,
because of our unregulated lifestyle, sometimes, we be..., have to do that in
emergencies. But if that is the way everything is, daily, then that is not a
sustainable way for us to practice. And then, we will not really make some
spiritual advancement. Anyway, we stay connected with Krishna, that is good. But
serious spiritual life means that we have a regulation. So that there is
balance. "yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā". So, for yoga practice to lead to the fruits.
Also, there has to be regulation in our interaction with matter. See, the soul
is here. Soul is right now caught in material consciousness. And we want to
connect the soul's consciousness to Krishna. Who is at the spiritual level of
reality. Now, when we want to connect with Krishna, there has to be regulation
with our material connection. If there is no regulation. If there is
disproportionate inbalance indulgence in matter, you know, our consciousness
gets caught up in matter. When consciousness gets caught up in matter, then it
cannot focus on spirit so much. So, when regulation is there. Then, one does not
have to think too much about material things. Ok. This is the time I will sleep.
This is time I will wake. So, or this may be another time I am going go to
sleep. That is my regulated thing. So, occasionally, when we are too tired. When
there has been too many, dema..., too much demanding work. We may rest more. But
in general, you know, we, if we are regulated, then our energy is free for doing
other things. If we are not regulated, regu..., if people, they do not, they are
not regulated about the sleeping. Then, many times, when they wake up, you know,
just waking up is a conflict which can go on for one hour, two hours. You know.
They say, you know, put the alarm. Wake up. Go to sleep again. Put the alarm.
Wake up. Go to sleep again. So, there are people who use all different kinds of
alarms, also. Somehow to try to wake up. You know. There is an alarm which at
the time, at the moment, normally, alarm means, it just rings at the time. There
is an alarm which is like a, at the moment when it rings, supposed to ring, it
just breaks apart. Like a jigsaw puzzle piece is falling apart. And what do
people have to do? The only way the alarm is stopping the sound is all the
jigsaw pieces puzzle have to be found and pieced together. Only when they are
pieced together, then the alarm will stop. So, people think that is the way. I
will force myself to wake up. Why? Because people struggle so much to wake up.
So, that whole struggle, you know, if a devotee decide..., I will, I will wake
up. These many are asleep. I will wake up. Then, there is, that big conflict is
not there. The regulated time for eating, then we will not always thinking,
should I eat this? Should I eat this? Should I just take a snack now? Should I
take a break? And just munch something. So, there, if there is regulation, then
our mental energy becomes freed for f..., more purposeful engagement. Otherwise,
the mental energy is always thinking about eating, sleeping, mating, defending.
And gets dissipated in that. Then, Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport that
extravagance:

"Extravagance in the matter of eating, sleeping, defending and mating – which
are demands of the body – can block advancement in the practice of yoga."

Now, in a rough way, you know, "āhāra" is related with the eating. So, m...,
m..., "vihārasya" can be related with mating. "vihāra" is entertainment. So,
people, recreation. So, people engage in sex. That is a primary recreation that
people do. Then, "ceṣṭasya karmasu". We do our prescribed duty. That is
primarily a way of defending. You know, to defend our arrangements for eating,
sleeping, mating. And "svapnāvabodhasya" is sleeping. So, in a rough way, they
can be correlated with these, these four activities can be correlated with the
standard a..., m..., bodily regu..., demands. Eating, sleeping, mating,
defending. So, Prabhupada saying, extravagance in the matter of eating,
sleeping, you know, sleeping, mating, and defending. You know, these are demands
of the body. So, we have to fulfill them. But if there is, if there is
extravagance, then it can block advancement in the practice of yoga. And then,
Prabhupada talks about how av, you know, a...:

"any unnecessary time spent sleeping is considered a great loss."

It is a great loss. You know. Actually, we often say the word time is money. It
is a very, it is a common saying. And people take it s..., people take it, time
is money. You know, but we have to apply it practically. So, we would not spend
our money thoughtlessly. You know. If somebody came along and just said, hey,
Prabhu, can you give one thousand rupees? What? Why do you want it? You know,
so, we will not casually go and ask somebody for money like that. And we will
not give casually money, also. But then, we go and casually spend our time with
somebody, take somebody else's time. If we are truly understanding that time is
more preicous than money, then we will be so cautious about how we use our time.
And how we take others' time. So, Chanakya Pandit says that: 

        ayush kshane ko api
        na labhyte swarn kotipi

How precious is time? Time is so precious that even if we are spe..., ready to
spend a svarana koti, you know, if we, even if we are, you know, a thou...,
ok..., o..., ok, crore, m..., jewel, you know, crore, gold coins, still, we
cannot get even one moment back. So, time is more precious than money. It has to
be valued like that. And any moment lost is a great law. Wasted is a great loss.
So, actually, you know, one more reason why time is even, needs to be one more
carefully utilise than money is, not just because it is irrecoverable. You know.
But it is also unstorable. With money, I can decide, ok, I am not going to spend
money right now. I will just store in the bank. In the future, we will set out
to spend it. But we do not have that option with time. Every moment that is
passing, time is getting spent. So, just do not have the option whether to spend
time or not. Time has to be spent. The only option we have is how do I spend my
time. How do I spend it in productive activities. Or in unproductive activities.
So, that is why it is a great loss. Any time, we may say, any time, spend.
Anyway. And we will spend it sleeping. Whatever the body requirement through
that. But beyond that, it is a l..., great loss. And Prabhupada quotes
"Avyartha-kālatvam". This is Chaitanya, from Chaitanya Charitamrita. It is also
talked about in B..., Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. "Avyartha-kālatvam". It is not
spending any, wasting any time:

"a Kṛṣṇa conscious person cannot bear to pass a minute of his life without being
engaged in the service of the Lord."

So, it is very beautiful usage. It, Prabhupada is not saying that the devotee
does not waste, any mi..., amount of time. It means it cannot bear to pass a
minute of his life. A devotee cannot tolerate. Oh, can, how can I waste time?
So, like, there is so much to be done in Krishna's mission. You know. A serious
devotee alw..., is defined by a sense of purpose and a sense of urgency. You
know, a serious devotee is defined by a sense of purpose. Ok. There is so much
to be done in Krishna's mission. Let me take up one service. This is my service.
This is what I am going to do. So, purpose. And this is what I am going to do.
And I am going to do it soon. I am going to do it now. Urgency. So, a serious
devotee is defined by a sense of purpose. And a sense of urgency. And that is
why devotee cannot bear to spend time. Passing on a minute, without being any
insults of the Lord. And naturally, sleeping is kept to the minimum. And then,
Prabhupada says the ideal Goswamis could sleep so less. Now, of course, Srila
Prabhupada cautioned that, you know, if we try to physically imitate the
Goswamis, we will die. It is not possible for us to do that. And we do not have
to physically imitate. But the point is, we can keep that as idle. And try to
keep our eating, sleeping, mating, defending a minimum. So, in general, when we
talk about regulation, we should assume that, you know, we will tend by default
to go on the extra side. You know, for example, if it is said that, you know,
when we are doing material activities. If I am eating, and if I think, ok,
should I eat some more? So, generally, the answer is no. Because, you know, you
know, actually speaking, the body sends us signal when it is enough. So, it is
b..., safer to eat a little less that to eat a little more. Because the body
send a signal, that means it is enough. So, if we feel, so, I chant one round
more. Any spiritual activity, we should, yeah, yes, do it. So, like that, you
know, these are not absolute principles. But these are general principles. Which
are helpful for us. So, actually speaking, when we are genuinely hungry, we do
not even think should I eat, just eat immediately. Because we are hungry. So,
even when we eat, it is always safer to take less quantity and then, ask for
more. If you already take too much quantity, then that gives us, oh, I do
not want to waste prasad. So, let me eat more. But then, what happens when we
eat more? That sucks our energy. And then, you know, it goes into the stomach.
It becomes like a stone over there. And then, we, we become lethargic because of
that. So, a devotee should eat, you know, in a regulated way. And then, now,
Prabhupada continues and explains that how these things have to be practiced in,
you know, the, a life of a yogi. So, we will discuss that in our next class.

Thank you very much. Srimad Bhagavad Gita ki jaya. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya.
Thank you.
