Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d_ULTqhSgJ0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_081_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_06_Text_08_to_14_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=kmUQBkmX6RZXTK4_HhYDavkDonN8MTU0ODQ4ODIxOEAxNTQ4NDAxODE4&event=video_description&v=d_ULTqhSgJ0

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. In the
last class, we, were discussing the first section of the Sixth Chapter. The
Sixth Chapter is talking about, yoju know, ashtanga-yoga. So, we discussed
moving from the yoga Aruruksha stage to the Arudha stage. So, from the beginning
to the advanced stage. And what essentially differentiates the beginning and the
advanced stage is not just the externals. Externals, that is a difference.

        ārurukṣor muner yogaṁ
        karma kāraṇam ucyate

That in the initial stage, karma. Activity is the womb Means of advancement.
And:

        yogārūḍhasya tasyaiva
        śamaḥ kāraṇam ucyate

In 6.3, Krishna says that, then, when we become "ārūḍha", then we give up work.
But that is not the essential difference between Aruruksha and Arudha. It is not
that just by giving work, one will move from Aruruksha to Arudha. What makes a
difference is the control of the mind. The capacity to become equipoised towards
the external things. So, we discussed how the mind is the e..., you know, can
act as the enemy. And then, we discussed how the yogi brings the mind under
control. So, we will discuss a little bit more about "jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā".
In 6.7. Then, we will move onto, this is 6.8. We will discuss that first. And
then, we will move forward. So, let us recite the verse once again:

        jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā
        kūṭa-stho vijitendriyaḥ
        yukta ity ucyate yogī
        sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ

So, "jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā". So, let us look at what is the implication of
this. See, how does knowledge move towards realisation? So, there are three
stages. There is hearing. Contemplating. And applying. This called as sravana,
manana, and nidihyasana. So, hearing is sravana. Contemplating is manana.
And applying, internalising, is nidihyasana. It is talked about in the
Upanishads. So, when we hear spiritual knowledge. These stages, three stages can
be correlated with, when we hear, the knowledge enters into the ears. Then, we
go further. We contemplate on it. And that enters into the head. At that time,
it becomes "jñāna". And then, when we internalise it. Apply it further. Then, it
enters into our heart. And then, it becomes "vijñāna". "vijñāna". So, let us
understand this better now. So, first time when we hear something. We hear so
many things. We may hear some people doing some casual, you know, talk while be,
walking along the road. We hear so many pro..., you know, new..., news on the,
n..., a, news in the TV channel, on, you know, so, we may hear so many things
from so many places. Now, most of it, it does not really enter much. Or even if
it enters, it just does not register over there. So, we forget it soon. And, you
know, we do not really, you know, give it much thought. After it enters the head
through the ears. So, that is how it, you know, dies away from our
consciousness, gradually. Although, some impression might be stare..., there in
the background. But mostly, it dies away. So, when we talk about hearing. At
that time, say, we are now discussing some philosophy. So, hearing means, first,
at least, the ears are there. So, things go inside. Hmm. Then, after that, we
contemplate. You know, Srila Prabhupada says, in one place, that one should not
hear like a hog. Now, we may wonder, what does hearing like a hog? You know. The
hog, it, it can have big ears. But actually, it does not hea..., it cannot
understand philosophy. So, hearing like a hog means, stay, a, being in animal
consciousness. And staying in animal consciousness. Not letting one's
consciousness become raised by one's hearing. Not becoming illumined, and
purified, and transformed by hearing. That is hearing like a hog. So, after
hearing, we contemplate. So, scriptures say that sense gratification leads to
misery. We discussed in the Fifth Chapter.

        ye hi saṁsparśa-jā bhogā
        duḥkha-yonaya eva te

So, now, how does it make sense? We may feel like that. So, when we hear, at
that time, we may think, does this really make sense? Or does not make sense?
When we think in this way, we realise that we have certain conceptions. And
in what we are hearing, there is, it is contradictory. So, generally speaking,
you know, we, I, m..., discussed earlier how knowledge involves connecting the
unknown with the known. So, there is something that is known. For what is known
in this case is, oh, sense gratification leads to pleasure. That is what I have
heard from my childhood. That is what I have seen in the movies. That is what
all the ads are telling me. So, that is what I have heard. So, now, when I hear
from the scriptures that sense gratification leads to misery. Now, if I do not
take it very seriously. And it just comes and ok. These are religious people.
They just keep saying thin..., things like this. You know. They are all spoilt
sports. They are all key joys. They do not want us to enjoy life. You know,
said. They do not want to enjoy. Let them not enjoy. But we are going to enjoy
life. So, do not bother about this religious stuff. So, many people think of
things like this. And they do not take things very seriously. Then, they have to
bear serious consequences. The body is going to grow old. Get diseased. And
then, all the bad karma that a person has done is going to come back. As serious
sinful reactions. So, therefore, you know, a wise person does not neglect
scriptures. So, when we hear. And we think about it. So, if, what the
preconceptions that we have. And the c..., what we hear. If the two contradict
each other. Then, we have to seriously think, which is right. And why is it
right. You know. You know. Ac..., we cannot just, you know, wish away our
preconceptions. If we acquired our preconceptions based on certain experiences.
Or certain assumptions. Or certain no..., a, certain n..., notions that we have
acquired from various sources. Then, we have to challenge and counter them by
conscious contemplation. Ok. Scripture is saying like this. I am hearing
like this. So, this is "jñāna". I may be thinking like this. Which is true.
Contemplate. Yeah. It is, seem like sense gratification leads to pleasure. But
are the people who are enjoying the senses happy? Most of them, we see, they, in
the name of happiness, they engage in activities that are harmful to them. They
engage in smoking, drinking, intoxication. These harm them. Some time, the,
these harm others, also. When on the control of s..., these dri..., a,
activities, they act. And they harm others. So many people are drunk. They
drive. And they hurt others. They hurt themselves. So, beyond that, yes, it
dev..., leads to satisfaction. The pleasure is always temporary. And after that,
there is so much trouble. So, then, by conscious culti..., contemplation, we can
understand, yeah, oh, what scripture. What I have been thinking of is false.
What scripture is saying is true. This sort of contemplation when we do, then
the knowledge, it is going from the ears, it just does not just come and to one
ear and go out of the other ear. It goes from the ear into the head. It becomes
s..., settled over there. You know, even when it is settled over there, it is
not necessarily that means we have accepted it. Internally, just, there, there
are various levels of internalisation. One is the intellectual internalisation.
When we, when we intellectually understand it. But even after intellectually
understanding it, there may not be emotional internalisation. Emotional
internalisation means that I accept it. Just this is true. This is true. And,
you know, this is, actually, what happens many times, even we intellectually
internalise certain things, at that time, still, the problem remains that, you
know, f..., the feelings are still very much towards sense gratification. So, if
I had the opportunity, I have to pounce on sense gratification. Now, somehow, I
am, I am told. And I am, to some extent, I have accepted. Some extent, accepted
it intellectually that sense gratification does not lead to, you know, pleasure.
It leads to misery. But still, I feel, you know, it leads to pleasure. So, then,
that will require purification. That will require greater realisation. When that
purification, realisation comes. Then, we move to the next stage. The next stage
is, we accept in the heart.

So, for example, say, somebody who is never drunk in one's life. And has got no
illusions about drinking. Has seen how people, when they drink, you know, they
just topple on the side of the street. Or they just roll over on the table where
they are drinking. They throw up stuff. And they get terrible hangovers. They
make a fool out of themselves. They just waste so much money. So, one has seen
how it leads to misery. Someone has no illusions about it giving some pleasure.
So, at that time, there is no inner battle between the feelings. And the
thoughts. There is no conflict that I do not feel that, actually, yeah, you
know, that is, you know, there, the feel will give me pleasure. But somehow, I,
I do not want to. I should not be doing it. It is not like that. There, there is
no temptation, only. So, when we get, now, we may feel like this about, say,
alcohol. But we may not feel the same way about other pleasures. For example,
sexual pleasure. We may feel very strongly tempted about it. But as we bec...,
s..., become spiritually advanced, slowly. Then, m..., more and more of the
material ex..., pleasures will be exposed to be what they actually are. They are
not source of happiness. They are sources of delusion. And sources of distress.
They delude us. And they cause us to suffer. So, gradually, as we understand it,
we move towards "vijñāna". "vijñāna". So, "vijñāna" means internalise in terms
of, not just at the level of the head. At the level of the heart. So, now, you
know, I talked about emo..., intellectual internalisation, emotional
internalisation. Emotional internalisation, here, we are not just talking about
feelings in terms of the feelings of the mind. Yes, the mind has feelings.
Generally, what do we mean by realisation? See, realisation means that when the
mind accepts something. Yes, this is true. This is true. So, when it goes deep
into our heart, then, yeah, I accept. This is true. That is realisation.
Realisation means that which is a reality, we accept it to be a reality. That,
it, that, which is a reality. Sense gratification leads to misery. But we have
not accepted it to be reality. When we accept it to be a reality. Then, that
becomes a realisation. So, we all want to move towards realisation. And
gradually, we will gain, we will be able to accept these things that sense
gratification does not lead to pleasure. It leads to misery. So, therefore, I
should not indulge in it. Not because I have been told not to do it. But because
it is the lea..., it is a path to misery. And why should I get involved on it?
There are better ways to live life. And the best way is to live by serving
Krishna. So, let me live in service to Krishna. That is "vijñāna". When we get
this inner acceptance. So, Krishna is saying, our, "jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā".
When one has knowledge. And one has realisation. Then, one becomes "tṛpta". One
becomes satisfied. Otherwise, if one has "jñāna". Oh, sense gratification l...,
you know, leads to misery. But when one is at "vijñāna". So, one is, one is
hearing sense gratification leads to misery. But one is feeling, oh, sense
gratification leads to happiness. Why am I? Why? Why am I not allowed to do it?
So, then, there is no "tṛpta" over there. There is "atṛpta". There is, you know,
dissatisfaction. There is irritation. There is frustration. So, we gradually, by
contemplating and living accordingly, we will be able to realise it. So, now,
here, you know, how does, so, what is in-between is, af..., from hearing, after
"tṛp...", you know, hea..., at the level of hearing, one is in the ears. But
from the ears, it goes to the head. And then, we contemplate. And from the head,
how does it go to the heart? When we apply it.

So, when we apply it, it goes to the heart. So, now, we may wonder, what comes
first? Does the applying come first? Or does the knowledge going to the heart
come first? Actually, it is both ways. You know. Bo..., it is whatever little
conviction we have, we apply. So, alcohol, like, may not feel alcohol as
miserable. When the urges come. Alcohol may feel, no, I want to enjoy this. But
the alcoholic is told no. No. No. No. Alcoholic understands I have had enough
experiences. It leads to misery. I have resolved. I am going to be sober now. I
am not going to get involved in this. So, nothing doing. Let me just put this
aside. So, there are some, some determination. But once the determination is
there, then one goes beyond it. So, now, m..., we discussed this briefly
earlier. So, "jñāna" and "vijñāna". There are four examples which we can use for
explaining how scriptural knowledge needs to be applied to be inter..., you
know, to be b..., to be truly beneficial. So, there are these four examples. A
map. A prescription. A recipe. And a manual. See, all of these provide some
information. Some knowledge. But none of these truly benefit us unless we do
something with that knowledge. A map may tell me how I can go from Mumbai to
Pune, say. But unless I move big, the journey, I will not move from Mumbai to
Pune. A prescription may tell me, ok, you are having cough now. Take this, this,
this. You will get cured. Th..., but unless I take the medicine, I will no get
cured. A recipe can tell me how to make Rasgulla. But unless I use the recipe.
And cook the Rasgulla, I will not have the Rasgulla. A manual may tell me how to
operate a machine. But unless I actually open the machine. And start pressing
the button and operating it. I cannot use the machine for any purposes. So,
these, so, scriptures are like that. They are like a map, or manual, a recipe,
or, you know, a prescription. So, unless we applied it, scriptural knowledge
does not benefit us much. And the difference between all these and, you know,
you know, scriptural knowledge is that, scriptural knowledge application is
largely internal. We have to apply it. And application has to be internal. So,
you know, whether a person is applying it or not, may not be so easily apparent.
We will know whether we are applying it or not. But even if we are not applying
it, others may think we are applying it. And we may be satisfied with making
others think that I am applying it rather than actually applying it. So, that
should n..., not happen. Because if that happens, then:

        mithyācāraḥ sa ucyate

As Krishna has talked about in the Third Chapter. So, we need to internalise the
knowledge. Then, we will become "tṛptātmā". So, now, what Pra..., what prevents
the "jñāna" from becoming "vijñāna". There are two obstacles. You know. They are
what? Desires and doubts. So, desires originate from the mind. And they entrap
the karmis. Doubts originate from the inte..., intelligence. And they entrap the
jnanis. Now, in, many times in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says:

        mayy arpita-mano-buddhir

Offer your mind and intelligence to Me. Why these two specific faculties?
Because they comprise our subtle body. And wherever subtle body goes, that is
where we will go, eventually. So, if we offer our subtle body to Krishna. Then,
we offer ourselves to Krishna by that. So, desires and doubts are what stop our
subtle body from going towards Krishna. So, now, you know, w..., desires, they
make us feel, yeah, there is so much enjoyment here. Why should I go towards
Krishna? And doubts, this is Krishna for real? Is this spiritual? Is this for
real? It also creates obstacles. So, doubts and desires, both are obstacles.
Now, when we say, that desires entrap karmis. And doubts entrap jnanis. Who are
we? Actually, we have the worst of both. We have desires, also. And we have
doubts, also. So, we have both. So, when we are talking about, ka..., you know,
here, the paths, or the practioners, we have karma tendency. And we have some
jnana tendency, also. So, many, many devotees think that, you know, science is
like jnana. Science is jnana. Because, you know, scientif..., scientists are
intellectuals. You know. There are so many formulas. So much complex scientific
concepts. So, actually speaking, from the spiritual perspective, science, a,
from the philosophical point, science is not jnana. Science is k..., largely
karma. Why? We may say science is jnana. Jnana, you know, isn't it? Similar to
the path of jnanis. Thinking very deeply about what are, the nature of reality
is. Then, there may be some scientists who think about what the nature of the
reality is. Most scientists think of how to bend the world to nature, by our
will. You know, most people, you know, who are in the field of science, they
work on technology. And technology basically involves manipulating matter. And
manipulating matter is karma. It is karma-kanda. So, in the path of karma, for
example, you know, somebody has to produce rains. So, then, they will do some
Indra yajna. And by that, rains will come. So, now, we may not believe today
that, people may not believe today that in, that, by doing some fire sacrifice,
yajna will come. That does, you know, so, putting aside the fact of whether
people believe or not, what is the underlying principle over there? The
principle is we are using some method to manipulate matter. Yes, there may be,
you know, ma..., ma..., you know, a, rains are material. Rains are not in that
sense spiritual. What comes out in the rain is matter. And the clouds that from
which the rains come, they are material. And devata in charge of that is also
material. So, rains are material. So, we are using some material phenomena. Some
yajna. To get some material result. The process itself may be high-tech. But
actually, the essence of the process is material manipulation. Material control.
So that, there can be material enjoyment. So, most of science is karma. It is
not jnana. It is karma. So, that, now that is what happens, today, many people who
are scientifically well-educated, also. They are filled with many desires for sense
gratification. That is why we will see so much of scientific technology is used
to promote sense gratification. You know. The whole, a, entertainment industry,
especially in that we have the, you know, porn industry which is using advanced
technology to bring out the most regressive desires. M..., the lowest desires from
people's minds. And make them act on those desires. So, either way, doubts and
desires. Both obstruct us. So, now, wha..., a, why, when I was saying that,
today's people have often the worst of both. See, we have scientific education
which we mistake to be intellectual. And bec..., and through this in...,
education, we get a lot of doubts, also. There is God exist. There is soul
exist. There is reincarnation for real. Along with that, because this knowledge
is used largely for sense gratification. So, we are all so filled with many
desires. So doubts and desires, both obstruct us. Now, among these two, you
know, which are most, more dangerous? Actually, both are dangerous. But doubts
are more dangerous. Because generally, on the spiritual path, when doubt...,
desires come, desires make us feel lowly. You know. I am, so many material
desires. You know. I am so impure. But when doubts come, doubts make us feel
superior. Hey, you know, these people, they are so sentimental. They believe
such stuff? I am not so sentimental. I am intelligent. I will not believe these
things. So, what happens is, when we feel superior like this. Then, it becomes
difficult for us to seek shelter. To ask for help. To, you know, try to find out
what is the solution in a humble and submissive way. So, that is why, in one
sense, doubts can be more dangerous. And Srila Prabhupada also considered
philosophical deviation as far more, you know, a, dangerous than sensual
deviation. If some disciple had some sensual fall down. Prabhupada would
encour..., you know, Prabhupada would still encourage them to continue on. But
if somebody philosophically deviated, Prabhupada was very strong in cautioning.
That devotee, as well as other disciples. So, that is what, now, you know, why,
wh..., the, so, what, what are we discussing over here?
"jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā". So, we have to deal with our desires. And we will have
to deal with our doubts. So, we deal with our desires by chanting, purification.
We deal with our doubts, also, by chanting, purification. No doubt. But along
with that, we systematically study. Enquire. And be patient. We discussed
earlier about how doubts can go, be dealt with, by keeping certain doubts in a
state of suspension. Neither judging them as true, nor false. Just keep them in
suspension. So, now, Krishna has talked in the previous verse about, in this
verse about "sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ". Just equal vision towards things. Now,
Krishna will describe a higher level of consciousness, where he describes equal
vision towards all kinds of people, also. It is one thing to see things equally.
It is quite another to see thing, see people equally. And that is what Krishna
talks about in the next verse. So:

        suhṛn-mitrāry-udāsīna-
        madhyastha-dveṣya-bandhuṣu
        sādhuṣv api ca pāpeṣu
        sama-buddhir viśiṣyate

So, "suhṛn". "suhṛn". "suhṛn" is friends. Well-wisher. Very close well-wisher.
We have used the word "suhṛn" in the Bhagavad Gita, earlier, 5.25. "suhṛdaṁ
sarva-bhūtā...". "suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ". Krishna is the very intimate,
well-wi..., greatest well-wisher of all living beings. "mitra" is the friend.
"ari" is the enemy. "udāsīna" is the neutral. So, "udāsīna". And then,
"madhya-stha". What is the difference between the two? "udāsīna" is one who does
not take any side. "madhyastha" is a person who tries to act as a mediator to
bring conflict resolution by trying to act as a, you know, discussion channel
for two opposing warrior fractions. "dveṣya". One who is envious, envious.
"bandhuṣu" is one who is a friend. So, "sādhuṣv api ca pāpeṣu". "sādhuṣu" is
saintly person. And "pāpeṣu" is sin..., sinful person. "sama-buddhir viśiṣyate".
One who sees all of them equally. "viśiṣyate". Such a person is higher. So,
Krishna is telling, higher because, why such a person higher? Because such a
person is able to see not just things equally, but people, also, equally. It is
one thing to see thi..., things. For example, this table. This computer. This
door. This floor. This roof. All of them are made of matter. None of that can
make me happy, actually. So, that is one level of equal vision. But things just
stay at one place where people act. Some people are kind and smiling. Some
people are, you know, grim and frowning. Some people are s..., you know, some
people are very negligent of us. Some people are very loving and caring. So,
different people are different kinds. It will be equal towards other people. How
is that possible? Krishna has talked about something similar earlier in 5.18.
When He has talked about how "paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ". You know, the person who
is a yogi, he sees all living beings equally. There, among the humans, it was talked
about, "brāhmaṇe" and "śvapaca". So, brahmana is, a, in the mode of goodness. At the
top in the spectrum. And "śvapaca", dog-eaters, ignorance. At the bottom of the
spectrum. So, Krishna is saying that a person sees all of the equal. Now, that
spectrum, there, included humans and animals, also. So, Krishna is here focusing
within that spectrum on human being. He is saying there are different kinds of
human beings. And that does not have to be human beings, also. That can be all
living beings, also, involved. But specifically, Krishna is talking about
relationships. So, the variety of relationship which we have. You know. These,
we generally see them among human beings. But it can be among other beings,
also. You know, some animals are hostile. Some animals are friendly. Some
animals are negligent. So, it can apply to them, also. You know, in general. But
Kr..., the point is, equal vision towards all people. So, when one has that
equal vision, then one has s..., one has stopped seeing other people based on
their potential to provide us sense gratification. You know. We see people based
on their potential to provide us sense gratification. You know. Why is that? How
is that? You know, generally, you know, if, say, a person is very good-looking.
Then, that person attracts the glances of everyone. Why? Just people want to
look at that person. So that they can get some pleasure for the eyes again, and
again, and again. So, you know, somebody is, somebody is not at all looking
good. You know. Ok. A king. Haggardly. Old. Not alone. And people do not even
notice such a person. Why is that? Because their focus, their, their deciding
point is simply the, how much is the potential for sense gratification that the
person can give, you know, for me. Only per..., person is looking very wealthy.
Then, if such, such a person, such a person comes to office, people will come
and meet. Oh, maybe, this person will give me some money. Some bribe. Or
whatever. And e..., everybody will attr.., be attentive. Somebody, some comes,
you know, torn clothes, disheveled. We will look. And then s..., wait there in
the queue. And keep that person waiting for a long time. What happens is, we see
people based on their pot..., potential, we means m..., materialistic people.
You know, or we, when at the material level of consciousness, we see people
based on their potential for providing us sense gratification. So, where, when
we have given up, we understood sense gratification cannot make me happy, this
has, that has been mentioned:

        sarva-saṅkalpa-sannyāsī

Oh, so, we discussed that, you know, in this chapter earlier. 6.3, 6.4 talking
about Arudha and Aru..., Aruruksha. So, the yos..., yoga Arudha stage is,
"sarva-saṅkalpa", so, one is a "sannyāsī". One who has given up the desire for
sense gratification knowing that cannot make me happy. Then, one does not
evaluate people based on their potential for sense gratification. And that is
how one can have equal vision. And Krishna says, those who have such an equal
vision, they can move forward. And they can, actually, take us for, a, they can
take, a, take to the renounced order. They can renounce and go out of the world
to situations elsewhere. So, now, Krishna describes about the, to, going to the
forest:

        yogī yuñjīta satatam
        ātmānaṁ rahasi sthitaḥ
        ekākī yata-cittātmā
        nirāśīr aparigrahaḥ

So, "yogī yuñjīta satatam". The "yogī yuñjī...", "yogī" is the
transcendentalist. "yuñjīta" is engaged in. "satatam", always. "ātmānaṁ rahasi
sthitaḥ". "ātmānaṁ". The oneself. Oneself here means the body, mind, soul,
everything. One contra..., a, "rahasi". "rahasi" means it a secluded place.
"sthitaḥ". Such a person situate oneself on, in, in a secluded place. "ekākī
yata-cittātmā". So, externally, the one is secluded. And internally, one is
concentrated. "e...". One is controlled and concentrate. "ekākī". That person
is, so, "rahasi" means the place is secluded. On a secluded place, also,
sometimes, there can be 5-6 people. And they are just chit-chatting. There is no
other people. But it so..., it says the point, it is "rahasi" and "ekākī". So,
that person goes to secluded place where there are not many crowd. And there,
also, person sits alone. "ekākī". So, no distractions. "yata-cittātmā". One
controls the mind. And then, "nirāśīr aparigrahaḥ". "nirāśīr". One does not have
too much material desires. You know. One gives up material desires. "na",
"aparigrahaḥ". "nirā", "ap...", "aparigrahaḥ" means one gives up material
possessions. When one sits like this, then what happens? One can start
practicing, one starts practicing the process of ashtanga-yoga. So, Srila
Prabhupada explains, the, in his purport that, actually, it is a significant
statement.

"the impersonalist and the meditator are also indirectly Kṛṣṇa conscious."

How is that? Prabhupada explains that. The impersonalist is meditating on
Brahman. And the per..., meditator is meditating on b..., Paramatma. So, in that
sense, they are also indirectly Krishna Consciousness. So, however, if they are,
you know, they become directly Krishna Conscious, then that is an easier
process. It is a more fruitful process. That will give them greater joy. And
they will make swifter spiritual advancement. But the point is they are also
indirectly Krishna Conscious. You know. And Prabhupada quotes about
"aparigrahaḥ". He says, how a devotee practices this by not using anything in
devotional service of the Lord. We discussed about "yuktaṁ vairāgyam" and, you
know, "phalgu vairāgyaṁ" earlier. And Prabhupada basically explains how a
devotee is the perfect yogi. A devotee practices all these things. A devotee
does not have any possessions for oneself. But uses possessions in Krishna's
service. So, now, hmm, let us move forward and discuss the, you know, aspects of
ashtanga-yoga. Now, m..., hmm, yes, so, ashtanga-yoga refers to the physical
aspect o..., ashtanga-yoga has two aspects. The physical aspect is called as
hatha-yoga. The psychological aspect is called as dhyana-yoga. The physical
aspect means yama, niyama, asana, and pranayama. These comprise the physical
aspect. They are the hatha-yoga. And psychological aspect refers to one starts
turning inwards. So, pratyahara, dhyana, dharana, samadhi. Now, this is not an
absolute watertight division. In each of these things, in the, even in the
physical level, also, some level, the mind is definitely involved. And
psychological aspect, also, the body is involved. But the focus we are
talking about. You know. Warrior. So, ashtanga-yoga. Now, Bhaktivinoda Thakur
writes in Prema-pradīpa that yoga is harmonisable with, but not essential to
bhakti. That means if s..., if somebody is a, if a, a devotee can practice yoga
and also do bhakti. So, a devotee, I mean, if the devotee can have bhakti as
the main process that the devotee is practicing. But along with that, the
devotee can do yoga, also. You know. Maybe, for keeping health, or, a, helping
in sense control. But that is not essential. It is not that everybody, every
devotee has to practice yoga. Nowadays, you know, the practice of yoga, is,
largely been, is widely been embraced for health purposes. So, Srila Prabhupada,
in these purports, will time and again say that authentic yoga practice means
one has to give up sense gratification. And go to the forest. And that way, one
can, you know, one can become a true yogi. Otherwise, if one is living in a
city, engaging in sense gratification, then that is not actually yoga practice.
So, Srila Prabhupada seems to be, c..., at many places, quite critical of the
fact that, hmm, there are yogis who, you know, they are, who, yoga teachers who
teach yoga. You know. And most people practice yoga mostly for purely its health
benefits. And not for anything else. So, yoga asanas. Different people do
different asanas. And often, it just becomes a largely physical accomplishment.
You know, some people, they want to lift weights. And they say, hey, say, I can
lift v..., high, bigger weight than you. You lift this kg. You know. I will lift
this much kg. So, like that, it becomes a physical co..., a, competition. You know.
You can do that asana. I can do a tougher asana than this. You know. You can,
you can s..., stand on your head for ten, for, you know, two minutes. I can wait
for five minutes. I am gonna say, I can stand on my head for ten minutes.
Somebody else fifteen minutes. So, now, this is, this sort of competition for
the sake of, you know, trying to prove how good one is, this is not actually the
purpose of yoga. Far from the purpose of yoga.

So, Prabhupada in that sense was critical of the, m..., you know,
misrepresentation of yoga as purely bo..., physical exercise. And actually,
there are many yoga teachers, also, who are, you know, who are displeased by
this. They are authentic yoga teachers. And they see yoga as a means for
transcendence. Although, of course, that is not recommended in this age. But
still, actually, it is one of the means for transcendence. So, when people
practice it purely for exercise purposes, then that is a misappropriation of the
process of yoga. At the same time, so, this is true, it is a misappropriation,
it is a misrepresentation. But Srila Prabhupada was also open to, you know, that
sort of uses, if it could be used to attract people to Krishna Consciousness.
Even Srila Prabhupada in South, in South America, this is described in
Prabhupāda‑līlā. Prabhupāda‑līlā is the seventh volume of līlāmrta. You know,
Prabhupāda‑līlāmrta is six-volume book. So, after he finished the si..., sixth
volume, Satsvarūpa Mahārāja, you know, he had s..., several miscellaneous
pastimes which devotees sent him. And he put them in an additional volume which
is just called as Prabhupāda‑līlā. Like seventh volume of "līlāmrta". So, in
that book is described when Srila Prabhupada was in South America. So, the
devotees told him that there are a lot of people who are interested in Indian
culture. Because they are interested in yoga. So, how should we deal with them?
So, Prabhupada said, yes, encourage them. And tell them, yoga is not just about
the body. It is about the mind and the heart. And the best way to practice yoga
is to chant Hare Krishna. So, we do not have to be disapproving of this culture
of yoga. And the popularity of yoga. But we have to elevate it to a deeper and
higher understanding. You know. So, there are many devotees, also, who, you
know, who are yoga teachers. And they use yoga to teach yoga. And while teaching
yoga, they also teach bhakti. They teach about inner aspects of yoga. So, that
way, we can definitely do that. If we, people already have some interest in
something connected with spirituality. Yoga is not directly spirituality,
necessarily. But it is connected with spirituality. If yoga opens people's minds
towards the, you know, t..., ancient wisdom, then why not? Of the Vedic culture.
So, they may say, oh, this is the, these Vedic literature, they have produced
yoga. Maybe, there is something good in it. This yoga is helping me to improve
my health. Maybe, it can help me some, a, off..., offer me something more, also.
So, that way, people can become more, more open to explore these things. And
then, we do not have to clo..., if the, if a door is opening to take Krishna to
a, people, who would otherwise never have considered Krishna. So, people, they
were not interested in worshiping. Chanting Hare Krishna, that is a religious
activity. I am not interested in religion. But interested in health? Yes.
You are interested in yoga? Yes. Bhagavad Gita is the manual of yoga, itself.
Oh, really? I did not know that. I thought Bhagavad Gita is about bhakti. Yes,
but bhakti is a yoga. Oh, bhakti is yoga. So, we can get people interested in
that way. And as f..., many devotees, also, may themselves do yoga as a matter
of exercise. So that they can maintain health. And that is also fine. You know,
the, our, the time which we spend for our y..., a, for doing some yoga asanas.
We should not see that as, as a time for sadhana. It is not, it is not a time we
are spending for spiritual purposes. It is a time we spend for bodily purposes.
And that is fine. This is some peop..., some devotees may do some jogging. Some
devotees may do some cycling. Some devotees may do some swimming. Some devotees
may do some, you know, s..., t..., you know, some, you know, some other kind of
workouts. Some devotees may do yoga. So, we all, if, if the body requires to do
some kind of exercise. Then, some devotees choose to do yoga. That is fine. So,
th..., the only point is the physical, that which is physical, should not be
mistaken to be spiritual. So, if a devotee is able to maintain health without
having to, without doing much yoga asanas. It is not necessary that others have
to tell, we have to do yoga. Yoga is Vedic culture. Yeah. Yoga is Vedic culture.
But there are so many other things in Vedic culture, also. It is not that every
single devotee has to do yoga. And, you know, we, our primarily sadhana is
chanting Hare Krishna. Doing so..., bhakti. But along with that, yoga can be
used in supplement. For those who want it. That is why it is harmonisable with.
But not essential to bhakti. Hmm. So, now, let us look at these fives stages of
ashtanga-yoga. O..., the various stages we discussed. So, let us look at the
next verse now.

        śucau deśe pratiṣṭhāpya
        sthiram āsanam ātmanaḥ
        nāty-ucchritaṁ nāti-nīcaṁ
        cailājina-kuśottaram

        tatraikāgraṁ manaḥ kṛtvā
        yata-cittendriya-kriyaḥ
        upaviśyāsane yuñjyād
        yogam ātma-viśuddhaye

So, "śucau deśe pratiṣṭhāpya". "śucau" is a secl..., is a sacred place. "śuci".
"śuci" means pure. "śucau" means that which is pure. Sanctified place. "deśe
pratiṣṭhāpya". In such a place, one situates oneself. "sthiram āsanam ātmanaḥ".
One situates oneself on a "sthiram āsanam". Steady "āsanam". "nāty-ucchritaṁ
nāti-nīcaṁ". One should not sit on a place that is too high or too low. If it is
too high, then what will happen? If one sits on a mountain top. Then, one will
do more of sightseeing than inward of meditation. And you know, what is here?
What is here? What is here? If it is too low, then one will not see. One goes
and sits inside a ditch. Something may come. And fall. And something may attack.
It may not be, you know, it may not be very secure.

        nāty-ucchritaṁ nāti-nīcaṁ
        cailājina-kuśottaram

So, "cailājina-kuśottaram" means what? Actually, one fixes the mind on, one uses
"cailājina-kuśottaram". "kuśa" is "kuśa" grass. And "cailājina" is in a tiger
skin. So, you know, there are certain materials which are meant..., recommended.
And they serve specific purposes. So, "cailājina". The tiger skin is recommended
because it keeps snakes away. So, it is not that the yogi has to kill a tiger to
get the tiger skin. No, generally, the tiger, when it died a natural death, then
its skin can be taken. So, deer skin is also used by some people. And the, the
idea is that, yoga, one of the principles of yoga, which we will discuss now is
a..., z..., ahimsa. So, actually, if one, one has to practice ahimsa, how can
one kill a tiger? Definitely not. So, "caila", th..., you know, that is used,
what is the, what, the tiger naturally dies, then its, its skin can be taken.
And simil..., similarly, Prabhupada would say that, actually, even if people
want to eat meat, let the animals die naturally. And then, they can eat the
meat. You know, eating meat directly is quite, you know, quite detrimental to
one's spiritual practice. Hmm. Killing animals and eating meat is quite
detrimental. So, you know, so, there can be deer skin. Or lion skin. Both are
used at different times. So:

        cailājina-kuśottaram
        tatraikāgraṁ manaḥ kṛtvā

Then, fix the mind steadily. "eka-agram". With one attention. And
"yata-cittendriya-kriyaḥ". And these actions of the "citta". The mind and
the "indriya". One f..., brings it under control. You know. You know. "manaḥ".
"indriya". "kriyaḥ". Actions. So, "upaviśyāsane yuñjyād". "upaviśya". You know.
"āsane". "upaviśyāsane" means situating on the asana. Sitting on the asana.
"yuñjyād". One engages in what? Yoga. What is the fo..., focus of yoga?
"ātma-viśuddhaye". So, for the sake of purification. So, this last line can be
used for meditating while japa, doing our japa, also.

        upaviśyāsane yuñjyād
        yogam ātma-viśuddhaye

You know, so, when we, in the morning, we sit down for our chanting. We think,
now, let me put everything else aside.

        tatraikāgraṁ manaḥ kṛtvā
        yata-cittendriya-kriyaḥ

This verse is a good verse for preparing our consciousness for, you know,
meditation. "ya...", "tatraikāgraṁ manaḥ". Now have, if there are any other
things to do in life. But this is not the time. This is the time for fixing
m..., you know, the mind on Krishna. "eka-agram". "manaḥ kṛtvā". And the mind is
going here and there. The sense is going to do this. Do that.
"yata-cittendriya-kriyaḥ". Let bring all of them under control. "upaviśyāsane
yuñjyād". Ok. Let me sit down. You know. And enjoy. What? Yoga. Hare Krishna Hare
Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare. For
what purpose? "ātma-viśuddhaye". "ātma-viśuddhaye". For the sake of
purification. This chapter talks about, you know, the process of sadhana, for
the sa..., you know, in ashtanga-yoga. But the principles are applie...,
applicable to all paths of yoga. And actually, among the all the 18 chapters of
the Bhagavad Gita. The Sixth Chapter offers the maximum guidelines for the
practice of sadhana. More than any other chapter. The Ninth Chapter talks about
"Rāja-vidyā". There, it is talking more about the glory of bhakti. Glory of
Bhagavan. Glory of bhakti. Similarly, the Twelfth Chapter talks about the glory
of bhakta. The qualities of bhakta. So, various chapters talk about different
subject matters. And they all give some hints about how devotees are. And what
is the glory of devotees. But in terms of practice of sadhana, this is the
chapter that gives us the most direct instructions. And these instructions, they
can be directly applicable to sadhana-bhakti. Or with slight modification, they
can apply to sadhana-bhakti, also. So, many verses in this chapter can be used
as a, guide..., guides. For, our, as in our sadhana. So, if one of them is just,
you know, we may not go to the forest. We may not sit on a deer skin when we
have to chant Hare Krishna. We may sit on a simple mat. Or a chair if we have
some back problems. Whatever. Wherever we are sitting. But the point is, we have
to become "upaviśyāsane yuñjyād". We sit in one place. "yogam ātma-viśuddhaye".
So, we, in some cases, some of us may not sit. Some of us may stand, also. Some
of us may walk while chanting. But either way, the point is, "yogam
ātma-viśuddhaye". When we walk and chant. You know. It is ok. Some people want.
Some devotees want to combine, you know, they want to do walking as an exercise.
They want to chant, also. If that is what they want to do, they have to be
careful that they do not get distracted while they are walking along. That is
why if somebody wants to walk and chant, it is better that they walk over a
small area. And not go for a walk. Because when we go for a walk, then we keep
seeing new, new scenery. And when we see new, new scenery. That means new, new
distractions. If we are are in a, walking on a small place again back and forth.
Back and forth. Then, there is nothing new to see outside. So, then, because
there are no distractions, then we get more impetus to fo..., you know, focus
the mind on Krishna. Or rather, there is less, you know, less thing which take
our mind away from Krishna. The mind has nothing to do. Then, the mind says, ok,
let me hear Krishna's names inwards. Let me do something which is fruitful. So,
in the purport, Prabhupada is constantly saying this point that one should chant
Hare Krishna. That is the way one can practice spiritual life in this age. So,
the best yoga for this age is chanting Hare Krishna. Now, Krishna will describe
the process of ashtanga-yoga further.

        samaṁ kāya-śiro-grīvaṁ
        dhārayann acalaṁ sthiraḥ
        samprekṣya nāsikāgraṁ svaṁ
        diśaś cānavalokayan

        praśāntātmā vigata-bhīr
        brahmacāri-vrate sthitaḥ
        manaḥ saṁyamya mac-citto
        yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

So, "samaṁ kāya-śiro-grīvaṁ". "kāya" is body. "śiraḥ" is head. "grīvaṁ" is the
neck. "samaṁ". So, all of them in a straight line. Sit straight. Most people sit
slumped. And sitting slumped also creates any back problems. So, sit straight.
Now, some people may say, oh, sitting straight. Yes. I like to sit. As soon as
we hear sit straight, then, normally, everybody starts sitting straight at that
time. But if we have to sit straight continuously for a long time, it is not
easy. Back starts paining. So, the yogis have to sit straight. "samaṁ
kāya-śiro-grīvaṁ". And then, not only straight. "dhārayann acalaṁ sthiraḥ". One
has to sit straight, also. Not looking here. Looking there. Looking. Just one
point. "dhārayann acalaṁ sthiraḥ". Where does one look? "samprekṣya nāsikāgraṁ
svaṁ". "samprekṣya" means look at. "nāsikā" is nose. "agram". "nāsikāgr...", 
"nāsikāgraṁ svaṁ". "āgraṁ svaṁ". So, what does it mean? Now, if you, if we
remember in 5.27-28, Krishna gave a brief description of ashtanga-yoga. And
there, He has talked about, you know, looking at the tip of the hair. "bhruvoḥ",
"maddhir". So, there, He said about looking at the tip of the hair. Now, He is
saying, tup..., look at the tip of the nose. So, where are we supposed to look?
The tip of the, tip of the, in-between the eyebrows, or at the tip of the nose?
So, actually, the point is, we have to have some focus of concentration. Which
is not very interesting. Because if it is too interesting, then what happen will
is, that will just stimulate our imagination and start thinking of other things.
So, actually, we will say, wha..., what is special about the tip of the, the tip
of the nose, or the n..., in-between the eyebrows? Nothing is special. So,
because nothing is special, it will, will, a, mind will not think of too many
external things. And then, we will be able to draw the mind inwards. Point is
focus. Focus. So, we need some object for concentration. Some object for
concentration is aided when we have some object for our vision. So, if
somebody closes the eyes, then tuck. It is quite likely that person falls
asleep. And, you know, the yogis are more, you know, troublesomely situated than
the bhaktas. Because bhaktas can g..., walk and chant, also. Yogis cannot do
yoga asana while walking. You know, if they have to, if they have to turn
inwards, pratyahara, dhyana, dharana, now, they cannot do all this while
walking. It all has to be done while sitting. So, that is why it is not
recommended you close the eyes. Sits. Fix the eyes at one particular time. And
"diśaś cānavalokayan". "diśaś cānala...", "navalokayan". Means what? Do not look
here and there. "anavalokayan". So, "lokayan" means to see. "loka" is the word
which is to see. So, "anavalokayan" can mean do not see here and there. Do not
look here. Do not look there. Do not be on a sightseeing mission. Just,
actually, one is focusing on turning inwards. And this is, so, generally, the
previous verse and in this verse. So, the eleventh verse was talking about
externals. Twelfth was talking about internals. So, similarly, here, thirteenth
is talking about externals. And fourteen is talking about internals. So, "samaṁ
kāya-śiro-grīvaṁ". The way we sit. All this is talking about externals. And
then, "praśāntātmā vigata-bhīr". One makes the mind peaceful. And one drives
away fear. "vigata-bhīr". It is not that a yogi is sitting in a jungle for
meditation. And then, you know, keeps a gun next to him. And when the tiger
comes along. I will take that and I will shoot a..., a..., a..., a..., yogi is
always thinking, oh, I am doing meditation on yoga. And the same time, I am
having a wondering. Will somebody come and steal my gun away or what? We cannot
do that. You know, so, we can see how difficult it is to practice, you know, to
go to the forest and do meditation. There are so many problems. First of all,
the biggest problem in Kali Yuga is there are very few forests remaining, only.

And even if one want..., you know, there are some forests remaining somewhere.
There are very few people who want to go to the forest. And even if there are
people who go to the forest, most of the forests, there are very few peaceful
places. You know, if there, if there are no dangerous animals in the forest,
there are s..., there are still much dang..., much more dangerous animals.
There are pirates. There are, you know, ne..., there are g..., boycotts. There
are terrorists. There are law-breakers of different kinds. So, it is not so easy
in Kali Yuga to do this process. Even the physical aspect of it. What to speak
of the internal aspect of it? So, "praśāntātmā vigata-bhīr". Then,
"brahmacāri-vrate sthitaḥ". So, one situates oneself in "brahmacārya".
"brahmacāri-vrate sthitaḥ". So, this is the, you know, first time in the
Bhagavad Gita that explicitly "brahmacārya" is being referred to in the Bhagavad
Gita. Earlier, in 4.26, you know, there is a referen..., reference indirectly:

        śrotrādīnīndriyāṇy anye
        saṁyamāgniṣu juhvati
        śabdādīn viṣayān anya
        indriyāgniṣu juhvati

So, there, Prabhupada explains that that refers to the bra..., unadulterated
"brahmacāri", naishthik "brahmacāris". And the regulated grihastas. But that was
an indirect reference. This is a first explicit reference in the Bhagavad Gita
to "brahmacārya". Although, the point of sense control has been talked
repeatedly right from the second chapter itself, m..., m..., wherein, Kri.., it
talk..., Krishna talked about "sthita-prajña". And the point of detachment is
always there. When Krishna is telling that, one should act without detachment.
It is, specifically, "brahmacārya" is a reference over here. When the person
goes to the jungle, the yogi, so, the yogi goes for doing yoga asanas. So, now,
you know, actually speaking, the yogi does not go with a yogini. They do not go,
not together. That women can also do yoga. But there is no mixing of the sexes
there. There has to be "brahmacārya".

So, here, now, the word "brahmacārya", there is a technical meaning. And there
is a generic meaning. The technical meaning is generally associated with
brahmacaris. Brahmacaris means it is a particular ashram. And males who do not
get married. And who fix, you know, their life in pursuit of brahman. They are
called as brahmacaris. So, Prabhupada there explains that simply bachelors are
not brahmacaris. So, those who are unmarried males, they do not, automatically,
you know, they are not brahmacaris. So, actually, one should be living in
"brahmacārya". In the sense, one should be trying "brahmacārati iti brahmacārī".
So, those who are trying to live in brahman. Those who are trying to move
towards brahman. Brahman is spiritual reality. So, in a technical sense, a,
males who choose not to marry and who focus on spiritual truth, they are
brahmacaris. But in a generic sense, anybody who is trying to do brahmacharan.
One who is trying to live in brahman. Who is li..., you know, try..., you know,
who is trying to pursue spiritual reality, that person is a brahmacari. So, in
that sense, even householders. Even females. They can be brahmacaris. Even
males, you know, who are married, they can be brahmacaris. So, there is a
principle. If one is living a life in pursuit of brahman, that is brahmacari.
Now, when Krishna is talking about over here, he is referring not just in a
generic sense. He is using in a technical sense over here. That one gives up
sexual abstinence. And one gives up sexual indulgence. And focuses on s...,
pursuing the brahmacari. Pursuing spiritual reality.

So, in this case, generally speaking, the path of yoga, in the Vedic culture was
followed by men. So, the women would generally, if, f..., for example, when,
say, Dhṛtarāṣṭra goes out to the forest. Gāndhārī also goes with her. You know.
But then, "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" is doing meditation. And "Dhṛtarāṣṭra", while doing
meditation, he brings out a fire from the, th..., his body. And then, "Gāndhārī"
enters into the fire. So, of course, women can also do austerities. And if they
do austerities, they also become purified. But generally, the focus has been on
male. So, women can also be brahmacaris. It is in that sense, if they are living
in, you know, in the pursuit of brahman. So, "brahmacāri-vrate sthitaḥ".
Prabhupada gives the definition, in the purport, of "brahmacārya". He gives the
definition as, in the rule of defin..., rule is given by "Yājñavalkya".

        karmaṇā manasā vācā
        sarvāvasthāsu sarvadā
        sarvatra maithuna-tyāgo
        brahmacaryaṁ pracakṣate

"pracakṣate". So, what is "brahmacaryaṁ"? With the s..., a, with one's actions.
With one minds. And with one's words. And in all places.

        sarvāvasthāsu sarvadā
        sarvatra ...

In all places, in all circumstances and all times. So, one gives up sex life.
"maithuna-tyāgo". That person is a brahmacari. So, now, Prabhupada explains in
the purport that, you know, how one can be a "brahmacaryaṁ". Actually, practices
"paraṁ dṛṣṭvā". You know, one gets the higher taste. Then, one is able to
practice it. Otherwise, it is very difficult. So, now, Prabhupada explains over
here:

"No one can perform correct yoga practice through sex indulgence."

So, "brahmacāri-vrate sthitaḥ". Now, when we talk about practicing a
"brahmacaryaṁ". The basic principle here is, one needs to regulate one's senses.
Because otherwise if one is to en..., engaging at the physical level. You know,
s..., sees sex is not just a physical activity. It is a physical activity. No
doubt. But it also drags our conscious to the physical level. And it keeps our
consciousness at a physical level for a long time. Very few things drag our
consciousness down. And keep our consciousness down at physical level as much as
sex. So, that is why if one wants to raise the consciousness higher towards
spiritual reality, this is a vital rule that one has to follow.
"brahmacāri-vrate sthitaḥ". And then, Krishna is telling over here "manaḥ
saṁyamya mac-citto". After it is fixing, after contr..., regulating the mind,
what has to be done? "mac-citto". Fix the mind on Me. And then, "yukta āsīta
mat-paraḥ". Now, actually, this is, "yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ" is something
identical to what Krishna told in 2.61. 2.61 was:

        tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya
        yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ
        vaśe hi yasyendriyāṇi
        tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

The person who has regulated the senses. And fixes the mind on Me. That person
will conquer the senses. And such a person is well-situated. "prajñā
pratiṣṭhitā". Krishna says. So, you know, at this stage, when the yogi is fixing
the mind on Krishna. What is He referring to? Krishna is revealing that
ultimately, the purpose of yoga is to fix the mind on Me. And when the purpose
of the yoga is to re..., attain Me. So, you know, actually, the yogis, when they
fix the mind, they are fixing the mind on Supersoul. Krishna is telling,
actually, it is, you know, here, Supersoul. The Supersoul is actually Me,
only. You know, my expansion. So, He, that is why He is saying, fix the mind on
Me. This is the first reference in the Sixth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita by
Krishna to Himself. Till now, He has talked about detachment. He has been
talking about, you know, realisation. He has been talking about equal vision,
seclusion. But, you know, the first time, He says, fix the mind on Me. Fix the
mind on Me. Now, when the yogis fixed the mind on Krishna, wh..., you know, on
the Supersoul, you know, at this stage, they may not realise that the Supersoul
is the ultimate goal. And that is the ultimate reality we realised. You know. It
depends on the mo..., m..., path that they are following. And the concept that
they have the Absolute Truth. But whatever if the concept they have. Fix, they
have to fix the mind on certain center. So, initially, one starts by fill...,
f..., fixing the eyes on the tip of the nose. But the mind needs some object for
meditation. And that object for meditation is Krishna. "manaḥ saṁyamya
mac-citto". Regulate the mind. And then, fix it on Me. Then, "yukta āsīta
mat-paraḥ". So, let us, you know, you know, discuss further about fixing the
mind on Krishna. And some further technicalities of the process of
ashtanga-yoga in our next class.

Thank you very much. Srimad Bhagavad Gita ki jaya.
