Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b2KXxsY2Dkw
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=HU3bDaiHOeuZ_e_vWHX_ohk9vrl8MTU0ODQ4ODA2NUAxNTQ4NDAxNjY1&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_076_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_05_Text_08_to_14_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=b2KXxsY2Dkw&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now into the Fifth Chapter. We discussed the first seven verses of the Fifth
chapter. This Fifth Chapter. Let us have a quick overview once again before we
move forward. And look at the sections. So, the first section was kal...,
karma-yoga is equal to, but easier than jnana-yoga. Then, we are now discussing
how karma-yoga keeps a person free from bondage. That is second section, seven
to sixteen. But by fixing the mind on atma, karma-yogi stays free from bondage.
So, seventh verse, we discussed was "kurvann api na li...":

        sarva-bhūtātma-bhūtātmā
        kurvann api na lipyate

Let us go to the eigth to nine verse now. These are, two are clocked together by
Srila Prabhupada:

        naiva kiñcit karomīti
        yukto manyeta tattva-vit
        paśyañ śṛṇvan spṛśañ jighrann
        aśnan gacchan svapañ śvasan

        pralapan visṛjan gṛhṇann
        unmiṣan nimiṣann api
        indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu
        vartanta iti dhārayan

So, "naiva kiñcit karomīti". "naiva". Certainly not. "kiñcit". Even a little.
"karomi", "iti". I am doing. "karomi" means I am doing. I do. "iti". One does
not think like this. So, one doe..., th..., the "yukto manyeta tattva-vit".
"tattva-vit" is the person who is the knower of the truth. Such a person
"manyeta". Such a person thinks what? That person is well-engaged, does not
think, thi..., you know, thinks that I am not the doer of anything. And what are
the things which are, He is talking about? "paśyañ śṛṇvan spṛśañ jighrann". So,
these are actions of the various senses. So, first, there are the senses which
take things in word. And kno..., knowledge acquiring sense. "paśyañ" is seeing.
"śṛṇvan" is hearing. "spṛśañ" is touching. "jighrann" is smelling. "aśnan" is
eating. So, these are the ways in which we take things inside the body. And
then, "gacchan" is going here and there. "gacchan svapañ śvasan". "śvasan".
"svapañ" is, you know, "svapañ" is sleeping, dreaming. "śvasan" is the, m...,
s..., breathing. Then, "pralapan". "pralapan" is talking. "visṛjan" is giving
up. "gṛhṇann" is accepting. So, these are the various ways in which we can take
things inside the body. And send things outside the body. "unmiṣan nimiṣann
api". "unmiṣan" is closing the eyes. Opening the eyes.

        indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu
        vartanta iti dhārayan

So, "dhārayan". What does one understand? The, "yuk...", "tattva-vit", the
person one is a knower understands that simply the senses are coming in contact
with the sense objects. Nothing more is happening. So, actually, you know, what
is Krishna telling over here? That the wise person understands that when so many
things happen with the body, I am not actually the doer of those things. We may
think I am the body. For example, I think I am speaking right now. And I am
using this body for doing various things. Now, at one level, it is true. I am
speaking. But that is hardly the complete picture. You know, a, modern scien...,
we will understand this at different levels. We will first understand at a
scientific level. Then, we will understand it at a philosophical level. So, if
we look at scientific level, you know, in the body, there i..., there are
different kinds of activities that happen. So, there are some activities which
we do consciously. For example, now, I want to s..., you know, explain something
with an expression, then I will raise my hand. Or I will move my hand. These
are a, things which I do consciously. And then, there is something which happen
unconscious..., subconsciously in the body. For example, while I am speaking, I
do not forget to breathe. You know, I, I, it is not that I have to remember to
f..., breathe. It is just that it happens subconsciously. So, now, you know,
there are various kinds of diseases in the body. Where sometimes in so..., in
some people because of some brain damage or some nervous tissue damage. The
nervous system damage. The peop..., the people, there, there, whatever is
happening, you know, involuntarily in the body. That, they do not, they cannot
make it happen. That means whatever happens involuntarily in the body, they, you
know, it does not happen involuntarily. They have to do it consciously. For
example, there is a disease. When people, you know, they, they stop breathing.
If they are not conscious about it. That will consciously remind. Oh, I have to
breathe. And this, these people, whenever they fall asleep, you know, they will
die of, you know, breathlessness if they swal..., fall asleep. Because their
body in a sense, because of some damage to the, a, a, nervous system, the sys..,
ped..., the involuntarily nervous system. They just, the body forgets to
breathe. It is a nightmarish kind of disease. That the person just cannot sleep.
And there are, in some cases, people, they, they have to, every time they sleep,
they have to put in artificial neural system, artificial respiratory system. And
only then, they can breathe. And similar, the aritificial respiratory system, if
it does not work, then the body will forget to sleep. And they will, in their
sleep, only, they will die. And no one will come to know about them, only. They
will, so, not realise it at all. So, now, resea..., researchers have found out
that if we had to be consciously aware so that the various bodily functions
could happen, then we would have such an overload on our brain that we would
become dysfunctional. We would not be able to do anything. For example, when we
eat food, we do not, you know, we may have to remind ourselves, ok, I have to
chew it. Like that, also happens most of the time con..., a, subconsciously
only. And generally, if we forget it, we will just gulp the food down very fast.
We will not be very conscious of its taste. But either way, the food goes down
the body. After that, what happens? After that, nobody knows what happens
actually? We do not know at least. Some researchers may know. But now, if we had
to remember, oh, now, the food is going down the alimentary canal. Now, of, the
alimentary canal has to compress. Then, it has to expand. Then, it has to
compress. Then, it has to expand. And then, a, the, when the appropriate
reactions have to happen in the stomach. If we had to be conscious of all these
things, we would not be able to be conscious of anything else in life. You know,
if we had to be conscious about breathing, about digestion, about blood
circulation. Oh, heart, now, you must beat. Now, compress. Now, expand. Now,
compress. Now, expand. And that is how the blood will go all over the body. Now,
if we had to be conscious of all these things, we would have a tremendous
overload on our brain. You know. So, it is a great relief that we do not have to
be conscious about all these things. But how do these things happen? So, I
understand the, they, this automatically happening. Actually, we discussed
earlier how automatically simply means that we do not know who is in control and
how that, how that control is happening. But that doe..., a, it does not mean
absen..., automatically does not mean absence of control. Automatically simply
means absence of awareness of control. You know. Absence of awareness of
control. So, who is controlling? Actually, it is, Supersoul is controlling.

        mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

"mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ. So, actually, even through sci..., a, "maya...", that
is, refers to 9.10 in the Bhagavad Gita where Krishna says I am the controller.
So, in this way, if we think deeply, there is so much in our own body that is
happening that is not a..., a..., although it is necessary for it to be done so
that the body can function, but it happens without our conscious awareness. So,
we are not even aware of it. In fact, you know, we eat food. And we enjoy the
taste if it is good. And we curse the taste if it is bad. But afterwards, who
does the digestion? You know, actually, the only time we think about our
digestion is when it does not work. You know, my stomach is upset today. Why is
the ups..., stomach upset? So, practically, the only time we think about
digestion is when it does not work. But at other times, when the digestion does
work, at that time, what happens? We do not even think about it. So, who is
doing all this? It is not actually we who are doing it. It, so, with respect to
these things, we can say that, I am not the doer. You know, the, also, there,
so, actually, science tells us how much we, how much is happening in the body
for which we are not the doers. So, "naiva kiñcit karomīti". I am not doing any
of these things. We can say this. So, to some extent, science makes us aware of
th..., our own ignorance with respect to the complexity of the mechanisms by
which the body works and repairs itself. You know, when a wound happens, you
know, we might just decide, ok, I will put some turmeric. I will put some
band-aid. I will put some antiseptic. That is all that we do. But what does our
medication do? The medication basically would be useless if there would not be
an inbuilt healing process that ableisms are there in the body. The clotting
takes place in the body. So, if these mechanisms were not there, then the body
would not be able to function. And our, or medication primarily assists the body
in healing itself. These are, doctor was, said that, you know, most of medicine
is essentially entertaining the patient while the body heals itself. So, most of
medicine is what? Entertaining the patient. Told the la..., patient, too
worried. Ah, this will go down. That will go down. Just, they will be alright.
Take, keep taking these medicines. So, actually, the medicines are not the
primary cure. The body's own healing system is the primary cure. The medicines
do help. No doubt. And we should take the medicines ca..., responsibly. Because
the body's healing system may need some assistance at times. But the medicines
would not be of much help if the body's healing system itself are not working.
And that is what happens at, sometimes when diseases like AIDS. When people get
AIDS, at that time, the immune system, tha..., that is there. The immun...,
immunodiffusion s..., immunodiffusion system of the body, that stops working.
And then, what happens it, a, any small infection can turn out to become lethal
and then fatal. So, beco..., a, so, actually, the body's defense mechanism
itself collapses, then medicines can go only so far in helping the person. They
cannot help b..., beyond a particular point. Because a body's defense mechanism
itself has collapsed. So, that way, we can say there is so much in the body for
which we are not the doers. "naiva kiñcit karomīti". You know. You know. Now,
beyond what happens at a sub..., at an unconscious level, at what other their
in..., co..., at an involuntarily level, even what are the, happen at the
voluntarily level, we are not always in control.

You know, for example, I am moving my hand right now. So, now, if suppose, I get
an ache. Or I get a paralysis. Then, I find move my hand. I am here. My hand is
here. But I cannot move it. Or sometimes, people get some disease like
Parkinson's. And when they get the disease, then what happens is, the, the, one
loses control over one's motor nervous system. That time, also, we can
understand, wha..., I am not the doer. I thought I was moving my hand around. But I
have losed the..., lost that power. So, now, when we say, oh, those are natural
conditions. Naturally, we are the doers. But in certain unnatural conditions, we
stop being the doers. However, our living in the body itself is temporary. So,
when our staying in the body is temporary. Our association with the body is
temporary. Within that temporary association with the body, for some time, we
are able to do some things. You know, for some time, we are not able to do some
things. So, what essentially is the, you know, difference. Wha..., how do we
say that one is natural, one is unnatural? You know, both things happen. And
yes, majo..., for majority of people, the things may not happen. But that does
not mean that they are the doer. That simply means that the system is in place
by which the illusion that they are the doers can continue. And when the system,
you know, changes its way of functioning, then that they cannot continue the
illusion. So, that is all at a scientific level. Now, looking at a philosophical
level, they can understand that the material nature is working. Now, I as a soul
do not really have much to do with the body. I am just currently in a body. You
know, person may be in a, a soul may be in non-human body. And then, comes to
human body. And may that, after that, go, again go back to non-human body. So,
the soul in a, say, dog's body cannot do anything except bark. If it wants to
communicate. It cannot speak any, any of the human languages. So, how do I, if I
am in a human body. And next life, I have to again go to a dog's body. Or I go
to a horse's body where I am going to neigh. So, how do I produce that
particular sound? I do not know anything about it. It is just that along with
that body, "śarīra-bandhaḥ". You know. "śarīra-yogaṁ". When we become mounted in
the body. When we get connected with the body. Whatever are the faculties that
are associated with the body, the soul starts expressing its desires according
to those faculties. So, actually, you know, that means the body is a mechanism.
And becau..., according to that mechanism, people work. So, when we understand
this, then we understand that, actually, I am not the doer. I am not the doer.

        indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu
        vartanta iti dhārayan

Let us try to understand this concept of doership more. So, now, if we look at
this point of who is the doer. So, we have discussed this briefly earlier. But
let us focus on this now. If the soul is not the doer, it raises several
questions. Whose reactions is the soul getting? And whom are the scriptures
meant for? So, if it were the absolute statement the soul is not the doer at
all, then if the soul is not the doer, then the soul should not be the reaper of
the reactions, also. Yet, we said it the soul will get the reactions, isn't it?
M..., m..., we said that the soul gets the reactions. And the scriptures also
consider soul to be responsible. Scriptures say, you should do this. You should
not do this. So, the point is not to say that the soul is not absolutely, is, in
absolute sense, a non-doer. The point is to convey that,  the soul is not the
karta means, the soul is not the "svatantra karta", is not an independent doer.
Not an independent doer. Soul is a dependent doer. Soul works in coordination
with other elements. Let us understand this with an example. Soul is not the
independent doer. How is it not the independent doer? Let us look at it. So,
now, we will discuss this. If the tree is the karta, sorry, the tree is cut.
A..., Axe is the instrumental cause. And woodcutter is the initiating cause. So,
both causes are important. For actions, in the world, prakrti, material nature,
is the instrumental cause. And jiva is the initiating cause. So, you know, if a
soul is in a human body, then a soul is in a dog's body, in a human body, and
then goes into a horse's body. So, now, the, the soul is the initiating cause.
Say, the soul wants to communicate something. So, now, that, c..., soul is the
initiating cause with the desire to communicate. But the instrumental cause is
different. So, in a dog, the dog's voice box is different. The human being's
voice bok is difference. And the horse's voice box is d..., voice box is
difference. So, therefore, the sound that comes out will be different. So, the
instrumental cause is different. So, when a, somebody want to cut a tree, now,
somebody may use an axe. Somebody may use a machine axe. And somebody may use a
tree. A..., somebody, so, some may use a huge, a, bulldozer sort of thing which
just, you know, plows down trees. That may vary. So, the instrumental cause can
be different. And the way, the action will work out will be different
accordingly. So, we have been given a particular instrument. And this instrument
that is primarily acting. Although, our desire is the initiator. But it is the
instrument that is the executor. So, now, moving forward with this poi...,
understanding, another example is, now, when the criminal is put into jail. When
the criminal is put in jail, who is the doer at that time? The police is the
instrumental cause. The judge is the sanctioning cause. And the criminal is the
initiating cause. So, now, all three are involved. Isn't it? So, if there is, if
the criminal had not done a wrong, then the criminal would not have gotten into
jail. So, the criminal is the initiating cause. But even after the criminal does
something, it is the police who have to arrest. So, the police are the
instrumental cause who take the criminal into the jail. Ca..., catch the
criminal and pu..., put him in jail. And then, the sentence in jail is sactioned
by the judge. So, in the act of jailing the criminal, all three are involved.
The police. The judge. And the criminal. So, like that, when the soul suffers.
Material nature is the instrumental cause.  So, if a, I, if I, if somebody gets
a cough. Somebody gets a stomach upset. So, it is the body that is suffering.
So, the material nature is the instrumental cause. Supersoul is the sanctioning
cause. Supersoul is the sanctioning cause. Supersoul sanctions.

        upadraṣṭānumantā ca

And the soul is the initiating cause. So, actually, it is we who have done
certain karma for which we are meant to get certain reactions. So, we get the
reactions according to time, place, circumstance. And according to what is best
for our ev..., eventual reformation. So, in this way, we understand who is the
karta. The karta is actually all three. Let us understand this with one more
example, now. It is a diagram with a depiction of this over here. So, here, what
you see in the shade of v..., blue. That whole box, rectangular box. That is the
conditioned soul. Now, the conditioned soul, when the conditioned soul is in the
body. At that time, the soul is there. The Supersoul is there. And then,
material nature is there. Now, how do things work? See, there is s..., there is
sense object which is perceived. And the soul has perceived the sense object,
so, the in..., input of the sense object comes in and then the input comes in on
the sense object, so, the input comes in from here, like this. Then, after that,
the soul desires. And now, the soul of course desires the sense object. This,
that means desire goes outward. But the chain of execution, how it works? When
the desires, the soul desire..., the soul intends, that is Su..., that is
perceived by the Supersoul is present in the heart. And then, the Supersoul
sanctions. Now, when the Supersoul sanctions, at that time, material nature then
executes its. And then, the person engages in sense gratification. You know, but
this is how, a, we engage in activities. So, now, if we look at this carefully,
who are all the doers? The soul is the doer in the sense of being the desirer.
In the sense of being the initiator. Supersoul is sanctioner. And material
nature is the executor. So, all three are the doers. Now, what is the point of
the Gita verse over here?

        naiva kiñcit karomīti

So, what it means is:

        indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu
        vartanta iti dhārayan

        vartanta iti dhārayan

That simply the senses are coming in contact with the sense objects. So, what
does it mean is, is that, a, there is no, there are some inevitable needs of the
body which have to be fulfilled. And those are fulfilled. But beyond that, there
is no further requirement to try to, a, engage in sense gratification. Because
the soul is not motivated by material desire. When the soul is not motivated by
material desire, then there is no further, you know, stimulation to do sensual
activities. And that is why the person stays protected. So, person does not get
bound. So, in this case, what will happen for a detached soul? What will happen
for a detached soul? So, actually, that means there is no, there is no desire
for sense gratification. There is "indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu". So, material nature
means the senses. So, then, the, you know, body needs some food. So, then,
material nature basically, the sou..., the, so, the soul is inside the body. The
soul is here. And the body is a vehicle. And the body needs some fuel for the
vehicle. So, then, the food comes inside the body. And when the food is going
inside the body, the person does not think, oh, I am going to enjoy this food.

        indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu
        vartanta iti dhārayan

You know, the senses are coming in se..., contact with sense objects. Now, we
may wonder, if a person does not desire, how can one eat food? You know, one
will have to have certain desire to eat food. Yes. The desire to eat food can be
there. But the desire while eating food can be, do, eat to live, or eat to
enjoy. So, now, when we eat to live, then there, there is no enjoying mentality
over there. When there is eat to enjoy, then the enjoying mentality comes. Takes
hold. And then, that can, you know, implicate one in karmic bondage. So:

        indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu
        vartanta iti dhārayan

When one is engaged, one is engaged in contact with the senses and sense objects.
Then, there is no bondage involved over there. 

        indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu
        vartanta iti dhārayan

So, now, let us understand this more. This is a very important concept to
understand in the Bhagavad Gita. And Prabhupada explains how, you know, this is,
a devotee acts for the sense gratification of Krishna. Hmm. For the pleasure of
Krishna. Uses all senses in Krishna's service. Now, that Krishna will introduce,
that we will point through in the verse:

        brahmaṇy ādhāya karmāṇi
        saṅgaṁ tyaktvā karoti yaḥ
        lipyate na sa pāpena
        padma-patram ivāmbhasā

So, when the soul offers the karma. To whom? "brahmaṇy ādhāya karmāṇi". "ādhāya"
means to offer, to resign, to hand over. So, when one does one's karma, what
does one think? Oh, this is for the Absolute Truth. This is, so, d...,
Prabhupada explains it from the devotional perspective. "saṅgaṁ tyaktvā karoti
yaḥ". So, when one gives up attachment and acts. Such a person, "lipyate na sa
pāpena". Such a person does not become bound by karma. Why? Because that person
is like "padma-patram ivāmbhasā". So, "ambhasā". "ambhasā" is water.
"padma-patram" is lotus. So, "brahmaṇy ādhāya karmāṇi". So, when we offer the
work to the Absolute Truth. Now, the word brahman, the achar..., Baladeva
Vidyabhushana. So, different acharyas explain the brahman in different ways. So,
it will depend on what is the conception. For a bhakta, bhakta will understand
brahman is actually Bhagavan. And Prabhupada is explaining from that
perspective. That the bra..., for the brahman, the, for the bhakta, brahman be
a, Bhagavan. The devotee offers all the work to Krishna, and thus for uses all
the sensory activities for Krishna's pleasure. The karma-yogi may not know at
this stage that, actually, the Absolute Truth is Bhagavan. So, what does the
karma-yogi do? The karma-yogi will work understanding that it is material nature
that is acting. So, the word brahman can also be used to refer to material
nature. This will happen in the Fourteenth Chapter. You know, thi..., third and
fourth verses, Krishna talks about where brahman refers to material nature. He
says that, m..., "sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya", "mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ". "sa...":

        sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya
        mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

A..., m..., so, there, He says, a...:

        brahma mahad yonir
        ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

So, there, He says that "brahma mahad yonir". So, the great womb, that womb is
referring to, He uses the word brahman to explain that. But that womb refers to
m...:

        sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya
        mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

"sarv...", so, basically, Krishna is telling "sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya". All living
beings, what happens? They get their forms within the womb of material nature.
"mūrtayaḥ". So, the "mūrtayaḥ" refers here to the forms. So, they get the form
through material nature. And the great womb, "ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā". Krishna
says, I give the seed. And who is it that gives the seed? It is actually Krishna
that gives the seed. And who is it that uses the seed? The person who uses the
seed is that m..., tha...,  that is material nature. So, material nature is
ref..., used, referred to by the word brahman over here. So, "ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ
pitā". "brahma mahad yonir". So, the word brahman can refer to material nature,
also. And here, w..., if the person does not know about the Absolute Truth. That
person may think, ok, it is material nature acting. So, I am not acting in this
way. So, when one thinks in this way. So, when one does not, you know, get
oneself emotionally involved in the actions of material nature. When one does
not think that I am the doer. I am the enjoyer. Then, that person does not
become bound. And the example for that is, given is "padma-patram ivāmbhasā".
"padma-patram". "padma" is lotus. So, now, lotus has this characteristic that
even if water falls on, it, lotu..., water just slips away. The lotus flower
does not stay wet for very long. In fact, if there is some dirt on it, also,
wa..., the wat..., dirt also gets slipped o..., o..., o..., washed off. And the
water also gets washed off. So, it does not stay wet. So, "padma-patram
ivāmbhasā" means, wa..., the karma does not bind to the soul. The karma just
washes off. Because there is no emotional attachment which will bind the soul.
So, now, actually, this property of lotus is so remarkable that has, it has
been exp..., it has been utilised even by the, you know, commercial industry.
You know, there are reseachers who observed how is that lotus, it does not,
wa..., water does not stick to it. And by observing the m..., m..., way a lotus
leaf is constructed. Then, its surface density i..., its surface tension, and
its surface construction, and all those things, wa..., by ob..., observing them,
researchers have replicated that. And then, when they have to, they make
skyspirit..., big skyscraper buildings. Now, these skyscraper buildings are
meant to be, loo..., look very good, also. But they have to be clean. Now, how
will you clean the? How will somebody clean them? You cannot have people
climbing on boa..., on ladders every day to clean these skyscraper buildings.
So, they des..., a, they have designed with lotus and facades. What is? They
called as lotus and facades. Facade means front face. Lotusen means they are
like lotus. So, if just water is sprinkled from above. Then, that water, they
are made, the facade, the, their walls are made in such a way that nothing
sticks too much to them. So, when water goes off, water also slips off. And
along with that, water cleanses the way, whatever dust particles are there,
only. And in this way, they stay clean. So, "padma-patram ivāmbhasā". So, a
devotee who is working in the material world can similarly stay detached, can
say "padma-patram ivāmbhasā", if that devotee works in this way. In what way?
"brahmaṇy ādhāya karmāṇi". So, Prabhupada quotes how Krishna is curiatriating
what He has said in 3.30.

        mayi sarvāṇi karmāṇi sannyasya

So, Prabhupada translates brahman, "brahmaṇy", Supreme Personality of Godhead.
And for that, he correlates this with 3.30 saying that, Krishna is, already says,
give your work to me, unto me. Same thing is being said over here. And
Prabhupada also quotes that m..., he quotes the, now, he quotes also this:

"material world is a sum total manifestation of the three modes of material
nature, technically called the pradhāna."

And

"The Vedic hymns sarvaṁ hy etad brahma (Māṇḍūkya Upaniṣad 2), tasmād etad brahma
nāma rūpam annaṁ ca jāyate (Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.1.9), and, in the Bhagavad-gītā
(14.3), mama yonir mahad brahma indicate that everything in the material world
is a manifestation of Brahman;"

So, you know, that means even the material nature is a manifestation of brahman.
Prabhupada does not develop that point over here. But he does mention that
point. So, in this way, Krishna is a..., addressing Arjuna's question of how a
person while working in the material world can stay free from bondage. So, now,
what is the motivation for such a person to work? If one is not going to be
involved. One should not have an emotional desire for the result. One should not
be attached to the result. And what will be the motivation for working? Krishna
says, purification. That He addresses in this verse.

        kāyena manasā buddhyā
        kevalair indriyair api
        yoginaḥ karma kurvanti
        saṅgaṁ tyaktvātma-śuddhaye        

So, "kāyena manasā". So, with the body. With the mind. With the intelligence.
And even with the senses.

        kevalair indriyair api
        yoginaḥ karma kurvanti

The yogi work. For what purpose? "saṅgaṁ tyaktvā". If I have given up the
attachment, there will be no reason for me to work. But I work for
"ātma-śuddhaye". For the sake of purification. "ātma-śuddhaye". So, now, you
know, we can practice spiritual life at various levels. We know the, we had
discussed this, fear, desire, duty and love. So, fear is, oh, if I do not obey
God, I will be punished. Therefore, let me obey God. The desire is actually
where as if I obey God, He will give me some good results. Duty c..., you know,
is the level where sadhana-bhakti is performed. Duty refers to the level where,
now, duty can mean various things. But for us as transcendentalists who are
practicing bhakti-yoga. It is at the level of duty where our, you know, m...,
our motivation for practicing spiritual life is, so, I want to follow the
instructions of my spiritual master, of Krishna, ultimately. So that I will
become purified. So that I will become elevated. So that I will ultimately
become elevated and return back to Krishna. So, "kevalair indriyair api".
"indriyair api". So, you know, why "indriyair api"? Now, it is remarkable the
senses can also be involved. The idea is that, you know, there can be two
meanings of this. One meaning is that that even if the mind is not involved, at
least, let the senses be involved. That means that, suppose, we are chanting
Hare Krishna. Now, somehow, we are not able to concentrate while chanting. So,
ok. Even if I am not able to concentrate, at least, do the external to be
spiritual. At least, chant. At least, let the senses gain. Ok, "kevalair".
"kevalair" can mean at least the senses. Or "kevalair" can mean even the senses.
So, normally, the idea is that in spiritual life, or, the senses are the cause
of bondage. And one should have minimum engagement for the senses. But the
process of purification, the active method of yoga. There is active method of
yoga. And there is a contemplative method of yoga. The contemplative method of
yoga is centered around more of the jnani process. Who, one sits and point us,
I am not the body. I am the soul. Naiti. Naiti. That is one way of doing things.
The other way of doing things is active. Use the senses in Krishna's service.
So, we use the eyes to behold th..., Krishna's form. We use the tongue to speak
about Krishna. And in this way, "saṅgaṁ tyaktvātma-śuddhaye". We can work for
our purification. So, even the senses, which normally cause bondage, can lead to
liberation if we engage them properly. So, at the final stage, when we are
purified, if the senses themselves can bring us ecstasy. You know, the senses
cause us bondage and agony in material existence. At the pure stage, the senses
can bring us ecstasy. So, we have, m..., cur...., Rupa Goswami, for example,
saying that, he, there is a famous verse:

        tuṇḍe tāṇḍavinī ratiṁ vitanute tuṇḍāvalī-labdhaye

He says that when I chant the holy names, you know, I get so much nectar in 
chanting of holy names that I feel that I should have hundreds and thousands of
mouth. And I should have crores of ears. Why? So that I can relish the nectar
of, the nectar is so much that:

        no jāne janitā kiyadbhir amṛtaiḥ kṛṣṇeti varṇa-dvayī

I do not know what, know how much nectar is there in these holy names. So, now,
we, this is, you know, this is a know..., this is at, a statement of ignorance.
Which is not a statement of ignorance, actually. It is a statement of amazement.
It is statement of wonder. So, somebody will, dives into the ocean. And goes
deep, and deep, and deep. And really realises how big the ocean is. That person
comes out and says, I do not know how big this ocean is. It is amazing. So, you
know, I do not know how big the ocean is. When I understand this, at that time,
I become purified because, so, here, because I know that, actually, this ocean
is so big. You know, so, I say that it is not big enough. So, that is the way,
the senses, "kevalair indriyair api". I act according to my senses because I act
according to the senses, because the senses give me ecstasy. So, currently, our
senses cause us agony. We see sense objects. And we crave for them. And we want
them. And no, we are not meant to take them, enjoy them. And there is so much
battle. They cause us agony. At the pure stage, they will bring us ecstasy. But
in-between to go from agony to ecstasy through the senses. We have to have
tolerance. We have to have patience. We have to have determination. So,
steadily, we engage in, you know, the process of bhakti, a, process of
purification. So, even the senses can be engaged. Normally, the senses are to be
put aside. We have discussed this principle in 2.58 in the Bhagavad Gita when it
is said that just as a tortoise withdraws all its limbs, wi..., wimb..., limbs
inside. You know:

        yadā saṁharate cāyaṁ
        kūrmo ’ṅgānīva sarvaśaḥ        

Just as a tortoise withdraws all its, you know, you know, limbs inside.
Similarly, we can also withdraw all our limbs inside, all our senses inside. So,
that is one way of acting. But here, the point is, "kevalair indriyair api".
Even the senses can be engaged for purification. In fact, the process of bhakti
is, in many ways, sensory spirituality. You know, this word, sensuous refers to
that which is, generally word, the word se..., sensory and sensuous. Both are
adjectives that come from sense. Senses. You know, we have senses. We have eyes,
ears. So, sens..., the word sensuous refers to that which is, which is
materially titillating. So, sensuous. The sensuous forms. Sensuous objects. That
means if those which attract the senses. Which, which agitate the senses.
Sensory is used more in the functional sense. So, functional means, yes, it is
sensory perception, may say. We do not just sensuous perception. Sensory
perception means whatever we are perceiving with our senses. So, s..., you know,
bhakti is sensory spirituality. Sensory spirituality means, it is, senses are
actively involved in the process of spirituality. In the process of
purification. And in this way, one makes spiritual advancement. And one returns
back to Krishna, gradually. So, here, the remarkable point is, even the senses
can be involved. Even the senses. So, "kevalair indriyair api". "kevalair
indriyair api". You know, so, when this way, by engaging this way, we will
become purified. So, the same tongue, which was causing us bondage by speaking
nonsense. The same tongue when we speak about Krishna, can purify us. It can
elevate us. It can liberate us. So, now, Prabhupada quotes the verse again from
Rupa Goswami about "jīvan-muktaḥ". So, we discussed about different kinds of
"muktaḥ"s earlier, will mention, is the Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, 1.2.87 say...,
1.2.187 says that here, also, the point is one is using the "girā".

        īhā yasya harer dāsye
        karmaṇā manasā girā

So, body, the mind and the senses. When one engages, such a person is
"jīvan-muktaḥ". Such a person is actually liberated. So, there are various
different kinds of "muktaḥ"s. So, who are the different kinds of "muktaḥ"s?
Yeah. So, we will discuss about jivan mukta and videha mukta. So, "jīvan-muktaḥ"
is the person who has a deha. Who has a body. But is liberated from all material
detachments. So, and so, he is pow..., all practical purposes, liberated. So,
that person is in the body. But is liberated because the person has no material
attachments. O..., what causes bondage is the attachments. Videha mukta is the
person who has left the body and has gone back to the spiritual world. Now, Jiva
Goswami also talks about three types of maha-bhagavats. So, he talks about those
who are gunatita and svarupa-siddha. Then, he talks about those who are gunatita,
but not svarupa-siddha. Then, they are, th..., third is, not gunatita, not
svarupa-siddha, but still, they are sthira. Let us see what this means. Those
who are gunatita and svarupa-siddha means that they have transcended the three
modes. And they have realised the svarupa in the spiritual world. See, we, you
know, we discussed earlier about the negative axis and the positive axis. So,
gunatita means one has gone from the negative axis to zero. And svarupa-siddha
means one has advanced on the positive axis till one has realised one's svarupa.
All of us have an eternal spiritual relationship with Krishna. And that is based
on a particular form that we have. Think we are gopar, or gopi, or whatever. Our
svarupa is in the spiritual world. And we are a..., we all have that svarupa.
And as we make spiritual advancement, we may realise what is our svarupa. So,
there is, there are these souls who have not only moved out from the negative.
But they also moved forward in the positive. They are gunatita. And they are
svarupa-siddha, also. So, these are souls. They may be in the material world.
But they are actually for all practical purposes in the spiritual world. You
know, we have pastimes of, say, Raghunatha dasa Goswami. At such times, he
says tha..., sometimes, he says that, you know, the, he was a, he was very
austere person who would practically eat a little butter milk once in two-three
days. But at one time, he was sick. And the vaidya, the, you know, the doctor
who came there. He said that, he has got stomach upset because of overeating.
Now, all the disciples and associates are going to say, they were, a..., just so
angry with the doctor. What kind of nonsense diagnosis are you doing? You know,
he eats nothing. It was almost like blasphemy of Raghunatha dasa Goswami. How
can you say that he eats? He does not eat anything practically. How could he
have overeaten? When Raghunatha dasa Goswami was told about this.  He said, yes,
actually, you know, there is a cele..., festival in the spiritual world.  You
know, and in the spiritual master..., ma..., a, world, Rādhārāṇī and Rasaki has
cooked. And they had cooked kheer. And I ate a lot of kheer. So, when I ate a
lot of kheer, that is how my stomach has got upset. So, actually, what has
happened, in the spiritual world. So, the, now, the, now, it is not that in the
spiritual world, we will have Raghunatha dasa Goswami as Raghunatha dasa
Goswami. You know. He is not a Goswami over there. He is a manjari over there.
So, he is a manjari, is an intimate associate of Radharani and the sakhis. So,
you know, you know, that means he is, here acting at a, at the, as a Goswami.
But he is also aware of his svarupa. And he is acting at the level of svarupa,
also. So, when the soul becomes svarupa-siddha, the soul has the capacity to act
at both levels. At the svarupa-siddha level. At this level, also. So, these are
souls who both feet are situated in the spiritual world. You know, the both feet
are spiritual, soul is as good as back in the spiritual world, only. You know,
waiting just for the body to, you know, lead, body to exhaust its tenure in the
material world. And once its tenure is exhausted, the soul will return back to
the spiritual world. Then, there is gunatita. But not svarupa-siddha. That is
second category. That means that a person has a, so, negative axis, positive
axis, the person has gone through the negative axis, beyond the negative axis.
But has not yet advanced very far in the spiritual, positive axis. That means he
has not realised the svarupa till now. That person is also actually considered
jivan mukta. Because the person is no longer influenced by the three modes. And
then, there can also be third category. These people also consider great souls.
They are, you know, they are not gunatita. And they are not svarupa-siddha.
B..., so, they, so, second category is, the souls who has, one leg is in the
spiritual world. One leg is in the material world. Hmm. But for those who are
third category. Both their legs are in the material world. But their eyes are
fixed on the material world. They are not looking here and there. See, what are
the, what is the pleasure available in the materialist? Their eyes are fixed on
the spiritual world. On the spiritual world. And on the spiritual world alone.
So, they are the topmost souls. Nor gunatita. Not so, a, so, those are the, they
are not topmost among all the souls who are still in the conditioned stage. And
they are moving towards liberated. So, they are as good as liberated because
they are not looking. They are not craving for the things of this world. So, of
course, the highest is gunatita and svarupa-siddha. But all three are, to
various degrees, jivan mukta. So, Kr..., here, Krishna is saying that peo...,
souls who get this conception, they work for the process of purification. And
they attain liberation. That He will tell in the next verse. So:

        yuktaḥ karma-phalaṁ tyaktvā
        śāntim āpnoti naiṣṭhikīm
        ayuktaḥ kāma-kāreṇa
        phale sakto nibadhyate

So, "yuktaḥ". Such a person who is well-situated. Who is connected with the
Absolute Truth. "karma-phalaṁ tyaktvā". Such a person gives up attachment to the
fruits of work. And then, "śāntim āpnoti". Such a person attains peace. What
kind of peace? "naiṣṭhikīm". "naiṣṭhikīm" means unflappable. Unshakable. And
then, "ayuktaḥ kāma-kāreṇa". The person who is "ayuktaḥ". The person who is not
connected with the Absolute Truth. Such a person acts because of "kāma-kāreṇa".
Person acts because of lust. Of selfish desire. And because that person is
motivated as "phale sakto", is motivated by the desire for the fruits. So,
"nibadhyate". "nibadhyate" means, such a person becomes bound. Becomes bound.
So, there is a difference between the two kinds of people. And Krishna is
telling that, you know, now, Krishna in this verse is offering a comparison
between the fruitive worker and the karma-yogi. In 12..., 5.6, there is also
comparison. There, the comparison was between the karma-yogi and the jnana-yogi.
And Krishna in 5.6 said that, the, you know, five, 5.6 was that, m..., hmm, it
said that, actually, you know, the, a, you know:

        yoga-yukto munir brahma
        na cireṇādhigacchati

        sannyāsas tu mahā-bāho
        duḥkham āptum ayogataḥ

So, the person who is "ayogataḥ". The person who is not practicing karma-yoga.
Just trying to do inactivity. That person will find it very difficult to become
free from bondage. In 5.2, Krishna said, yes, both paths are good. But
karma-yoga is better. Why? That He has told in 5.6. It is better because
"ayogataḥ" will lead to "duḥkham". It will be difficult. Whereas, one who
practices yoga, then activity is natural. And then, that will ha..., one will
happily:

        sukhaṁ bandhāt pramucyate

Now, somebody may say that, oh, could you have, going to act? Won't action cause
bondage? That Lord Krishna has explained there. It is not action that causes
bondage. It is motivation that causes bondage. And when the person does not have
a selfish motivation, then the person will not get bound. And, you know, Krishna
is going to tell over here now, in this verse that a person who does not have
selfish motivation, that person will not get bound. So, here, what he says,
"yuktaḥ karma-phalaṁ tyaktvā". So, because this person has no selfish
motivation, that person, now, does not get bound. And when the person does not
get bound, "śāntim āpnoti naiṣṭhikīm". So, Krishna knows that Arjuna has a
longing for peace. But he is telling, you will attain the supreme peace. He has
used the word "parāṁ śāntim" in 4.39. And now, here, He is using a similar
superlative. He is, he is using, you know, you know, a, a, epithet for
describing, saying "naiṣṭhikīm". "naiṣṭhikīm" means unshaken. Unshakable. Very
deep. Unflinching. So, you know, people may have a lot of facade of peace in
this world. But when their big agitations that come up, then they will also get
disturbed. But when a person has no ag..., agitation, nothing of the world can
disturb him. There is "śāntim āpnoti naiṣṭhikīm". So, Krish..., you know,
Krishna is telling Arjuna do not think that you will get peace simply by
avoiding war. Actually, even if you avoid the war, as long as one has material
attachments, one will be agitated. But you know, act in vai..., karma-yoga.
And purify yourself of material attachments. Then, what you will attain is
"śāntim", "naiṣṭhikīm". You will attain unshakable peace. On the other hand,
"ayuktaḥ", if a person is not connected. So, here, the comparison is between
karma-yogi and fruitive workers, the karma-kandi. Or it can be materialists,
also. vikarmi, "ay...", "ayuktaḥ kāma-kāreṇa". Such a person works out of
material desire. If such a person works out of material desire. What happens?
"phale sakto". Because the person is attached to the fruit, then "nibadhyate".
Such a person becomes bound. So, Krishna is very categorically comparing and
explaining that what causes bondage is not action, but motivation. You know, if
one i..., m..., "kāma-kāreṇa phale sakto", then there is bondage. But when is,
you know, when the "ayuk...", "ayuktaḥ". And then, "karma-phalaṁ tyaktvā". Then,
there is no bondage. So, Prabhupada explains this in the point, in the purport.
Prabhupada makes a very profound statement over here.

"This is the secret of Kṛṣṇa consciousness – realization that there is no
existence besides Kṛṣṇa is the platform of peace and fearlessness."

Hmm, realisation that there is no existence besides Krishna. What does this
mean? It means that ultimately, everything is working under Krishna's sanction.
Whatever happens, it cannot happen while Krishna's sanction is there. And
whatever exists, it is Krishna's energy. So, when we see something excepted from
Krishna, that is illusion. When we see everything as connected with Krishna,
that is reality. And that reality, see, the realising that no existence besides
Krishna is a platform of peace. You know, peace just talked about. Already
"śāntim". But Prabhupada says peace and fearlessness. Why fearlessness? Because
"naiṣṭhikīm". So, what takes away our peace is fear. Oh, what if that goes
wrong? What if that goes wrong? What if that goes wrong? That causes f..., f...,
that fear. That causes fear. And these fears take away of peace. But Kri...,
one when understand there is nothing beyond Krishna. And Krishna is always my
well-wisher. Then, there is, then there is no loss. Then, is the platform of
peace and fearlessness. Peace and fearlessness. So, now, Krishna will talk about
how one can stay detached, further. He will give another example now to
illustrate this point.

        sarva-karmāṇi manasā
        sannyasyāste sukhaṁ vaśī
        nava-dvāre pure dehī
        naiva kurvan na kārayan

So, Krishna says, "sarva-karmāṇi manasā". So, how should one work? All the
work, with the mind, what should do? "sannyasyāste". So, Krishna is talking
about here "manasā sannyas". You know, just as we have "manasā" puja. You know,
"manasā" puja means if a devotee cannot, you know, do, you know, cannot worship
Krishna directly, then the devotee can worship Krishna in the mind. So, if you
cannot offer beautiful jewel necklaces to Krishna. Because we do not have the
financial resources to do that. Then, we can do it in the mind. Krishna, you
know, beautiful deity, and I want to offer this to you. Please accept this. So,
that is accepted. Because Krishna sees our intention. And when Krishna sees that
our intention is to serve Him. To glorify Him. Then, Krishna accepts that
intention. So, "manasā sannyasyāste". So, "manasā sannyasyā". So, what we,
similarly, that is at a devotional level. That at karma-yogi level, ok, I am not
the doer. "sarva-karmāṇi sanasā...", "ma...", "manasā sannyasyāste". So, when I
understand that actually I am not the doer. The body has certain needs. Then,
those need to be fulfilled. So, whatever needs are required for the body, I
fulfill those needs. "sukhaṁ vaśī". Such a person will be able to stay happily.
"sukhaṁ vaśī". Will be able to, how happil...? Because there will be no, you
know, messing up with the troublesome, you know, you know, sense objects,
especially in terms of emotional entanglements with them. We will function in
the, so, material world. But we will only emotionally entangle in them.
And "nava-dvāre pure dehī". So, "nava-dvāre". "nava-dvāre" refers to nine
doors. So, no..., th..., "pure dehī". "pure" is a city. Like we have Jagannath
Puri. So, the city of Lord Caitanya. So, puri refers to a place. So, "pure" also
refers to a place. So, "nava-dvāre pure", "pure dehī", the city of nine gates.
So, this "dehī" is the soul who lives in the city of nine gates. So, "na...",
"kurvan", "naiva kurvan na kārayan". Such a person will not be the doer. And
will not be the, you know, you know, a, motivator of, for doing to others. That
means Krishna is telling that you will not be the doer. I will not be also doer.
Krishna is, Arjuna is thinking, Krishna, why are you asking me to fight in such
a, you know, such a, fight such a ghastly war? You know, gaura karma, why are
you asking me to do, do it? Krishna has asked in the Third Chapter.

        tat kiṁ karmaṇi ghore māṁ
        niyojayasi keśava

He has asked in 3.1. So, Krishna is telling, do not you, when you understand
this philosophically, then you will not think that you are the doer of anything.
Nor will you think that I am making you do anything. You know, because you will
understand it is material nature that is acting. "sannyasyāste sukhaṁ vaśī". So,
to the extent, we think that we are going to enjoy the sense objects. To that
extent, we think I am doing things. And to the extent we think that I am doing
things, to that extent we will get entangled. We will become bound in material
existence. But to the extent we do not think this, to that extent we will not
become bound. So, now, what is this "nava-dvāre pure dehī"? Now, "nai...",
"sa...", "nava-dvāre". They are the nine, nine holes in the body. So, Prabhupada
explains this. This is quoted fr..., th..., "Sri...", "U...", from the
"Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad".

        nava-dvāre pure dehī
        haṁso lelāyate bahiḥ
        vaśī sarvasya lokasya
        sthāvarasya carasya ca

So, this verse talks about the "nava-dvāre pure dehī". And now, so, same phrase,
that is there in this verse. In the C part, so 5.13C is repeated in 
"Śvetāśvatara Upa...", "Upaniṣad", 3.18A:

        nava-dvāre pure dehī
        haṁso lelāyate bahiḥ

So, what described over here there is Lord is situated in this body. And:

        vaśī sarvasya lokasya
        sthāvarasya carasya ca

So, the, when the living entity, "vaśī sarvasya lokasya". So, actually, when the
living entity, Prabhupada explains, is situated in, in the conditioned stage,
then there is, identifies with the body, thinks I am this body. So, what are the
nine, nine, a..., gates to the body? The nine gates here are two eyes, two
nostrils, two ears, one mouth, and the anus and the genitals. So, they are the
nine holes in the body. And just in the city, you know, we may have different
entrance gates. You know, there is sometimes, city has a northern gate, a
southern gate, an eastern gate, a western gate. Those are ways from which people
can come inside the city. Especially if some city is like a fort where there
are walls around it. When those cities are, the, the, a, gates are the way from
which people can come inside. In the past, when cities had to be defended. That
there woul..., the forts would be built. So the gates would be the main entry
points. So, that way, you know, the entry points for, you know, coming into the
body, for the external world's impressions, are the senses, is the entry points,
is the exit point, exit points. So, why the emphasis on entry and exit points?
Because it is through these that we interact with the world. And it is through
these that we come, become bound in the world. You know, when we look a..., when
we find good-looking sense objects in this world. When we become attracted. Oh,
I want to enjoy. I want to enjoy. I want to enjoy. And then, when we may get
into the physical enjoyment. So, with "jñānendriya", we perceive, so, some
sensory impressions come inside. And then, we engage in dritupti, then certain
senses, impressions go out. And then, sen..., sensory actions go out. And then,
we become bound. So, the interaction of the soul with the external world happens
through these gates. So, just as, you know, you know, every well-protected gate,
you know, city will not have, allow anyone and everyone to come inside. Nor will
it allow anyone, every..., say, anything and everything to go outside. You know,
if a cou..., say, in a country, the foreign exchange situation is delicate, And
the country may not allow too much money to go out of it. So, like that, there
is a regulation. Similarly, when one understands that this body is like a city.
And one needs to regulate what is going inside. What is coming out of the body.
Then, we can stay free from bondage. When we understand that, this body is like
a city. So, actually, whatever necessary functions that are happening for the
body. They will. Let them happen. You know, now, when I am going around in
c..., you know, walking around, I have to look at the, you know, look at the
path. I cannot close my eyes and walk. So, necessary functions, have to wal...,
happen. But:

        sarva-karmāṇi manasā
        sannyasyāste ...

Then, I said, ok, these are necessary functions that happen for the body.
"indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu". Necessary contact with sen..., of the senses and
sense objects has to happen. But beyond that, I will not become emotionally
involved. I will not think that, ok, the contact with the senses and the sense
objects, that is what will lead to, will me, lead me to happiness. So, you know,
"manasā sannyasyā", "sannyasyāste sukhaṁ vaśī". It is like if a person is
watching TV. Then, now, the TV may go on if that person understands, ok, these
TV programmes are not going to make me happy. Then, the person, this TV may go
on. But the person will not get emotionally involved in it. So, like that, the
things have to go on at a material level. But as long, if we are not emotionally
involved, if we are renounced, then we will not get, come bound. So, this is
what Krishna is telling about "naiva kurvan na kār...", "naiva kurvan na
kārayan". You will not be the doer. And you will not make others do, also. Now,
Krishna is telling Arjuna to fight. So, what does it mean, Krishna is saying,
you know, I am, I am not the doer and making you do things? So, Krishna is
actually telling Arjuna, see, you have a body. That is ksatriya's body right
now. Ksatriya body is going to act according to particular nature. And that
nature is a nature of fighting. So, you cannot resist that nature. But do not
become too, so identified with the nature that you become consumed by it. That
you identify yourself entirely as a ksatriya. So, see, Arjuna is a soul. But
that soul is right now in a ksatriya body. So, that body has to function as a
ksatriya. Now, if Arjuna tries to resi..., reject that. And say, I, I, I will
act as a sannyasi. It will not work. Because the body is at certain way of
working. At the same time, if Arjuna entirely identifies with the ksatriya
conception, then, then tha..., what happens it becomes a bodily conception. And
then, one cannot make much spiritual advancement. So, understand that you have
particular body. And when you have particular body, you have to work in a
particular way. But do not become bound with that conception. "naiva kurvan na
kārayan". So, you know, I am not making you do things. Because I am simply
encouraging you to act according to your nature. But act in such a way that you
are not emotionally involved. That you will not, a, so, then, you will not get
entangled karmically. And that way, you will stay free from bondage. And you
will keep moving forward in your, you know, spiritual journey. So, "naiva kurvan
na kārayan". So, Krishna is t..., you know, in this way, He is telling here that
act Arjuna. But act without the principle of bondage. Act without the principle
of entanglement. So, now, Krishna continues this thread of thought in the next
verse.

        na kartṛtvaṁ na karmāṇi
        lokasya sṛjati prabhuḥ
        na karma-phala-saṁyogaṁ
        svabhāvas tu pravartate

So, you know, now, you may say, is God not the doer?

        na kartṛtvaṁ na karmāṇi
        lokasya sṛjati prabhuḥ

No. He says no. "prabhuḥ" here refers to the Supreme Lord. No, actually, the
"prabhuḥ" is not the doer. So, actually, it can refer to the master of the city
of the boats..., so, it can, you know, now, Krishna will talk about, these
"prabhuḥ" and "prabhuḥ" can refer to the Supreme Lord. It can refer to the soul,
also. Now, in this case, Prabhupada is using the word to refer to the, the
master of the city of the nine gates. In that sense, is, the soul is the
"prabhuḥ". The soul is not the doer. So:

        na kartṛtvaṁ na karmāṇi
        lokasya sṛjati prabhuḥ

So, actually, the soul neither does things, nor makes other do things. Why?
Because "na karma-phala-saṁyogaṁ". "svabhāvas tu pravartate". All this happens
by "svabhāvaḥ". "svabhāvaḥ" refers to one's material nature. You know. So, it is
not that w..., we do things. It is not make others do things. And it is not
become attached to things. Who is this? The Supersoul, liberated soul. Or an
enlightened soul. The soul is not doing all these things. So, the soul is never
the doer. But as long as soul thinks I am the doer, the soul becomes the bearer,
the repear of the consequences, also. But if the soul understands I am not the
doer, then the soul will not be the reaper of the consequences. So, "s...",
so, "svabhāvas tu pravartate". "svabhāvas tu pravartate" means material nature
is acting. So, the Bhagavad Gita is offering a very profound vision over here.
Sometimes, we may think Bhagavad Gita, oh, we just chant Hare Krishna and be
happy. Yes, that is true. Definitely, that is true. We can chant Hare Krishna.
Make spiritual advancement. And become happy. But that does not mean that there
is no metaphysical depth over here in the Bhagavad Gita. That is the conclusion.
The conclusion is profoundly simple. But at the same time, you know, it i..., it
can be very deep, also. So, Krishna is telling over here, the body is a machine.
I would like to the particular. So, "svabhāvas tu pravartate". So, when the soul
identifies with that, the soul becomes bound. But when soul does not identify
with that. But soul utilises that. Then, the soul does not become bound. So,
Krishna is telling Arjuna, understand that you are not the doer in a sense that
the body has certain propensities. The body likes to act according to those
propensities. And you stay detached. When you stay detached, then you will stay
free from bondage. So, Prabhupada writes in the purport. What is the nature of
the soul?

"He is simply in the midst of the material ocean, struggling for existence. The
waves of the ocean are tossing him, and he has no control over them."

So:

"His best solution is to get out of the water by transcendental Kṛṣṇa
consciousness."

So, we are all in the ocean. You know, what is the waves o...? The ocean
refers to, of course, material existence. What are the waves? The waves are the
waves of three modes. Sometimes, suddenly, we feel passionate. Sometimes,
suddenly, we feel I just do not want to do anything. You know, passionate means,
you know, which carcedic hama, I want to show the world who I am. You know. I am
such a famous person. Such a powerful. Such, such a talented person. I just want
to show the world. Sometimes, we feel like that. Other times, you know, you know,
we feel going to take that, such a whole, whole, hurray, huneto..., that ha...,
everything is, happen. Who bothers? What makes any difference? Just let me
sleep. You know. Let me just rela..., let me just relax. And not do anything.
Let us, let us, rel..., that relaxation is actually t..., can very well be
tamasic. Just let things happen. On other hand, that will be transcendental.
Transcendental means one understands that actually I am, a, o..., or we can be
in mode of goodness. We are at, mode of contemplating, understanding the deeper
truths of life. So, the m..., modes like that. You know, we will see our mode
just come and go. And the, those are up and down. To the extent that we can
st..., strengthen and steady our Krishna connection, to the extent, we get a
boat. By which we can come out of this material ocean. Otherwise, we are
helpless. So, Krishna is telling "svabhāvas tu pravartate". So, the varnashrama
dharma recognises that we are also due to certain modes, but offers a pathway by
which we can serve Krishna. Steady our connection with Krishna. And ultimately,
come out of this material ocean.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna. 
