Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PI3CGZGjUhM

Hare Krishna.

Question from Ankor Sharma Prabhu.

Prabhupada says in the purport of 4.13, Bhagavad Gita, that as Krishna is
tran..., transcendental, so is a person who is in Krishna Consciousness. So,
what is the practical implication of someone being transcendental? And a, then,
we are living in this world, how, how can actually we be transcendental? Answer:

        tasya kartāram api māṁ
        viddhy akartāram avyayam

Krishna says in 4.13 that although He has created the four divisions of varna
and ashrama. Still, He is a non-doer. And He is imperishable. So, the point of
that particular verse is that Krishna is talking about the important principle
of He being transcendental. He, He gives people differ..., He puts people
according to their own past karma in different varnas. But He does not di..., He
is not discriminating. He is reciprocating, you know, based on their, based on
their own desires and their own activities. So, now, if we see, you know, the
Bhagavad Gita does talk about the qualities of advanced devotees. And it is,
uses, in, in the fourth, "udāsīna", for referring to Krishna in, as He is
situated in the heart. You know. He says, talk, when He talks about "udāsīna-vad
āsīnam". And it is talking about in, say, nine point, a, 9.9 and other places,
also. And while talking about the person who has transcended the modes,
Krishna also gi..., again talks about how "udāsīna". Such a person is situated
in entire de..., detachment. "Asak...", the, so the point is that when Krishna
talks about "udāsīna" or detached. He is saying that just as th..., He is
detached in the Supersoul manifestation. Similarly, the, the liberated soul or
the soul who has transcended the modes is also situated in that situation, in
that, with that attitude. So, yes, you know, we as sadhakas, you know, who, the,
are not at that level. And we should not artifically imagine that we are at that
level. So, when Prabhupada says a person in Krishna Consciousness, we have to
see what is Prabhupada talking about s..., because Prabhupada may use the same
word to refer to a siddha to tell us how a siddha behaves. And Prabhupada may
also use it, you know, for a sadhaka to tell us how we should try to behave. So,
now, if he is talking about the siddha, then, that does not, that can be an
aspiration for the sadhaka. But that is not a reality for the sadhaka. So, the
scriptural, so, Prabhupada's description of a person in Krishna Con...,
Prabhupada's mentions of a person in Krishna Consciousness can be both
prescriptive and descriptive. Descriptive means of one who is a siddha is
describing. And prescriptive means for sadhaka is telling what to do. So, we
should not mistake that which is descriptive of the liberated stage to be
descriptive of the cond..., a, descriptive of the seeker stage. So, yes, the
pure devotee is transcen..., a, is transcendental. And therefore, the
varnashrama divisions may not apply. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu talks about this:

        nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir

The famous verse where he says that, I do not belong to any of the four varnas,
nor to the four ashramas. And I am simply the servant of the servant of the
servant of the gopis.

        gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ

So, Caitanya Mahāprabhu said this as a matter of his, you know, expression of
pure devotion. Of pure transcendental devotion. But at the same time, we see,
Caitanya Mahāprabhu was quite a strict in following both the dharma of sannyas
and both, and the dharma of a brahmana. As a sannyasi, he was very very careful
o..., of not associating with women. And as a brahmana, he would take food only
in the house of brahmanas. That was the expected c..., a, standard behavior from
brahmanas during his times. And he followed that. So, the point is we do not, so
even when Caitanya Mahāprabhu is expressing that sentiment. He does not
indiscriminately or insensitively apply it in his day-to-day conduct. So, if
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is God, and who is also at an exalted level of devotion
in His descent as in the mood of a devotee. When if he does not transcend the
varnashrama principles, we too should not think of transcending varnashrama
principles. So, we can see this verse more as, this particular statement, more
as descriptive of a pure devot..., of a pure devotee who is transcendental.
Most, and not so much as descriptive of our stage. So, we, you know, need to
work according to our situation dovetailing our profession, and dovetailing our,
a, life in such a way that we can move onwards towards Krishna. So, as sadhakas,
we can see what is our sour..., a, nature. How, what are our talents. And
accordingly, we can try to engage in Krishna's service according to our
situation and disposition. So, in that way, we can move closer to Krishna. We
cannot appear, we cannot pretend or imagine that we are artificially
transcendental. But at the same time, we have to have the aspiration for
transcendence. And act in a way that will take us towards transcendence,
gradually, through the purification coming by the steady practice of bhakti.

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
