Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pGlYifI_jOo
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=PMhYeEdSty1PNqJgx_uJgUDEvgJ8MTU0ODQ5MDUwMkAxNTQ4NDA0MTAy&event=video_description&v=pGlYifI_jOo&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_156_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_08_%26_09_-_Offenses_%26_Deity_Worship_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri course. Continuing with  "The
Nectar of Devotion". So, we are discussing the 64 items of devotional service.
And we discussed how there are items which are "pravritti". Things to be done.
And there is "nivritti". Things to be avoided. So, today, what we will be
discussing, we will discuss two Chapters, today. The First Chapter will discuss
about the items to be avoided. So, Srila Prabhupada devotes a full Chapter to
one it..., you know, to the item of avoiding offenses in devotional service.
You know. This itself comprises a major subseque..., sub..., major subject. So,
the word "aparādha". "aparādha" has in its, you know, you know, root,
etymologically, if you go "rādha". "rādha" is related with "Rādhā". So,
"aparādha" is that which takes us away from "Rādhā". "Rādhārani" is the Hladini
potency of Krishna. She is the pleasure-giving potency. "Hladini Shakti". And
when we go away from the "Hladini Shakti", then we do not, we do not experience
any pleasure in devotional service. So, the results of offenses can be manifold.
One, one result is that, when we go away from the "Hladini Shakti". When we do
not experience any taste in bhakti, then because of that lack of taste, we all
need happiness. So, when we do not get happiness in spiritual life, we cannot go
on very long. Then, the material state, state starts propping up. And when
material taste prop up, then we get attracted to those material taste. And
eventually, we may fall away. So, actually, among offs..., offenses, which is
"aparādha". And sins, which is "pāpam". From the bhakti point of view,
"pāp...", "aparādha" is more dangerous than "pāpa". Because when we do
"aparādha", then we go away from Krishna. And we lose the taste in devotional
service. You know. So, "aparādha", generally, "pāpam" and "punya", they are
material. They act at the material level. Of course, it is not that we can do
"pāpam". And nothing matters. "pāpam" also brings its consequences. The sinful
reactions that come up. And "pāpam" takes us towards, you know, you know,
"raja-guna". Or "tama-guna". Which is "anuk...", "anuk...", which is "pratikul"
for bhakti. So, "pāpam" is also harmful. But even more is "aparādha". Because
"aparādha" is directly anti-devotional. And that is why one has to be very
careful about offenses. So, you know, you know, what do we mean by an offense?
Offense means that we basically disrespect that which is to be respected. And
that disrespect arises because we mistake that which is spiritual to be
material. That which is divine to be mundane. And of course, it is not that
Krishna is waiting to find false. You have committed this offense, now, go, I
will make you fall down. Nothing like that. No. Generally speaking, we should
always have a positive attitude that, you know, rather than looking at offenses
as some things to be feared, and to be paranoid about, we look at it positively.
That, you know, that these are guidelines of, you know, things which, I will do
if I am undisrespectful. So, in contrast, if I cont..., cultivate respectful
attitude, then I will no longer commit those offenses. And instead, I will be
able to deepen and strengthen my relationship with Krishna. So, if we look at
the offenses, you know, the primary focus in them is that we treat Krishna
respectfully. Treat Krishna's manifestations respectfully. So, for example, when
we go in front of the deity, so a day, one of the offenses, I will not to read
through the whole list of offenses. We can read through it. It is quite
straightforward. You konw. But I will just discuss some principles.

When we go in front of the deity, it is said that one should not shout and
chastise somebody in front of the deity. So, you know, that is, you know, that
is natural. It is just a way of showing respect to the deity. You know. If, if,
you know, if, say, two children are having a quarrel. Then, they may quarrel.
And if their father, or their grandfather comes over there, then, now, they will
stop their mischievous behavior. And they will be a little bit more sober. That
is the way we show respect to our elders. So, the Supreme Lord is the Supre...,
Supreme Being. He is the king of all kings. So, when we come in His presence,
then we should be at our best behaviour. So, that is the basic principle. The
idea in deity worship is twofold that there are two moods. One is that, when, if
the deity is at home, then we treat the deity as the king, as the owner of the
house. And when the deity is in the temple, we treat the deity like a king. You
know. A king whom we have invited to reside with us. So, that is why in the
deit..., temple, the deity is also offered opulence. As much as is possible. So,
opulent jewellery. Opulent dresses. And then, often, there are huge temples. All
that is, the Lord is the king. And he is being welcomed over there. Now, again,
if we understand this basic principle of being respectful so that we are
remembering Krishna. All these items, their common denominator is:

        smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇur
        vismartavyo na jātucit

Always remember Krishna. So, if we are remembering Krishna, then automatically,
we will avoid these offenses. You know. So, you know, at one time, it happened
that when the devo..., one devotee was cleaning, you know, you know, the, you
know, Srila, room of Srila Prabhupada, at that time, that devotee, there was a,
one, at place in the room, photo of Prabhupada. And he just put the photo
Pra..., up, Prabhupada, upside-down. You know. Hang. Hung it on the, it was
supposed to be hung on the wall. And there, it was kept, not on a hung on a
wall, it was kept on a sill. And there, he hung it up. So, then Prabhupada came
and said. No. This is offensive. You know. Prabhupada was, it was not that
Prabhupada was prak..., concerned about his own resp..., how he is respected.
But the idea that when we respect the representative of Krishna, that is the way
we are expressing our Krishna Consciousness. And that is what Krishna sees. And
He wants to give us His mercy. If we are, if we are not being Krishna Conscious,
then why will Krishna increase our Krishna Consciousness? So, if we are actually
seeing a pic..., if, if we are handling the picture of our spiritual master,
then naturally, it is basic sensitivity that, ok, I will keep this picture. How
can we keep a picture upside-down? So, it is natural. So, Srila Prabhupada
was a, considered that offen..., offense. Normally, even when we are carrying
books. If we are carrying books for book distribution, also, you know, we, if
the books have pictures of Krishna, it is as much as possible, we should keep
the book with the picture, vertically up. Not vertically down. That may not
always be practical, if we are carrying hundreds of books. Or something like
that. But if we are traveling, if we are carrying a Bhagavad Gita, then it is
good to keep the Bhagavad Gita with Krishna's picture vertically. Not
upside-down. You know. So, it is, this, you know, prin..., the princi... under
prin..., basic principle in avoiding offenses is just be conscious. And be
respectful. And if we are that way, then we will naturally be able to, you know,
you know, avoid most of the offenses. Now, some of the offenses may seem to be a
little mutually contradictory. For example, it is said, one offense is, one
statement is that, you know, when one sees one's spiritual master, one should
not fail to offer respect to the spiritual master. So, it is that one should
offer obeisanes. You know. And while offering obeisances, one should also chant
the pranam mantra loudly. And not so loudly that we disturb others. But
basically, it should not just be in the mind. That is also a way of, just like
we chant loud. The Hare Krishna mantra. Similarly, aloud, we chant the mantra.
So, that is one principle. That we should not fail to offer glory, praise to
the spiritual master when we see him. Now, other principle is that, you know,
you know, when we are in front of the deities, we shuld not offer praise to
anyone else. So, now, what will happ..., what happens if we see the spiritual
master in the temple hall? Now, do we offer praise to the deity? Do we follow
the second principle? And not offer praise to the spiritual master? Or do we
follow the first principle and offer praise to the spiritual master? So,
actually, it will dep..., it will, Krishna is  "Bhavad grahi". Krishna will see
that attitude. You know. We can see that, okay, the, Krishna is present over
here. Ok, let me not glorify anyone over here. So, therefore, we, I am not
glorifying over there.  That is ok. And, you know, you know, that is ok if we
do. Another way could be that, you know, actually, we see the spiritual master
as the representive of Krishna. The, Krishna's very dear servant. And then, you
know, we glorify the spiritual master as the representative of Krishna. In fact,
that is what we do in Mangala "ārtī". You know. The Managala "ārtī", actually,
it is Krishna who is coming. And giving darshan. But what we are doing is:

        saḿsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka-

We are actually glorifying the spiritual master. So, we may wonder, is this the
way to welcome Krishna? That we glorify somebody else? But it is not somebody
else. You know. It is somebody who is dear to Krishna. And what are we
glorifying the spiritual master for? All the verses of the, you know,
"saḿsāra-dāvānala" prayers, they are prayers about how the spiritual master is
so, you know, dedicatedly and gloriously serving Krishna. So, basically, we are
glorifying, you know, Bhakti Devi. You know. Krishna lov..., Krishna, you know,
for Him, "Rādhārani" is very dear. And for the spiritual master, you know, also,
you know, spiritual master is also great bhakta. So, you know, when we are
glorifying the spiritual master, we are basically glorifying, you know, the, the
bhakti of the spiritual master. And thereby, what we are glorifying is bhakti.
And bhakti, glorification of bhakti is very pleasing to Krishna. And in that,
the glorification of Krishna is included. Because Krishna is the object of
bhakti. So, some other principles, for example, say, you know, the other
principles are very simple to understand. When we are in an unclean stage, we
should not go in front of the deities. So, one principle is that, if we have, if
somebody has died in the family, then one should not go, you know, to the
deit..., one should not, you know, go in front of the deities. So, what is the
logic of this? Is, the idea is that there are two "viddhi"s. We have discussed
this. There is, some, some people may say that, actually, when somebody has
died, that is a time when we need consolation. That is the time when we need,
you know, relief. And that is the time we should go to the temple. So, what is
the idea that one should not go to the temple? The primary idea is that when we
are going to Krishna, especially, when we go into the deity manifestation to
serve Krishna. This is, this will largely, primarily applies to those who are
going to directly worship Krishna. As the deity, as the deity's pujaris. So,
when we are going to serve Krishna, we should be fully, you know, available and
attentive to serve Krishna. And just as there can be physical contaminations if
we are unclean. Similarly, there can be emotional contaminations when we are
distracted by grief. So, if we are distracted by grief, we cannot offer the
proper service to Krishna. And that is why, especially, one should not do the
pujari service. And regarding, going to the temple, you know, or it may depend.
Srila Prabhupada was not very insistent about this. Because in the traditional
society, people, the, almost the whole society had a lot of spiritual culture.
And people could get solace elsewhere. So, you know, if that is not happening,
then if one needs sol..., solace. And guidance. One can go to the temple. And
one may just not go to temple hall. One can, you know, ask the specific temple
devotees about what should do, one do if such a thing happens. But what is the
principle? That we can bhak..., do bhakti in two ways. One is "pañcarātra
viddhi". And the other is the "Bhagavad viddhi". The "bhagavad viddhi" is
centered on hearing. And chanting. And "pañcarātra viddhi" is centered on, you
know, deity worship. So, for "pañcarātra viddhi", there are a lot of rules and
regulations. About how one, something is to be done. How something is not to be
done. And one has to be careful about those rules. You know. But with respect to
"bhagavad viddhi", there are practically no rules. And regulations.

And we see that when "Citraketu"'s son, "Harshashoka" passed away, what
happened?  You know. The sages came over there. "Pārvatī". And "Nārada" Muni.
And they offered solace. How did they offer solace? By, you know, he, by
speaking philosophy. Similarly, when "Srivasa Thakura"'s son passed away, the
devotees continued on harinam sankirtan. And Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, also,
later, when he came to know, he was very touched by "Srivasa Thakura"'s
sacrifice. Doing spirit. That even after his son died, he cou..., allowed the
harinam sankirtan to go on. So, that happened in his home, home, only. Own home,
only. So, the idea is that Krisna's shelter is always available. That shelter is
available. Maybe, not through the "pañcarātra viddhi". It is available through
the "bhagavad viddhi". The "bhagavad viddhi" is focused on hearing. And
chanting. So, that way, the principles that are there for avoiding offenses,
the, you know, the principles are meant so that we are more conscious of
Krishna. And we are able to offer proper service to Him. Now, you know, you
know, as I said, the, you know, the "pañcarātra viddhi" is involving much more
stricter rules than in "bhagavad viddhi". You know. When there is "bhagavad
viddhi". It is hearing. And chanting. So, there are very less offenses in it.
But even then, even in the ho..., chanting of the holy name, also, there are
offenses. And Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport that, you know, you know,
there are actually double, two cautions one has to take. That just becau...,
becau..., so, it is said that if we comit any offenses while worshipping the
deity, if we can, if we chant attentively. And pray to Krishna for forgiveness.
Then, Krishna can forgive the offenses that we have committed while serving the
deit..., worshipping the deity. So, the holy name is far more merciful than the
deity. There is many ways in which the holy name is merciful. First of all,
generally, deity worship, it is only done by brahmana-initiated devotees.
Second, and deity worship, one has to go to the temple to the worship the deity.
The holy name, anyone can chant it. Even ifa  person who is not initiated. When
a person is breaking the principles, can chant it. And the holy name is like a
portable form of Krishna. Deity is not portable. You know. In the early days of
the movement, when Prabhupada got first time, the deities, Jagannath, Baladeva
and Subhad..., Jagannath. Baladeva. Subhadra. They made it. They installed it.
And then, the the evening, Srila Prabhupada came for the temple, take darshan.
And there was no deity in the temple, only. And Prabhupada was shocked. What
happened? He said, Prabhupada, the devotees had to take the deities to the
garden. Not. To through, to the park. You know. There is sometimes devotees in,
in the park. They would do harinam sankirtan. They decided to take the deities
to the park. And Prabhupada rushed. And there, he, practically, in the grass,
only, there, devotees were, placed the deities of Jagannath. Baladeva. Subhadra.
And they were, you know, you know, doing kirtan. So, Prabhupada did not speak
anything over there. Prabhupada was enjoying the kirtans. And then, after that,
you know, then, when the deities were brought back, then, then, then afterwards,
Prabhupada told that, you know, once the deities are installed at a particular
place, they should not be moved. There is only on very special occasions. Like
there are, Rath..., Rath..., Ratha Yatras. Or Yatras. Then, the deities are
moved. And even when those deities are moved, that is also gen..., generally, it
is the Utsava Murtis that are moved. You know. The big deities are normally not
moved. There are smaller deities which are, which are moved in processions. Of
course, sometimes, the big deities are also removed. Like it happens in
Jagannath Ratha Yatra. And sim..., there are Ratha Yatras like that. There are
Yatras like that. For other temples, also. But they are very special occasions.
So, normally, the deity is not portable. The holy name is portable. We can take
the holy name anywhere. And everywhere.

So, holy name is much more merciful. But just because the holy name is merciful.
That does not mean that we should be merciless in deity worship. That means that
it is not that we be careless in deity worship. One thinks that I can do any
offenses. And it is, I just chanting will overcome the offenses. No. If we are
to, actually, chanting attentively, then we will be becoming Krishna Conscious.
And then, we will naturally be Krishna Conscious. While worshipping the deity,
also. And then, we will be properly reverential. While worshipping the deity.
So, that is one aspect. The, the, the, with the bha..., the, the mer..., the
mercifulness of the, you know, deity worship, of the holy name should not be
used as a license to become, you know, lacks in deity worship. And secondly, if,
one should not be lacks in chanting of the holy names, also. Prabhupada writes
that, you know, offenses to the deity can be removed by chanting the holy names.
But what to happens if we commit offenses to the holy name? You know. Actually,
then, it is quite a serious thing. And one will have to work to remove them. So,
our spiritual progress can become, you know, very slowed if we are offensive. And
that is why, you know, Srila Prabhupada in the temples would have this
regularly. The reciting of the ten offenses. Against the holy name. And, you
know, you know, and the, all these offenses are important. And if we just look
at the principles of, you know, devotional service. 64 items. We will see that,
they will involve, you know, doing activities in a positive sense. Which will
naturally counter the offenses. So, one cannot commit sinful activities. Because
one is practicing devotional service. To under..., to commit sinful activities
on the strength of the holy name is quite a serious offense. Because one
completely misunderstands the purpose. You know. You know. Actually, the
chanting of the holy names is an indication of, is an expression of Krishna's
mercy. There are like verses, you know, say:

        nāmno hi yāvatī śaktiḥ
        pāpa-nirharaṇe hareḥ
        tāvat kartuṁ na śaknoti
        pātakaṁ pātakī naraḥ

That, you know, the holy name can remove more sins than what, you know, even the
most sinful person can commit. You know. So, if somebody says, ok, then I can
commit sins. What else? What is the problem? And I will chant Hare Krishna. And
the sins will be countered. But this is a wrong attitude. See, the idea is that,
Krishna, the promises in the scriptures, sometimes, devotees ask this
questio..., it is said if I do this, then this will happen. This is this, this
will happen. You know. If we just taste once darshan of Jagannath, then one will
liberated. One, do one's, this will happen. That will happen. So, are these
promises exaggerations? Or are they real? Actually, they are real. But they are
real, you know, when actually, the, but the mood we have to understand in that
these promises in the scriptures are expressions of Krishna's merciful heart.
His immense compassion. But, and Krishna says in the Bhagavad Gita.

        ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

That as all people surrender to Me, I reward accordingly. So, actually, when we
are approaching Krishna's heart, we have to approach with our heart. So, our,
Krishna's repentan..., our repentant heart, our humble heart, our, you know,
desi..., our repentant means, we have, we have a desi..., we, we regret what we
have done wrong. And we want to reform. So, our repentant heart attracts
Krishna's compassionate heart. You know. If we go with our calculative head, ok,
I will do this sin. But then, I will chant the holy names. And I will counter
the sin. Then, if we are going with a calculative head, then Krishna will also
reciprocate as a calculative head. We have done so many sins. Then, you, you
know, then, you know, have to si..., bear the consequences. So, the point is,
you know, the, the, the, if we look at the mood of the scriptural promises, you
know, it is, in the, for example, at the end of the "Ajāmila" pastime, it is
said, "Śukadeva Gosvāmī" says this. And Prabhu..., "Cakravartī" Pada and Srila
Prabhupada also say the same thing. Similar, say, similar things. The idea is,
is, by one's chanting. And even unconsciously, "Ajāmila" was relieved of si...,
immense sinful reaction. So, then, "Śukadeva Gosvāmī" is, therefore, if one
practices devotional service regularly, then, then, you know, you know, won't
the Lord be merciful? And one be freed from sinful reactions? And then,
Prabhupada says, if we chant 64 round attentively, you know, then won't we be,
then surely we can be confident that the Lord will be deli..., that we will be
delivered from sinful reaction. So, the mood is that there are scriptural
statements. And scriptural promises. And they indicate the extent of Krishna's
compassion. But a devotee does not, a devotee is humble. Devotee does not demand
that this should happen to me. That a devotee sees this, these extraordinary
promises, the devotee takes those extraordinary promises, as, you know, as
inspirations for intensifying one's commitment to the, you know, to the standard
process of devotional service. So, when we do the process of devotional
standard, that means, yes, for "Ajāmila", you know, chanting one name had such a
miraculous effect. So, what are, what we should see, we should not think that,
ok, I will do sinful activities throughout my life. And then, at the end of my
life, I will chant one name. You know. That attitude is wrong. Because, you
know, our goal is not just to somehow, you know, somehow slip into the spiritual
world. You know. That is not the goal. Even if we can slip into the spiritual
world, somehow, that is not, you know, you know, we will not be happy there if
we do not have, if we have, do not develop love for Krishna. Because everybody
there else will be centered on Krishna. And everybody will be talking about
Krishna. And thinking about Krishna. Serving Krishna. And if we have not
developed that attitude, we will not be happy in the spiritual world, also. So,
you know, you know, we have to develop love for Krishna. And when we hear these
extraordinary promises, they indicate the extent of Krishna's compassion. And
the indi..., indicate the, you know, the extent of Krishna's eagerness. That we
come back to Him. And to go back to Him, we try to, we have to develop our love
for Krishna. And we develop our love for Krishna. By, just by committing to the
standard process of devotional service. So, that is how a devotee sees these
promises. That as inspirations to increase our commitment. And our intensity in
the standard process of devotional service. And, and that way, you know, we can
avoid, you know, you know, using the holy name as the rationalisation for
committing sinful activities. So, when we give up these offenses, then we can
make very swift spiritual advancement. Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu says in
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta" that if one can just avoid offenses. And chant. Then, one
can attain the supreme perfection of life. So, this is the, you know, with
respect to the offenses. So, Prabhupada gives many, you know, lot, lot of
offenses list. And then, this, move forward. And we will discuss the next
chapter now.

Next chapter talks about, you know, "Further Consideration of Devotional
Principles". So, the first principle is about "BLASPHEMY". So, Prabhupada gives
one reference. And, you know, you know, then, he says that, there are three ways
of dealing. One is:

"If someone is heard blaspheming by words, one should be so expert that he can
defeat the opposing party by argument. f he is unable to defeat the opposing
party, then the next step is that he should not just stand there meekly but
should give up his life. The third process is followed if he is unable to
execute the above-mentioned two processes, and this is that he must leave the
place and go away."

You know. So, what does this mean? So, we see, especially, you know, you know,
you know, with respect to offenses, you know, in the Six, in the Fourth Canto of
Srimad Bhagavatam when, you know, Daksha offends Lord Shiva. By not having any
place for him. You know. Not ha..., not allocating for him any share in the
sac..., "yajñá". Sacrifices. You know. And sacrifical offerings. Then, the,
co..., you know, Daksha's daughter, who is also "Shiva"'s wife. "Satī". She sees
this. And she feels that her husband has been offended. And she gives up her
life. And, you know, similarly, we see that in the "Rajasuya yajñá" when, you
know, "Śiśupāla" started blasphemying Krishna. There were many kings who walked
away from there. Some kings, some, if it is not possible to walk away, one can
plug one's ears. And one does not hear it. So, then, beyond that, of course, the
best way is that, one answers the questions. Now, here, one also has to be
careful. If somebody asks some dou..., have some doubts. Some questions. You
know. We also have to see, see the attitude. When he is talking about blasphemy.
We should not label any, if you, if somebody just has an inquiry. Even if the,
you know, we should not, if somebody asks, you know, maybe, there has been this
problem. That problem. In ISKCON. We should not say hey, oh, you are
blasphemying. No. If a person maybe have sincere inquiry. So, at that time, one
has to, it, one should not just simplistically label any criticism as blasphemy.
Because sometimes, there is a valid criticism. And, and beh..., behind that
criticism, there may be a motive of wanting to clarify things. So, then, one
should be able to clarify. So, that is why in general, the, the, the second is
not an option which devotees should ever adopt. You know. First. Or the third.
We will, we move away from that situation. We do not hear it. Art, first is that
we hear. We hear. And clarify. You know. You know. We hear what a person is
saying. And then, offer the proper understanding. So that the person gets
clarified. So, especially nowadays, we can become very, you know, susceptible to
hearing blasphemy. Because on the internet, anyone can put anything about
anyone. And then, that just spreads over wide place. And how much is the true
element. How much is the false element. It is very difficult to know in that.
So, that is why we have to be careful. In general, you know, is, you know, we do
not have to go around searching for, you know, gossip on the internet. You know.
If somehow, some may, it, now, but what happens even if we do not go..., sea...,
quo..., searching, people send mass emails. This has happened here. That has
happened there. That has happened there. So, what we should understand is, Srila
Prabhupada's movement is a very big movement. And, you know, there are al...,
people who come from different backgrounds. And there can be different
situations. In which, problems can come up. And what I know is that, I am
following the process of bhakti. And to the extent, I have followed the process,
to that extent, it has benefited me. And if I keep following it, it will benefit
me. I can see there are senior devotees who have been following this process.
And to the extent, they have followed, they are making spiritual advancement.

So, if somehere, somebody did something wrong. And that created problems, that
is a, that is a problem with the individual. And it is not a problem with the
process. And sometimes, there may not be a problem with the individual, also.
Sometimes, there may be no offense at all. There may be nothing wrong. And just
the, you know, what has been portrayed is a, just a, you know, just a lie. Or it
is a distorted, you know, truth, which perverts the picture completely. So,
therefore, we have to be cautious. And if somehow such mails come, then we can
ask some senior devotees. And get clarification about the issues. So, that is
with respect to blasphemy. And, you know, generally, when we are count..., if,
if we have to clarify, counter. You know. And clarify. And counter issues. That
also, we should not do it in a violent way. You know. We see that, you know, you
know, when Lord Shiva, before this, so, actually, the, the daksha pastime is
quite elaborate. First time, Lord Shiva is there. And daksha blasphemed Lord
Shiva. And then, some of the followers of Daksha tried to counter. And then, the
brahmanas, who are doing sacrifice, they counter. And it is, just becomes a
whole cursing, counter, cursing, it happens over there. That is the first time.
And the second time is, the, Lord Shiva is not there, only. "Satī" is there. And
then, she commits suicide. So, she gives up her body. So, in the first case, you
know, you know, there, also, the cursing and counter-cursing, now, you know,
that leads to, you know, unnecessarily, unnecessarily catastrophic results. So,
in general, you know, when somebody, when we hear something that seems like a
blasphemy. It is not that we have to just sitting to take offense. You know.
Sitting to. You know. Sit back, rather. We can, we have to respond in a way by
following these three principles, also, we have to respond in a way that does
not make a bad situation worse. So, for the followers of Lord Shiva. To hear the
offen..., blasphemy against Lord Shiva, that was, certainly, they cannot hear
guru aparadha pos..., passively. But then, how do they respond to it? They have
to respond maturely. Not in a way that makes the things worse. So, the idea here
is, you know, not that we use this principle as a license to, to, you know,
create conflict. Or to provoke con..., you know, aggravate conflict. No. The
idea is that, we should have respectful attitude towards, you know, the Krishna.
Towards the spiritual master. And we should help others to have that respectful
attitude. And if some people are too envious to have that respectful attitude,
then better go away from those people. And if there are some, you know, people
when we are certain to be misled, then we clarify and counter those things. But
we do it in a proper attitude so that we make things better. Not worse. You
know. Let us move to the next one, now. So, then, after that, Prabhupada talks
about "TILAKA AND TULASĪ BEADS". So, how one should wear this. And what is the
glory of wearing this. There is a set of references there. And then, there are
"ACCEPTING FLOWER GARLANDS". You know. You know. So, here, actually, you know,
you know, you know, when we talk about flower garlands, here, there is this
item, "scented oils". So, you know, you know, now, in the early edition of "The
Nectar of Devotion", you know, this had been written as saintly articles. So,
"scented oils". And "saintly articles". Now, what does "saintly articles" refer
to? It is quite confusing for people. So, actually, if you know how Srila
Prabhupada's books were written and published. So, Prabhupada would speak. And
then, that would be a dictaphon..., you know, the dictaphone would be
transcribed by devotees. And then, that, it would go to the editors. The editors
would edit it. And finally, it would get published.

So, in the early days of the movement, you know, the devotees were not familiar
with sanskrit terms. You know. And then, and they were not familiar with Srila
Prabhupada's pronunciation, also. So, sometimes, they, you know, they would not
do understand the words properly. So, "scented oils" and "scently articles",
somehow, the devotees misunderstood it. And that is how it was put like that
over the, "scently articles". So, you know, this sort of things have been
edited. And there are some devotees who make a big human cry. Oh, Prabhupada's
books have been changed by some people. And, by the editors. And, they say that
we should read original, unedited books of Srila Prabhupada. But actually, Srila
Prabhupada himself wanted his books to be edited. And the editors, like
Jayadvaita Maharaja, and others, they have actually meticulously noted down what
they have read. They has mad..., they has made a booklet called responsible
publishing. In which, he has described, you know, what all the, the catalog of,
kind of errors that were there. And what were corrected. So, Srila Prabhupada
himself said that one mistake make, it kills the book. Say, peop..., people lose
credibility. If the, there is some mistake in the book. So, Prabhupada wanted the
books to be flawless. And what the devotees did was the editing was primarily
grammatical editing. And if something had been, if what Srila Prabhupada had
spoken, had not come in the book, then that was changed. And, you know, there
was one place. Where the devotees had translated, Prabhupada has said
"Pitraloka". And the devotees had no idea of "Pitraloka". What, what
"Pitraloka"? And so, they have written "Triloka". Now, that was actually
published in the book. "Triloka". Now, you know, you know, if we publish a book
with something called "Triloka", we will become a laughing stock among people
who know seriously what has been talked about. So, now, if we today publish book
with "Triloka". It will be ridiculous. It will be actually, we will be offending
our spiritual master by doing something like this. So, that edi..., doing that
edit is vitally responsible, is essential. You know. In the, when the devotees
were earlier do..., earlier, as, they were doing editing. So, at one time, when
Srila Prabhupada was doing transcriptions, Srila Prabhupada has spoken some
word. Say, spoken some word that was not there in the dictionary, only. So,
there was no word like that. And Prabhupada had spoken it. And the devotees
could not generally sense of the word by the context. But then, they thought,
you know, if a pure devotee has used this word, then, you know, rather than
changing the word, we should change the dictionary. And have the word included
in the dictionary. That, that is what they thought. And but one of the
devotee..., other editors said, better, we clarify with Srila Prabhupada. So,
Srila Prabhupada's, the, when they asked him, you know, Prabhupada said that no,
no. Change the word. What are the word? You change it. Make, use it properly. So
that it will be proper. So, Prabhupada wanted the books to be fist class. So,
the sentiment is good that, you know, yes, whatever is being done, we should,
you know, whatever, pure devotee is perfect. But that is in principle. You know.
When Srila Prabhupada was asked at one time. You know. Okay. Is it pure devotee
perfect? So, Prabhupada said yes. Jayadvaita Maharaja. Satsvarupa Maharaja.
When any update, went, they for a morning walk. And when Jayadvaita, Jayadvaita
Maharaja was Prabhu at that time. He asked Prabhupada. But one, what do we see?
What, when we see the spiritual master, you know, makes mistakes. So, Prabhupada
said, the spiritual master does not make any mistakes. But we see that,
sometimes he quotes the verses wrong. You know. Prabhupada would often quote the
verse:

        janma karma ca me divyam
        evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ
        tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma
        naiti mām eti so ’rjuna

So, Prabhupada often quotes it, "naiti mām eti so pandava". So, now, we say,
what if we see the, we see, actually, see the spiritual master quoting verses
wrong. Prabhupada said, that is material vision. Well that devotees were a
little confused. What does it mean? Material vision? Then, Satsvarupa Maharaja
said in their conversation that that means, Prabhupada, we have a wrong
conception of perfection. Prabhupada said yes. Perfection of a pure devotee is
that, the devotee's desires are perfect. The devotee always desires to serve
Krishna. The devotee does not, there are no errors in the desires or intentions
of a devotee. Sometimes, we have desi..., we, our enjoying mentality takes
al..., so, might that we engage. We, we, our desires are incorrect. And
improper. But, you know, the, so, the perfection of a devotee is that the
devotee, because the devotee always intends to serve and glorify Krishna,
Krishna is pleased by that service, always. So, even if a devotee pronounces the
verse wrong. You know. And, a devotee, Krishna will be more pleased by that
wrong pronunciation. Then, will be, somebody else who is, you know, so, who
pronounces the whole verse with precise grammar. Precise meter. And precise
pronunciation. And still, has no devotion. But at the same time, you know, when
we are publishing in a public forum, things have to be done accurately. That is
what Srila Prabhupada wanted. So, these kind of editing changes are there in
Prabhupada's books. And there is no need to make any human cry about it. By, it
is with, not, that, it is not that devotees want to change Prabhupada's message,
you know, to change something, to something else. No. Devotees have given their
life to Srila Prabhupada. What will, what, what will they change? And what would
the change achieve, basically? You know. Are they going to say that, oh, you
should not surrender to Krishna. Surrender Shiva. Or surrender somebody else.
Or surrender to me. Any devotee going to say like that? No. So, the changes are
done to bring the books to Pra..., to better quality. Not to, you know, you
know, not with any ulterior motive, at all. So, it is a, it is a, you know,
unnecessary, you know, controversy that is being created. And there is no need
for devotees to get caught up in such things. Now, going forward, you know, you
know, let us move forwar..., so, you know, and then, there are many items.
Actually, most of the items that Prabhupada talks about here are all centered
on the deity worship. So, "DANCING BEFORE THE DEITY". "BOWING DOWN IN HONOR OF
THE DEITY". "STANDING UP TO RECEIVE THE LORD". So, these are all items. And
then, there are references for giving. "FOLLOWING THE DEITY". You know. So,
"GOING TO THE TEMPLE OF VIṢṆU OR TO PLACES OF PILGRIMAGE". We will discuss about
pilgri..., pilgrimage places in the, you know, in the five potent forms of
devotional service. Then, "CIRCUMAMBULATING" the deity. So, this is, these are
all, now, "ARCANĀ" itself may, may we may see, all this includes "ARCANĀ", is,
all this is following the deity. Going to temple. Bowing down. Isn't it
"ARCANĀ"? No. The way, "ARCANĀ" is, you know, it specifically refers to doing
"ārtī". And deity worship. In terms of, you know, you know, you know, doing
puja. And, you know, all other items can be, one can receive, one can take in
darshan. One can be dancing. But "ARCANĀ" means, specifically doing deity
worship. Then, "RENDERING SERVICE TO THE LORD". So, Prabhupada quotes over here.
This is the moo..., I discussed earlier, the mood of:

“Any person who can arrange for service to the Lord in the same way that a king
is given service by his attendants is surely elevated to the abode of Kṛṣṇa
after death.”

You know. So, this is the, so, there is the, this is "Viṣṇu-rahasya". This is
the glorification of, you know, then there is "SINGING". So, you know, one sings
about the glories of the Lord. Now, when he talks about "SAṄKĪRTANA". So, now,
sa..., Srila Prabhupada, you know, used the word "SAṄKĪRTANA" in the very broad
sense. For example, he said even book distribution is "SAṄKĪRTANA". For example,
he said, even book distribution is "SAṄKĪRTANA". So, one may not be specifically
doing kirtan. Of course, many time, when there is book distribution, devotees do
kirtan, also. But one is actually glorifying Krishna. So, any form of
glorification of Krishna is " SAṄKĪRTANA". In the final days of Srila
Prabhupada, when he was sick in 1977, at that time, there was a science and
religion conference which the Bhaktivedanta institute had organised. And, you
know, you know, you know, Bhakti..., Bhaktisvarupa Damodara, Maharaja went,
Prabhupada were discussing about how to counter atheistic misconceptions. And at
that time, you know, you know, after the, Prabhupada was getting quite a vigorous
in discussing how this should be countered. So, you know, you know, after, after
the converastion went on for quite some time. You know. Tamal Krishna Maharaja
came along. And he said, Prabhupada, would you like to have kirtan? You know.
Pra..., he thought that Prabhupada may be sick. And Prabhupada will get quite
exhausted. So, Prabhupada got a little annoyed. And Prabhupada said, do you
think what are we doing now? We are doing kirtan, only, now. So, Prabhupada
considered that kind of speaking about, you know, so, any glory..., any way, any
way in which we are sharing Krishna's message, that itself kirtan. So,
Prabhupada gives a very broad definition of sanirtan. And in that way, you know,
we can connect the various activities that we are doing for sankirtan. So, here,
so, in this particular section, you know, actually, there is kirtan. There are,
there are three references here. You know. The first reference is about nama
kirtan. The name of:

"kṛṣṇa is so auspicious that anyone who chants this holy name immediately gets
rid of the resultant actions"

So, this is nama sankirtan. And then, there is, the next verse is about, I:

"because simply by hearing about Your pastimes I shall get out of all the
contamination of material attachment.”"

This is "Prahlāda Mahārāja" in 7.9.18 saying that "añjas". "titarmy". He says,
easily, I will conq..., go over material existence. So, the first was nama
sankirtan. This is lila sankirtan. So, here, "Prahlāda Mahārāja" is not talking
about chanting the names. He is talking about reciting the pastimes. Hearing.
And reciting the pastimes. So, you know, you know, then, you know, you know,
Prabhupada talks about how there are many songs which can be, many verses which
we can recite. And how big, there is "Brahma-saṁhitā". There is "Bhāgavatam".
There are so many places where there are verses. And then, the last one if we
see, so, there are various activities. Which are there. But one, if one instead
goes to a holy place:

"and chant the glories of the Lord.”

So, this is also another reference for the nama sankirtan. So, you know, so,
this is also another form of nama sankirtan. Where one is chanting the glory.
The glories can be the name. Or the pastimes. Both. Now, what is the difference
between sankirtan? Generally, sankirtan is in a group. "sankirtan". And it is,
generally involves musical recitation. Or speaking aloud. Jappa is an
individual activity. It is of course, it is also recommended japa we do in a
group with people. But the idea is that when we do japa, the idea is that we do
japa, you know, is, it is an individual meditation. It is individual
meditation. Individual meditation means that I am chanting. And another devotee
might be chanting. A third devotee might be chanting. So, we, it is good if we
chant together. Because then, if our mind starts wandering. If we sl..., fall
asleep, or something like that, the distraction is less if we are in a group.
Others will help us. But still, japa is individual meditation. That is the
difference between japa and sankirtan. It is best if we can do japa, also, in
association. But the point is that japa is individual. And then, now, after
that, we move onto another item called "SUBMISSION". Now, this is interesting.
There is submission. And then, afterwards, there is another item called
"RECITING NOTABLE PRAYERS". So, "RECITING NOTABLE PRAYERS". And "SUBMISSION".
So, actually, there is a difference between the two. And we will look at each of
them afterwards. And briefly. So, "SUBMISSION". You know. It refers to offering
one's own prayers. And "RECITING NOTABLE PRAYERS" refers to repeating scriptural
prayers. Both are glorious. Actually, we have a, you know, praying is a very
important way of developing our relationship with Krishna. And sometimes, some
devotees have some doubts. You know. Should I pray to Krishna for something? You
know. Actually, kevala bhakti means we do not pray to Krishna for anything
material. But sometimes, when we, devotees say, should, if I pray to Krishna for
something, and if that does not happen, maybe I lose my faith in Krishna. So,
maybe, I should not pray at all. You know. The idea is, you know, if we see, the
way, you know, you know, the, the, the prayer is talked about. You know.
"Prahlāda Mahārāja", in his seven, in the Seventh Canto, when he talks about the
prayers, he says, it is also one limb of bhakti. So:

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
        smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam
        arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ
        sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

So, "vandanaṁ". It is also one prayer. Now, if we talk about "vandanaṁ". Now,
what do we expect after "śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ"? He said that after hearing, after
chanting, after "arcanaṁ", we expect some fruit of the, should work out, that
should work out. The fruit that we were, expect is that, actually, our
relationship with Krishna will expand. So, similarly, praying is a means, you
know, we, it is not so much to ask Krishna to do something for us. It is more of
that, that can be one aspect. But that is not the primary aspect. If we see the
"saḿsāra-dāvānala" prayers, you know, practically, there is nothing being asked
in those prayers. You know. All the prayers are "vande guroḥ
śrī-caraṇāravindam". Similarly, if we look at the "Brahma-saṁhitā" prayers,
they are prayers. But there is nothing is being asked. It is just gov..., all
the prayers are:

        govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

I simply worship the Lord. I simply, I worship the Lord. So, the idea in, you
know, of prayers is that we see prayers, also, as a means of developing our
relationship with Krishna. So, generally, if we talk with some person. That
talking helps us develop the relationship with that person. And if we talk
inti..., if we talk some, if we reveal our heart, that there is:

        guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati

We discussed how that sharing our heart and hearing another devotee share, 
you know, you know, share, share a heart, also, you know, that al... helps in
developing, that is the way "prīti-lakṣaṇam". That is the way, you know, you
know, the love is developed between devotees. So, sim..., what applies to
devot..., to the relationship between devotees also applies to the relationship
between the devotee and the Lord. That, so, when we have something, which is
burdening our heart. Then, you know, sharing that with the Lord is a way by
which we go closer to the Lord. By which we, you know, you know, you know,
in..., we expand. Intensify. You know. Deepen our relationship with Krishna. And
in this way, what happens is, you know, our, you know, we feel closer to
Krishna. So, we can pray to Krishna. And we will not have to bother about
whether the prayer will be fulfilled or not. We can, it, share our concern with
Krishna. And often, we, Srila Prabhupada, devo..., we can follow Srila
Prabhupada's example when he was sick in sixty se..., 67-68. At that time, it
seemed as if he had got a stro..., he had got a stroke. And he was almost on the
verge of departing from the world. So, he told the devotees to pray that, you
know, our spiritual master has not completed his work. Please let him live. So,
Prabhupada offered that prayer there. And then, later on again, when he was
sick, then he says, then Prabhupada would often ask, you know, generally, he
would express, if you so desire. Oh, Krishna, if you so desire, let our
spiritual master live. So, we can offer our con..., we can share our concern
with Krishna. And then, we can add, if you so desire. That my dear Lord, if it
is your desire, this is what I feel should be done. But whatever happens, please
allow me to continue serving You. Please allow me to, you know, you know, to
render devotional service to you at all times. Now, so, so, we can offer prayers
from our heart in our own words. And that is also a very personal way in which
we can develop a relationship with Krishna. So, you know, all of us, we may
have, you know, you know, we all have different languages. Which, from which we
come from. So, so, so, our vernacular language, that is a language since in
which we grew up. And there is a language, in which we deal with our relatives.
So, there might be some intimacy and sweetness in that language. So, you know,
we have a standard process of devotional service, in which we recite sanskrit
prayers. Or bengali poe..., bengali poems. And that is cool. That is the
standard way our acharyas have told. That is also a limb of devotional service.
But at the same time, then we, special intimacy that may come up, you know, if
we speak those prayers in the vernacular language that we are familiar with. So,
that is also a limb. Submission here means offering prayers in our own words.
And these prayers can be of three types. You know. So, Srila Prabhupada refers
to these prayers. Let us look at the submission. Prabhupada talks about
"samprārthanātmikā". dainya-bodhikā". And "lālasā-mayī". You know. You know. So,
let us look at "samprārthanātmikā" prayers. "samprārthanātmikā" is, Prabhupada
transl..., he says:

"very feelingly offering prayers;"

What does it refer to? It refers to, actually, offering the prayers for
spontaneous devotional service. So, there is example from "Padma Purāṇa" over
here. This is, so, this is example of, you know, "samprārthan...",
"samprārthanātmikā". Next example is of, you know, "dainya-bodhikā". And then,
there is, you know, there is this ex..., this "Nārada Pañcarātra" example is of
"lālasā-mayī". You know. So, let us look, you know, so, I mean, this is also a
"lālasā-mayī". Let us look at these examples one by one. So, the first pa...,
example from "Padma Purāṇa". You know. You know. So:

        Yuvatīnāṁ yathā yūni yūnāṁ ca yuvatau yathā/ mano ’bhiramate tadvan mano me ramatāṁ tvayi

So, here, the prayer is, my dear Lord, just as a boy is attracted to a girl, and
a girl is attracted to a boy. Similarly, let my me..., "mano ’bhiramate tadvan",
let my mind become attracted to You. And let me delight in You, similarly. So,
this is a prayer for spontaneous devotional service. You know. Now, it is not
that somebody has to educate a boy that you become attracted to a girl. Or a
girl, you become attracted to that. Spontaneous. Now, of course, that
spontaneity is a material level. And that spontaneity can often lead to, you
know, immorality. And perversity. If it is not regulated. And that is why there
is dharma. And there is marriage. And there are regulations like that. But this
is an example which is given to indicate spontaneity. And that is why even in
the scriptures, sometimes, when the gopis' attraction to Krishna is talked
about, the word "kāmāt" is used.

        gopyaḥ kāmād

There is such an intense attraction that, actually, it, to have, give us an
ind..., indication of how intense that attraction is, it is Kri..., it is, the
same word is used as is used for the most intense attraction in this world. That
is the attraction between the male and female. You know. Because of "kāmāt". So,
that way, they say, this is a prayer my dear Lord. Please help me have
spontaneous attraction for You. And then, there is, next prayer is
"dainya-bodhikā". "mat-tulyo". There is also in "Padma Purāṇa":

        mat-tulyo nāsti pāpātmā
        nāparādhī ca kaścana
        parihāre ’pi lajjā me
        kiṁ bruve puruṣottama

The prayer is, you know, "mat-tulyo nāsti pāpātmā". My dear Lord, there is no
one as sinful as me. "nāparādhī ca kaścana". So, we discussed earlier, sins and
offenses. They are two categories of, you know, un..., undesirable things. So,
they say, the, the devotee is praying, my dear Lord, there is no one as sinful
as me. And no one as offensive and me. And how offensive am, am I? If I try to
tell this? "parihāre ’pi lajjā me". By start speaking about it, I feel ashamed
of myself, my dear Lord. And I cannot even speak. Sometimes, you know, we do
such a terrible thing that we cannot even speak what we have done. So, the
devotee is saying, that is my situation. "parihāre ’pi lajjā me". "kiṁ bruve
puruṣottama". My dear Lord, what can I speak? This is "dainya-bodhikā". So, we
see the, "Bhaktivinoda Thakur"'s prayer, also:

        āmāra jīvana,  sadā pāpe rata,

This is "dainya-bodhikā". So, of course, this is "dainya-bodhikā". This humility
is not self-pity. You know. It is not, it is not inferiority complex, also. See,
inferiority complex is, false ego frustrated. Humility is false ego rejected.
In, inferiority complex, I want to be great. I want to be superior. I want to be
famous. But I am not able to be famous. I do not have any qualities. I do not
have any p..., abilities. I do not have any successes. And that is why I start
feeling I am worthless. And that is infi..., inferiority complex is undesirable.
Devotee should not have inferiority complex. You know. But humility means, false
ego rejected. It is not false ego frustrated. A devotee is, does not want to be
self-centered. A devotee wants to be Krishna-centered. And, you know, you know,
Krishna, I am so worthless. I am so undeserving. And yet, you have given me the
opportunity to love You. So, remember You. And I am so grateful to You, my dear
Lord for that. And I will grab this opportunity that you have given You. That
You have given me. So, we will see that "Bhaktivinoda Thakur"'s songs, also,
they may start, they, they may have very, you know, wren..., heart-wrenching
expressions of one's fallen nature. But then, the conclusion is, oh, my dear
Lord, I take shelter of You. You can deliver me. So, the whole principle of
humility is that, we should not be self-centered. We should become
Krishna-centered. So, it is a, humility is false ego rejected. And similarly,
humility is not self-pity. Self-pity means, oh, I am so bad. I am so this. I am
so that. No. Humility is actually meant to just give it, get us to be no longer
self-conscious. That there is nothing great about me. You know. The, and, even
some time, one devotee says, Prabhupada, I am the most fallen person in the
whole world. Prabhupada said, you are not, you are the most nothing. You know.
To think that I am most, that itself is a sign of false ego. You know. We should
not think that I am so, you know, whatever we are, we should not think that I am
so fallen that Krishna cannot elevate me. Some, sometimes, if we feel like that,
that is also a form of false ego, only. To think that I am so fallen that
bhakt..., Krishna cannot elevate me. It is like saying that my, you know, my
ve..., depravity, my fallen state is greater than Krishna's potency. Which is
actually false. Which is, which is a mistake. And it is an, which is false. And
it is an expression of false ego. So, we should not have such a thing. Nobody
can be so fallen that the, Krishna cannot elevate such a person. And then, then,
there is "lālasā-mayī". "lālasā-mayī" is even more specific. "samprārthanātmikā"
is focused on, you know, you know, spontan..., you know, spiritual for
spontaneous devotional service. Whereas "lālasā-mayī" is even more specific. It
is a very advanced stage. And one is actually asking for "svarūpa-siddhi". My
dear Lord, let me be situated in my "svarūpa". And in my "svarūpa", let me serve
You eternally. That is "svarūpa-siddhi". Then, after that, there is "RECITING
NOTABLE PRAYERS". So, it is very good if we can remember verses from scriptures.
And recite those verses. And Prabhupada, you know, then there are verses.
Prabhupada says, there is a "Gautamīya-tantra". You know. You know. Prabhupada
says, there is Eleventh Chapter, there are Arjuna's prayers.
"Gautamīya-tantra"'s verses are prayers. And the "Bhāgavatam", there are
hundreds of prayers. And like that, there are many prayers. So, we see that
Gajendra, he offered a prayers. And that is how in eight point, 8.2 is, Gajendra
gets into trouble. The eleph..., elephant Gajendra's crises. And 8.3 is
Gajendra's prayers of surrender. In 8.3 is, Gajendra is liberated. So, actually,
offering prayers is glorious. And if we can memorise verses, it is very, very
helpful. Sometimes, we may think, oh, memorising verses requires a burden on the
head. But actually, if once we memorise verses, they will become like ready-made
weapons for us. Ready-made tools by which we can think of Krishna. When we are
told to think of Krishna, how do we think of Krishna? We just try to visualise
some form. That is good if we can do that. But if we memorise verses, then we
can recite those verses any place. And then, we can resolve ourselves in
Krishna. So, we may think, initially, verses, memorising is a burden for the
head. But verses will not burden the head. Memorised verses. Eventually, they
will unburden the heart. Our heart is burdened by anxiety. Worry. Undesir...,
un..., anarthas. And when we can absorb ourselves in memorising and mem..., and
reciting memorised verses, then that will unburden the heart. And like that,
there are other elements. Which are straightforward. Drinking "caraṇāmṛta".
Smelling the incense. Then, touching the deity, Prabhupada talks about how there
is this agitation in India about how one should not, how people, lower caste
people wanted to enter the temples. So, Prabhu..., the idea up, again, in, you
know, restricting entry into the dei..., temple is to make sure that people, who
are qualified, enter. So, people who are qualified, they worship the deity. That
means, it is just way of honoring the deity. And if one is a bhakta, if one gets
initiated, one can easily enter into the temple. And one can make spiritual
advancement thereof. So, you know, now, sometimes, in ISKCON, you know, ISKCON
devotees are not allowed, not allowed to enter in the Jagannath temple. So, the
idea is, the original regulation might be true, is valid. That, you know, people
who are offensive, if they into, enter into the temple, they will think this is
a stone. And they will comm..., commit further offenses. If people are not pure.
They may commit more offenses. So, it is a matter, way of protecting them from
committing offenses. And they may blaspheme the deity. They may disturb the
faith of others, also. So, to have proper honor for the deity. To protect those
people from committing offenses. And from disturb, to prevent disturbing the
faith of others, there is a rule of restricting some people from otherwise
visiting the temples. But with respect to, Srila Prabhupada would say, with
respect to ISKCON devotees, they are following four regulative principles. They
have given their life to Krishna. So, why should they be restricted? So, that
sort of restriction should not be there. So, that is with respect to worshipping
the deity. Seeing the deity. And then, observing and cel..., aarti and other
celebrations of the Lord. So, in this way, these are all various items of
devotional service by which we can make steady spiritual advancement. We will
continue in our next class.

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
