Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WkgvUSXbUY4
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_150_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Preface_and_Intro_-_Bhakti_Rasa_and_Uttama_Bhakti_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=nY007kOEByvngMmJIFdMgp7JpSd8MTU0ODQ5MDM1M0AxNTQ4NDAzOTUz&v=WkgvUSXbUY4&event=video_description

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome to the last book within our Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now discussing "The Nectar of Devotion". You know. You know. So, "The Nectar of
Devotion" is Srila Prabhupada's English rendition of the title of "Rūpa
Gosvāmī"'s masterpiece called as "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". So, "Bhakti" is
devotion. "rasā" is mellow. Or flavor. Or "rasā". You know. Or, or, actually,
there is no equivalent translation literally. "āmṛta" is nectar. So, you know,
you know, the, the, "sindhu". "sindhu" is sea. Or ocean. So, it can, if there
is, literal translation would go, it would be the nectarian ocean of the "rasā"
of "bhakti". So, that becomes a complicated translation. If we put in, you know,
the point that "rasā" cannot be exactly translated into English. So, the word
"rasā". We will discuss it, you know, later, more in detail. When we come to it.
But in general, most people, when they know Hindi. Or other vernacular
languages. The word "rasā" is generally used to refer to something like aamras.
Or ganaras. You know. The juice of mango. Or juice of sugarcane. But the way
Srila Prabhupada uses it, and the way "Rūpa Gosvāmī" uses it, and the way the
"rasā" shastras use it, is something different. It is, and it is not a taste in
the, like a, you know, the juice coming out of a particular object. Which is
called as "rasā". But it is actually, you know, a sweet emotion. It is an
emotion, basically. Not all rasas are sweet. You know. But, you know, it is an
emotion. So, we will discuss about "rasā" more in detail. So, Srila Prabhupada
translates "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" as "Nectar of Devotion". And this is a large
book. And in the Bhakti Shastri, we will not be covering the full book. We will
be focusing on the, you know, you know, first part. That is the 19 chapters. And
these 19 chapters, you know, will give us an overview of sadha..., of
vaidhi-bhakt..., of sadhana-bhakti. And then, ragha..., o..., o...,
raghanuga-bhakti. So, of, the, the, actually, will be, that there are three
prior stages to bhakti. There is devotion in practice. Which is said to be, you
know, sadhana-bhakti. And then, there is, you know, devotion in ecstasy.
Prabhupada translates, that is bha..., bhava-bhakti. And then, there is
prema-bhakti. So, we will discuss these three, you know, you know, categories of
bhakti. In the first 19 chapters. And that is what we will be primarily focusing
on. So, let us look at the preface. Now, the, generally, when books start, they
can have multiple, you know, you know, you know, introductory write-ups. So, one
word for the introductory write-up can be simply introduction. Others can be,
another can be preface. Another is foreword. Sometimes, there is prologue. So,
these are all different slight..., in slight technical terms. So, foreword is
generally written by somebody else. Apart from the author. So, the foreword is
generally written by a person who is more likely to be familiar to the audience.
And then, they, just like when a person is giving a class, at that time, you
know, some speak, some person, some other person comes and introduces the
speaker to the audience. So, generally, the introducer is familiar to the
audience. And then, the introducer acts as a bridge between the speaker and the
audience. At least, a starting of, while introducing. So, foreword is like that.
Foreword is written by somebody else. Apart from the speaker. You know. You
know. Apart from the author of the book.

So, when Srila Prabhupada first published the, his Bha..., Bhagavad Gita as it
is, it was p..., it was, he did not publish it. He was, ISKCON was too new at
that time to have its own press. So, Macmillan published it. So, at that time,
there was, you know, foreword written by Allen Ginsberg. You know. You know.
Just like in Krsna Book, we have a foreword written by George Harrison. So, of
course, Srila Prabhupada later on felt that, due, because Allen Ginsberg was a
hippie leader. And he, you know, he was quite a controversial person. Who, you
know, would advo..., who would advocate taking of drugs for spiritual
realisation. Prabhupada eventually, you know, when BBT, when ISKCON Press, that later
on began, BBT published the, you know, Bhagavad Gita as it is, they decided to
remove that foreword. But Prabhupada kept George Harrison's foreword in Krsna
Book. And so, George Harrison was a phenomenally famous person. During his
times, at least. And he acted as a bridge between, you know, you know, the,
Sri..., Srila Prabhupada and his Krsna Book. And the audience. So, that is with
re..., foreword. So, Nect..., "Nectar of Devotion" does not have a foreword. So,
there is a preface. There is an introduction. And, as I said, the, some,
generally, prologue, if it is there, it is generally for novels. So, it
describes one brief scene from a novel. You know. Something which is
captivating. Or something which, you know, creates the setting. But, of which,
the later action unfolds. From where, the later action unfolds. So, that is, you
know, you know, the prologue. So, here, we do not have a prologue. We have
preface. And phrase..., introduction. So, generally, these are, you know, phrase
did, in different ways. So, Srila Prabhupada, in the preface of the Bhagavad
Gita, he basically talks about how he wrote the Bhagavad Gita. And he talks
a, more about his connection with the book. And he talks about how, you know,
you know, he, you know, how he came to write the book. And how it is going to be
important for the Krishna Consciousness movement. And then, Prabhupada, in the
introduction of the Bhagavad Gita, focuses on the book. And he talks about the
five subjects taught in the Bhagavad Gita, "jīva", "īśvara", "kāla", "karma",
"prakṛti". And he explains those five subjects in his introduction. So, here, in
contrast, Srila Prabhupada con..., he uses the preface for, to give what he
wants to give. You know. That means that in the preface, he introduces Rūpa
Gosvāmī to the audience. He introduces, you know, you know, the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" briefly. And then, he also talks about the concept of
"bhakti-rasā". So, it, the book is about "Bhakti-rasāmṛta", is
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". So, "bhakti-rasā", he introduces in the preface. And
then, in the introduction, largely, Srila Prabhupada focuses on the, you know,
introduction of the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" itself. And then, he takes some of
the verses. He takes the invocation verse. And other verses. And he elaborates
on those verses. So, he also talk..., you know, talks about the definition of
pure devotional verse. Which "Rūpa Gosvāmī" has talked about. So, the way
prefa..., Prabhupada uses preface and introduction in, you know,
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" is different from the way he uses it in, you know, you
know, Krsna Book. But essentially, we will focus on what Srila Prabhupada is
giving in his preface and introduction. Now, Srila Prabhupada called "Nectar of
Devotion" as a summary study. Summary study means that it is, you know, you
know, as Prabhu..., Srila Prabhupada is giving us an explanation in English
language. Of the, you know, intricate concepts that "Rūpa Gosvāmī" brings to
bear in his "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu".

So, Srila Prabhupada has, wrote two books as summary studies. One was the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". Or, which we can, which he renderred as "The Nectar of
Devotion". And the second was "Krsna Book". Which he renderred as the, you know,
so, which, the Tenth Canto of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam", which he renderred as the
Krsna Book. So, Satsvarupa Maharaja writes in his, you know, you know, you know,
one of his books appreciating Srila Prabhupada. You know. Prabhupada was asked,
what exactly does a summary study mean? So, Prabhupada, in a lighter way, and
said, summary study means I do what I want. So, what does it mean I do what I
want? It is not necessarily what Srila, what, you know, actually, Srila
Prabhupada was, you know, you know, basically pointing out that he does not
stick to any, you know, scholastic conventions. But he, basically, takes the
book. And presents it in a way, you know, that is relevant to the audience. So,
in Krsna Book, Srila Prabhupada does not necessarily, you know, stick to the
literal flow of the pastime. Although, he gives the pastime. But Srila
Prabhupada buffers the pastime with, you know, adequate philosophical ex...,
contextualisation and explanation so that people who are unfamiliar with
Krishna, and who can easily misunderstand the pastimes of Krishna, get a proper
understanding. That is what Srila Prabhupada does through his Krsna Book. Now,
similarly, "Nectar of Devotion", when Srila Prabhupada as a, Prabhupada says, I
do what I want, that basically means that he, you know, does not follow the, you
know, you know, stu..., the, the systematic scholarly format which he uses in
his "Bhagavad-gītā", "Bhāgavatam", "CC". There, what does Srila Prabhupada do?
He tran..., gives the sanskrit verse. Of course, that is the way the book is
published. But sanskrit verse. Then, the Roman transliteration. And the word to
word translation. Then, the sentence translation. And then, the purport. So,
when this is done, it i..., it i..., it i..., it actually requires a huge amount
of effort. You know. The way, Srila Prabhupada wrote his books, it is
remarkable. Because actually, he was travelling so much. And while traveling so
much, if one has to write, you know, if we look at the tradi..., you know, the
traditionally, when the scholars would have to write, they would just stay at
one place. There, they would have their libraries. And they would side. And
research their libraries. And write their books. So, Srila Prabhupada was
constantly traveling. He had some books with him. He had for, you know, the, you
know, the commentaries of the previous acharyas. You know. And then, he would
use those, but still, Sri..., there were a number of verses that Srila
Prabhupada quotes in his, you know, purports, is remarkable. And ma..., many of
the places, Srila Prabhupada quotes appropriate verses. Which are not
necessarily quoted there by the previous acharyas. So, that means Srila
Prabhupada is recollecting those verses from his memory. And he is, you know,
seeing the need to use those verses to explain the particular point over there.
And he is quoting them. So, Srila Prabhupada's scholarship is itself
phenomenal. In many ways. And, you know, his, of course, he is the, you know, he
is the empowered representative of Lord Krishna. And Lord Chaitanya. In this
age. And what we are discussing about here is that the way Srila Prabhupada
presented "Bhagavad-gītā", "Bhāgavatam", "CC", it is phenomenal. Because when he
is travelling so much, you know, cannot carry an exhaustive library. And of
course, we know that, he would spend time late at night, dictating the purports.
So, it is remarkable in its own, you know, right.

Now, but that kind of work requires huge amount of time. You know. And Srila
Prabhupada wrote the, you know, you know, Caitany..., wrote Krsna Book because
he felt that, you know, he, because he was, you know, quite in an advanced age.
And he was, felt that, I may not be, live long enough to actually be able to
translate the full, you know, "Bhāgavatam". And because the Tenth Canto was so
important. So, he felt that, that has, that he has to present that for the sake
of the world. And when, therefore, he presented that using the, you know, using
the, you know, summary study format. In which he gave the Krsna Book. And we
see, Srila Prabhupada's foresight. Sagacity. And wisdom in doing that. Because,
although he kept translating and commenting till the, you know, he kept
commenting until the, nearly the last breath of his life. You know. Still, he
had to depart. When he was in the Tenth Canto. So, we have, you know, the
Thirteen Chapter. And some sections of the Fourteen Chapter. You know. In the
Tenth Canto. And, you know, you know, if Srila Prabhupada had not been
farsighted enough to give us Krsna Book, then, we would not have had his, you
know, have got his, his guid..., assistance in understanding Krishna's pastimes.
In fact, his, what the spiritual master gives is not just assistance. Spiritual
master gives understanding itself. You know. That is very important. So,
similarly, "Nectar of Devotion" is quite a technical book. It is a con...,
technical book. And translating it verse by verse, by verse, is quite a
demanding task. So, that is why Srila Prabhupada focuses on giving us a summary
study. Because Srila Prabhu..., because this is one of the most important books
in the, in, you know, for the Gaudiya Vaishnavas, primarily. Why is it so
important? Because in the Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition, you know, there is the,
you know, special concept of, you know, madhurya rasa. Of course, madhurya rasa,
it, the concept, you know, the principle of the attract..., of the romance of
the Lord. The attraction of the Lord, between Him and His devotees, you know, is
con..., in con..., in conjugal relationship. That is there, you know, that is
there as a fact in the Vedic literature. And that is talked about by the other
Vaishnava Sampradayas, also. So, for example, there is Sri. And there is Vishnu.
And there are temples like, which have the worship of Sri. And Vishnu. In the
Sri Sampradaya, also. But the intimacy of the relationship, in the madhurya
rasa, is very special. You know. As explained in the Gaudiya Sampradaya. And in
this particular, you know, you know, you know, sweetness is explained in the
Gaudiya Sampradaya. Through the, you know, the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu",
primarily. So, if we look at these four books. "Isha Upanishad", we discussed as
a, is a broadly, a Vedic book. Then, "Bhagavad-gītā", that Vedic book means
what? It is actually accepted as an authoritative book by all people within the
Vedic circles. It is considered a, Shankaracharya talked about these
"Prasthanatrayi". And actually, the "Prasthanatrayi" concept came before him.
But he gave it great importance. "Prasthanatrayi" means if one wants to
understand Vedanta, one has to have a commentary on three books. These book,
three books are, you know, the Vedanta Sutra. The Bhagavad Gita. And the
Upanishads.

So, the Vedanta Sutra is called as "Nyaya". Bhagavad Gita is called as, you
know, sru..., you know, sru..., you know, is called, you know, is "Smriti". And
the, you know, the Upanishads are the "Śruti". So, you know, the "Isha
Upanishad", so, if we consider this to be like a, consider, four books of the,
you know, nectar, of the Bhakti Shastri to be like a pyramid. Then, the "Isha
Upanishad" is a Vedic book. Which is accepted by, you know, the, all the, by,
practically, in the Vedic c..., Vedic schools. All the schools accept this is
important book. Then, Bhagavad Gita is also like that. Although Bhagavad Gita is
focus on Krishna. And in many ways, it is a Vaishnava book. But Bhagavad Gita is
also accepted large..., by most varieties of people who are followers of the
Vedic culture. Now, "Nectar of Instruction" is a book of general instructions.
For the followers who want to prac..., cultivate bhakti. So, it is a sadhana
book. And it is, now, if we move it upward, upward, now, the special revelations
that the world has, you know, received through the Gaudiya Vaishnava Sampradaya,
they come in the books which are given by the Gaudiya Vaishnava acharyas. So, we
are studying in our "Bhakti-rasāmṛta...", in our Bhakti Shastri course, two
books. One is bhak..., you know, "Upadesamrta". And "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu".
From "Rūpa Gosvāmī". So, Srila Prabhupada, he translated and commented on the,
you know, "Nectar...", of the "Upadesamrta". Calling it as "Nectar of
Instruction". It is quite a literal translation. And, you know, he gave, in his
normal way, word to word translation, translation. And purport. So, you know,
that book gives practical ana..., practical instructions. Bhagavad, "Nectar of
Devotion" also gives instructions. When "Nectar of Devotion" goes deeper into
the speciality of, you know, of, you know, "Bhakti-rasā" as is revealed in the
Gaudiya Sampradaya. The word, you know, Gaudiya refers to many things.
Primarily, it refers to Gauda-desam. You know. You know. That Gauda-desa is the
area which Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu appeared. You know. In the banks of the
Ganga river. So, that branch of Vaishnavism, that appeared in that area.
Actually, that is an external meaning. The, its internal meaning is "Gauda" is
related with the word "Guda". "Guda" is jaggery. So, jaggery is "Guda". You
know. So, actually, jaggery grows in various parts of the, you know, various
parts of the world. But actually, the jaggery that grows in Bengal, especially
sweet. It is almost like chocolate. So, Vaishnavism was there in various parts
of the world. But the special, you know, special sweetness, the, of madhurya
rasa, and as, of all the more so Parkira, Parkibhava in the madhurya-rasa, that
is revealed by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So, that special sweetness of bhakti comes
in Gaudiya Vaishnavism. So, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, you know, had, you know,
four, you know, signi..., the Goswamis, as his primary disciples, and he sent
them to Vrindavan with four instructions. He told them that you should go to
Vrindavan to excavate the lost, you know, sacred places of the pastimes of
Radha, of Krishna. And then, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Himself started this by
rediscovering, you know, you know, Radhakunda. And Shri Caitanya, asked
Chaitanya, he asked the Goswamis to do that. Second was he told them to, you
know, you know, you know, build temples. So, first is, that ok, wherever there
have been pastimes, uncover those places. And second is, build temples. So, that
the Goswamis, all of them they had their worshipable deities. And Radha Govinda.
Radha Madhan Mohana. Like this. All these beautiful temples. Radha Damodara. All
these temples were built. You know. By the Goswamis. You know. Third was to
write books. How, establishing how pure devotional service is the conclusion of
the teachings of the various scriptures. Of the, all the whole Vedic scriptures
about, it is a vast, vast body. But their conclusion is to, you know, you know,
establish pure devotion us. To teach pure devotional service. As Krishna says:

        vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

That I am to be known. And how is He to be known? He says in 15.15, I am to be
known by the Vedas. And then, He says in 18.55 that He can be known by:

        bhaktyā mām abhijānāti

"yāv...", that He is, can be known by bhakti. So, bhakti is the conclusion of
the Vedic scriptures. As far as the sadhana is concerned. What is the sadhana to
be followed? You know. By which, sadhana to be followed. By which, one can
attain, you know, you know, the, you know, the ultimate revelation that is given
in the Vedic scriptures. That is Krishna. So:

        nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saḿsthāpakau
        lokānāḿ hita-kāriṇau tri-bhuvane mānyau śaraṇyākarau

So, basically, "nānā...", I, you know, what is the living to our context is,
"nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau". "nipuṇau" means expert. The goswamis were
expert in "nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika". "vicāraṇaika" means contemplating.
Considering. Analysing. They analysed the hu..., vast body of scriptures. And
then, "sad-dharma-saḿsthāpakau". You know. They established the "sad-dharma".
"sad-dharma" is the true religious principle. That is of bhakti. You know. And
what, what purpose? "lokānāḿ hita-kāriṇau". For the purpose of doing "hita". For
the purpose of doing good to all people. You know. "lokānāḿ hita-kāriṇau". So,
this was the mission that Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave to the Goswamis. And
they executed. Then, last was to write books. You know. Talking. To exemplify.
And write books about how a devotee should live. You know. So, third and fourth
is different, is, fourth, third is more in terms of siddhanta. To establish
philosophically and scripturally how bhakti is the conclusion of the Vedic
literature. And how that is "sad-dharma". And then, how to practice that
"sad-dharma". Exemplify that. And teach that to others. So, these were the four
instructions that, that given to the Goswamis. Now, the fact that the Goswamis,
especially "Rūpa" and "Sanātana" were the primary disciples of Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. And they were primarily in exe..., executing his will. That itself
indicates the universality. Universality of the, you know, message of Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. And of the mood of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, actually, "Rūpa" and "Sanātana", they were, you know, they
were forced to become muslims because at that time, the muslim king, Dabir Khas,
you know, the so, you know, so, you know, Nawab Hussain Shah, he saw that, you
know, he wanted to rule. And he wanted commi..., competent ministers at that
time. So, he came to know from the people that these two young men, you know,
they, you know, who, they were very, you know, very intelligent. And very
talented. And very competent. To be ministers. But in that time, the, in the
Vedic culture, you know, you know, for a, you know, they were Saraswat Brahmins
at that time. They were, morning, Saraswat Brahmins that. It is Vedic culture.
So, for a, you know, the culture was such that, for a brahman to accept the
service for a per..., follower of the Vedic culture, to accept the service of a
mleccha, was considered to be like losing the caste. So, they did not want to,
you know, do this. But then, Nawab Hussain Shah has written that, if you do not
serve Me, then, if you do not become a minister for me, then I will, you know,
you know, persecute the whole Vaishnava community. And in order to protect the
Vaishnava community, they did the sacrifice. Of course, they did not sacrifice
their bhakti per say. You know. Externally, they lost their caste. But actually,
they were, remained dil..., diligent devotees. And, you know, where they were
staying in "Rāmakeli", you know, the king, because he saw that they were
competent ministers. And he came to rely on them. So, he gave them opulence,
also. So, within that op..., using that opulence, they created for themselves a
facility for them to practice bhakti sincerely. And they have created almost
like a, you know, you know, you know, hidden Vrindavan in their own palace. In
the garden. So, replica of Vrindavan, where they would meditate on the pastimes
of Radha and Krishna. So, externally, they lost their caste. But internally,
they were lo..., you know, completely fixed in devotion.

In fact, it was sacrifice so that, you know, you know, sacrifice of, b...,
sacrifice in motivated by their devotion, only. And once they had this position
of power, they protected Vaishnava culture. In fact, they, even, not only
protected. They, but they further promoted Vaishnava culture. You know. They
would invite brahmans to their place. And they would give charity to the
brahmans. And that is how they would, you know, you know, you know, protect and
promote the Vedic culture at, vaishnava culture at that time. You know. Now,
o..., of, they have corresponded with Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu through letters.
And eventually, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu came to meet them. He went out of way, in
his travels, to come to "Rāmakeli". He blessed them. And then, he, he initiated
them. It was not a formal fire initiation that sacrifice that was performed. But
it was in principle the siksha, the, you know, the siksha was given. And then,
they decided to renounce the world. Renounce the world. And go to Vrindavan.
As per the instruction of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So, among the two, "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" renounced first. And "Sanātana Gosvāmī" renounced later. So, because
"Rūpa Gosvāmī" renounced first, so, Shri Chaitanya Maha..., so, "Sanātana
Gosvāmī" considered "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is senior. Although, "Sanātana Gosvāmī" was
among, the older among the two. But he thought that, actually, he has
surrendered his life first. That is why "Sanātana Gosvāmī", despite being older,
considered himself to be subordinate to "Rūpa Gosvāmī". And "Jīva Gosvāmī",
later on, when he came to, you know, you know, came to, you know, you know,
Vrindavan, you know, you know, and he sought initiation from "Sanātana Gosvāmī".
Because he was the older among the Goswamis. But "Sanātana Gosvāmī" said, you go
to "Rūpa Gosvāmī". And take initiation from "Rūpa Gosvāmī". So, in that way, you
know, they, you know, they both lived together. So, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" was
instructed by Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu personally. And he come, those
instructions come in the "Bhakti-rasāmṛ...", you know, in the
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta", also. In the "Madhya-līlā". And "Sanātana Gosvāmī" was
also instructed. And both of them, you know, they, based on the instructions
which Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave them. They combined those instructions. And they
wrote many books. So, one of the most important books that, you know, "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" wrote is "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And then, you know, whatever he
talks about, you know, the, he talks about general "Bhakti-rasā". And
especially, he talks further about, you know, madhurya-rasa in terms of analysis
of various emotions in madhurya-rasa. In his book, "Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi". Sorry,
not, not "Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi". Yeah. "Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi". "Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi" is a
book which talks, you know, "nīlamaṇi" is like a blue jewel. So, "Ujjvala" is
effulgent. That means, it is, it is a reference to Krishna. Of course, there can
be many meanings of it. But, you know, this book talks about madhurya-rasa
ela..., elaborately. When the gopi, some gopi is singing some song, you know, in
separation from Krishna. Then, what is the mood at that time? So, they analyse,
this, this, this indicates this rasa. This indicates this end rasa. This
indicates this rasa. Like that. So, it is a very eso..., esoteric and exalted
book. And, and, so, you know, like that, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" has written
many, many books. Actually, we will not go into all his books. We are focusing
on "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu"'s English rendition as "Nectar of Devotion". So,
Srila Prabhupada gives this introduction, of "Rūpa Gosvāmī". And then, he
describes how, if we look at the, you know, you know, you know, look at the
introduction. Then, Prabhupada talks about bhakti rasa. So, let us look at
bhakti rasa now. Yeah. You know. So, Srila Prabhupada talks about Bhaga..., you
know, bhak..., here about "Rūpa Gosvāmī". And then, you know, Prabhupada writes
what will happen by studying this book.

"Persons engaged in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement may take advantage of this
great literature and be very solidly situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness."

"be very solidly situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.". So, you know, you know, we
discussed, Prabhupada translates bhakti, not simply as devotion. Or divine love.
He translates it as devotional service. So, devotional service is a compound
word. In which, devotion indicates the internal side. The feeling. And the
service indicates the acting. So, both are there. So, devotional service. That
is Prabhupada's special translation of bhakti. Now, Srila Prabhupada explains
how everybody has an impetus to serve. Everybody has an impetus to, you know,
want some pleasure. And we want some kind of pleasure. Some kind of rasa. And
for that, we act in various ways. But the problem with material emotions is that
they are temporary. So, we may work, you know, and by working, we may get some
enjoyment. So, there is bhoga. And there is "tyāga". So, let us look at this.
So, Srila Prabhupada talks about the, how there is ra..., Prabhupada uses the
word rasa. We will not go into the technicalities of the word rasa over here. We
will simply talk of rasa in terms of pleasure. That is how Srila Prabhupada uses
it. That people get pleasure in various things that they do. So, when they get
pleasure, you know, you know, there is, this pleasure has two aspects. There is
bhoga. And there is "tyāga". Bhoga means enjoyment. And "tyāga" is renunciation.
So, sometimes, when there i..., when we enjoy, you know, par..., particular
activity, then, by enjoying, enjoying, enjoying, we feel, oh, I am enjoying.
Initially, when we start enjoying a particular activity, we feel, yes, this is
wonderful. I want to do it more and more. We are looking forward to it. Suppose,
there is a big feast. And say, my favo..., especial, favorite item is "Gulab
jamun". So, then, I am, I am then told, there is "Gulab jamun". So, I am very
eager for it. And then, I am practically, my mouth is watering. I am salivating.
And then, come on, come on. Come. Come. And then, "Gulab jamun". And if somebody
is serving, when are you going to serve "Gulab jamun"? Come. Come. And then, you
know, suppose, you know, you know, there are unlimited "Gulab jamuns". You can
serve as much as, take as much as you want. So, I take one. Two. Three. Five.
Ten. How much can I take? Fifteen. And then, after some time, you know, I, no,
enough. Enough. Enough. And not just that I am, you know, full in my stomach.
Even if my stomach had lot of capacity. Still, you know, this, it, it, the
satiation comes. You know. There are two words. Satisfaction. And satiation.
When I am satisfied, then I am happy. But satiation means enough. No, I cannot
take more. So, you know, some, over a period of time, if we keep stuffing,
stuffing, then somebody says, take more. No, I do not want it. If somebody
forces into our mouth, we may even vomit it out. No. Why? Because just cannot
take it. So, material enjoyment, there is bhoga, you know, so, there is pleasure
initially. But at the end of it, we get frustrated. We get frustrated. Because
it does not satisfy us. It does not satisfy us. So, whatever material enjoyment
is there, you know, we can say that there is a law of diminishing returns.
Diminishing returns means, initially, we get a lot of pleasure. But afterwards,
the pleasure keep decreasing. Decreasing. Decreasing. And then, after it goes
into negative, if I feel frustrated by it. So, people enjoy for some time. And
after enjoying, then they feel I cannot enjoy anymore. So, they want to give it
up. "tyāga". So, you know, you know, "tyāga" means renunciation. So, one gives
it up. One thinks that, ok, you know, I do not, I do not want to, anything to do
with this. Nothing.

Sometimes, people, say, drink. You know. Somebody drinks alcohol. And drinks. And
drinks. And afterwards, he gets a hangover. He says, I am never going to drink
again. You know. So, he says, I will give it up. Now, of course, most
alcoholics, they have given up alcohol many times. And still, they are
alcoholics. So, the "tyāga" does not last for long. But anyway, "tyāga" is
there. So, in material life, there is a rasa. Which we get through enjoyment.
And when that rasa does not endure, we go to another extreme. And try to
renounce that. You know. So, there is, you know, it is like a pendulum. So, one
extreme of the pendulum is, you know, bhoga. The other extreme of the pendulum
is "tyāga". So, in neither case, does the pleasure endure. The pleasure is
"capala-sukha". Prabhupada uses the word "capala-sukha". And this phrase comes
from, you know, Bhaktivinoda Thakur's song. You know.

        capala sukha-laba lāgi' re

He says "capala sukha". He says, actually, that, that is not a, it is not a
song, song by Bhaktivinoda Thakur. It is a Vaishnava song. Which was given
by, you know, another Vaishnava acharya. So, therein, he says, "capala sukha".
It, I got flickering pleasure. "capala". That is not permanent. It is temporary
pleasure. I got that. And went away. It did not last for long. So, fleeting
enjoyment. So, as compared to this fleeting enjoyment, so, there is, you know,
the "rasa" that is permanent. That permanent "rasa" is, you know, "bhakti-rasa".
So, let us look at this, what Srila Prabhupada is saying over here. You know.
How Srila Prabhupada's emph..., you know, empha..., introduce "rasa" is.

"That force that drives the philanthropist, the householder and the nationalist
is called rasa, or a kind of mellow (relationship) whose taste is very sweet."

You know. You know. So, then, Prabhupada explains:

"Bhakti-rasa is a mellow different from the ordinary rasa enjoyed by mundane
workers."

"mundane workers". What they enjoy is different. So, Prabhupada writes that:

"Material engagement means accepting a particular status for some time and then
changing it."

"changing it". We not, you know, we do not endure in one situation for a long
time. And ultimately, there is a death which destroys everything. Even if I say
that, oh, I got job satisfaction. You know. I am in a material situation, which
I enjoy. I do not need anything. I am quite happy in this situation. Fine. I may
say that I am happy in this situation. But how long is that situation going to
continue? Death is going to take me away with everything. F..., also, actually,
even while we are alive, the material "rasa" does not endure. And if somebody
somehow says, no, it will endure. Then, also, it is not going to be endured
forever. Because death is going to take it away. In contrast, "bhakti-rasa" is
such that, actually, it, you know, it, it is not taken away by death. We are
discussing the Bhagavad Gita:

        nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti
        pratyavāyo na vidyate

That whatever we have accumulated by the, you know, on the spiritual path. It
never goes away from us. It stays forever. There is no loss. There is no
diminution. There is no destruction. So, "bhakti-rasa", whatever attraction to
Krishna, we have cultivated, that will stay forever with us. You know. We discussed
in the Sixth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, also:

        pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva
        hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ

That by past pratice, one becomes again attracted to Krishna. "hriyate", avaśo".
Helplessly, one becomes attracted. You know. So, in this way, this is bhakti.
The specialty of bhakti is that, it enables us to move straight to, you know,
it, it, it is something which continues life after life. After life. Becoming is
for all of eternity, of course. When we go back to the spiritual world,
continuously will go on eternally. But even when, we, if we are not purified
enough to go back to the spiritual world. Even if we are in this world, we go,
one life at a time, and after one lifetime, still, bhakti will stay with us. No
other material possession will stay with us. No material possession will stay
with us for that matter. But, you know, bhakti will stay with us forever. So,
now, you know, you know, Srila Prabhupada further explains how we are preparing
for next life by this life. You know. So:

"This eternal engagement in bhakti-rasa can be understood by a serious student
upon studying The Nectar of Devotion."

If a student studies "Nectar of Devotion", Prabhupada says, he can understand
it. And then, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know:

"The senses can then become uncontaminated, being constantly in touch with
bhakti-rasa. When the purified senses are employed in the service of the Lord,
one becomes situated in bhakti-rasa life, and any action performed for the
satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa in this transcendental bhakti-rasa stage of life can be
relished perpetually."

"relished perpetually". So, you know, you know, what is happening is that, you
know, in this world, we all want something lasting. You know. What we want is
not just lasting possessions. We want lasting emotions. Emotions. Not just
emotions. Any emotion. But pl..., pleasant emotions. Sweet emotions. Emotion of
happiness. And many people have the idea that by possession, I will get emotion.
Yes, if I have a car, if I have a house, if I have this, I have that, then that
possession will bring emotion. What emotion? Emotion of security. Emotion of
satisfaction. But it does not work like that. The, so, possession themselves do
not last. And then, the emotions do not last, also. Actually, the emotions that
are there, you know, even when I sometimes, I have a possession. I get a, say, a
new laptop. Initially, I have great satisfaction, oh, a new laptop. It gives me
some emotion. Oh, it gives me pleasure. It makes me feel special. But after some
time, that possession may still be there. But the emotion goes away. And after
some time, the possession also goes away. Because it does not last forever. So,
you know, "bhakti-rasa" means that we do not strive for external possessions in
the hope that they will bring us emotions. Or pleasant emotions. Rather, we
focus on the practice of, you know, you know, you know, engaging ourselves in
sense, in service of Krishna. And by this engagement in the service of Krishna,
you know, the original emotions of the soul, you know, they become awakened. So,
the soul has original pure love for Krishna. But that is forgotten. And it is,
that, you know, our love for Krish..., our relationship with Krishna is
forgotten. And our emotions, our longing for love is misdirected towards other
things now. So, there is a redirection of that love towards Krishna which
happens through the process of bhakti yoga. So, bhakti and bhakti yoga are not
the same thing. Bhakti yoga is the process. Yoga. It is the process. By which,
one develops bhakti. So, yoga means connection. So, the connecting with the
Supreme Lord through bhakti. That is bhakti yoga. And bhakti is eventually the
emotion and the action which is there when we have developed, you know, devotion
to Krishna. So, that is why ach..., you know, now, our acharyas often use the
word kevala-bhakti. Pure devotion. So, bhakti yoga is a process which will take
us to kevala-bhakti. To the stage of pure devotion. Now, you know, Srila
Prabhupada talks about, in the further purport, the, if we look at it further,
you know:

"The basic principle of the living condition is that we have a general
propensity to love someone."

And then, you know, Prabhupada further explains:

"At the present moment the human society teaches one to love his country or
family or his personal self, but there is no information where to repose the
loving propensity so that everyone can become happy. That missing point is
Kṛṣṇa,"

You know. Let us try to understand this very profound point. You know. You know.
You know. "That missing point is Kṛṣṇa". So, what Srila Prabhupada is telling
is, you know, all of us have our own loves. Different kind of love. You know.
Say, the mother loves the child. The hus..., you know, hus..., husband and wife
may love each other. A patriot loves the country. You know. A philanthropist may
love general, people in general. Humanity. You know. There can be different
people who love different, you know, things. Different people, also. But all of
these are temporary. All of these are limited. Why? You know. So, our loving
propensity expands. You know. Child initially loves oneself only. The child
thinks everything in terms of food, only. My pleasure. The child cannot even
think of others. And others' pleasures. Child thinks only of one's own pleasure.
But as the child grows, start thinking of, you know, he or she starts thinking
of others. Ok. My parents are there. You know. I should not just, you know,
every time I have problem, I start crying. And I expect my problem, parents to
come and solve my problems. But I have to consider them, also. I have to try to
please them, also. And so, then, what happens? Instead of thinking of only
oneself, the child starts thinking of others. And like that, the child's, you
know, you know, child moves from self-centeredness, you know, outward, outward.
Outwards. So, there is expansion. Now, this expansion is to one's family. You
know. That is good. You know. One is not thinking only of oneself. One is
thinking of others, also. One's family members, one is thinking. But then, that
can expand further to, say, you know, nation. Oh, I, so, for example, somebody
might be a patriotic soldier. And is ready to risk one's life. For the sake of
protecting the country. So, that is noble. The circle of love has expanded
further. And then, somebody may go further. And think about humanity at large. I
will love all human beings. Now, in the, all these cases, the expansion of the
loving propensity is good. It is auspicious. It is positive. It, it is
auspicious in the sense that it is, all that is at the material level. But
still, one is moving from selfishness, you know, concentrated selfishness. One
is moving upwar..., outwards. But the perf..., this is not perfect. None of
these is perfect. Because, you know, because, it, it is not perfect because,
the, actually, it creates, you know, crea..., you know, you know, sort of
limitation. When I love my family, then I do not love others. Because others are
not part of my family. If I love my country, I do not love other countries. So,
if I love my countrymen, I am not loving other countrymen. If I, say, even if
love humanity, but still, humanity is not the totality of creation. I may love
human beings. And I slaughter animals. And eat them. So, you know, you know, my
love remains incomplete. So, how can I, our loving propensity become complete?
When we love Krishna. Why? Why? How does loving Krishna complete our loving
propensity? Because when we learn to love Krishna, at that time, our, we learn
to love the, you know, person who is the root of all of existence. So, Krishna
is not just some historical or mythological person. Krishna is the Supreme
Person. He is the Lord of all living beings. He is, you know:

        suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

He is the greatest well-wisher of all living beings. All living beings are His
expan..., are His, you know, are His children. There is parts. So, when we love
Krishna, it is not that we are just loving one person. That person is related
with everyone. And by loving Krishna, through Krishna, we learn to love
everyone. So, our loving propensity expands to its su..., maximum. Srila
Prabhupada would use the word "supermost". To its maximum. When we love Krishna.
So, if we want a harmony in society. Then, we, you know, loving one particular
thing when in society will not help. You know. When we love Krishna, through
Krishna, we love everyone. And that is the perfection of our loving propensity.
So, how to love Krishna, that is what "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" will teach. And
Prabhupada gives the standard examples of, when we water the root of the tree,
the whole tree gets watered. And when we puts food in the stomach, the, all the
parts of the body gets, you know, get nourished. So, then, Prabhupada says, you
know, that:

"unless one has realized Kṛṣṇa there is no question of self-realization."

So, Prabhupada says that, one does not have, the emphasis is one does not
have to cultivate "ātmajñāna" separately. If one just cultivates, you know, love
for Krishna. Then, it is like the sun rising. When the sun rises, I can see
myself clearly. I can see, you know, my own hand in front of me. Without the
sun, I cannot see my own hand. So, like that, when we understand Krishna,
Krishna is the Supreme Sun. And by knowing Him, even our, you know, you know, we
will come to know about, you know, ourselves, also. So, in bhakti, we do not try
to cultivate "ātmajñāna" separately. We focus on pure devotion. You know. We
focus on cul..., developing our devotion towards Krishna. And "ātmajñāna" comes
automatically. So, now, let us go to the introduction. So, in the introduction,
you know, you know, you know, you know, let us look at a few things first. So,
this is what we have discussed until now. The history of the book. The history
of the author. And primary subject matter, "bhakti-rasa". This is what we have
discussed in the preface. And then, we discussed about comparison of
characteristic. Material rasa. This bhoga tyaga. And capala sukha. So, actually,
"bhakti-rasa" is, the soul has a natural love for Krishna. So, it is the natural
position of the soul. And it is perpetual. We do not, once we stay, situated in
bhakti, we stay, we get "rasa" constantly. And it is not only perpetual in terms
of this lifetime. It is eternal. Now, we are going to the introduction. You
know. So, introduction, first, there is Mangalacharan. Mangalacharan is the, you
know, invocation of auspiciousness. We will just look at what Mangalacharan
means. Then, there is, Prabhupada gives the broad con..., you know, content, you
know, overview of the contents of scope of the book. Then, he talk, focuses on
the definition of pure devotional service. And he explains that definition. You
know. So, let us look at the, you know, now, Srila Prabhupada explains, based on
what "Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī" says in his, you know, in his, you know, you
know, "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". And in general, it is understanding what is the
purpose of Mangalacharan? It has three purposes. So, you know, there is, it
states the objective of the book. It, you know, offers obeisances to the, pays
obeisances to the worshipable deity. And then, there is a benediction offered.
Benefiction is phalashruti for those who are ready. So, like that, Mangalacharan
serves multiple purposes. A..., a..., Mangalacharan is invoking auspiciousness.
So, now, Srila Prabhupada talks about the, so, "Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī"
talks about it. And Prabhupada mentions this, also. So, now, we are coming to
the Mangalacharan of the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". What is that Mangalacharan?
So, he says over here:

        akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ
        prasṛmara-ruci-ruddha-tārakā-pāliḥ
        kalita-śyāmā-lalito
        rādhā-preyān vidhur jayati

"jayati". "jaya...", let that Lord be glorified. Who is that Lord? You know. His
glories are supreme.

"“Kṛṣṇa, the destroyer of all sin and the bestower of all bliss, the very form
of the highest bliss,"

"akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ"

"filled with all rasas,"

"rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ"

"excels all others in glory."

GYou know. And:

"He brings Tārakā and Pālikā under His control by the diffusion of His beauty;"

And:

"He accepts Śyāmalā and Lālitā as His equals; and gives pleasure to Rādhā with
His excellent qualities.”

You know. So, here, you know, you know, the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" talks
about, you know, quite an extraordinary. It is talking about, for the
invocation, you know, when the, you know, you know, the Mangalacharan is being
offered to, to what is it being? You know. It is, it is offered to Krishna. Now,
but what, what Krishna? In what mood? You know. When we, we were reciting the,
we were studying the Bhagavad Gita, we were reciting this verse.

        prapanna parijataya
        totra vetraika panaye
        jnana mudraya krishnaya
        gitamrita duhe namah

This is a prayer to Krishna. But what is the, what is the mood of Krishna over here?
You know. The wo..., we are focusing on Krishna as the giver. As the giver of
the knowledge of Bhagavad Gita. We are offering obeisances to that Krishna. But
here, the Krishna, who is being invoked, is not Krishna of "Kurukṣetra". Or
Krishna of "Dvārakā". You know. Not the Krishna of the Pandavas. Of Hastinapur
who is helping the Pandavas. He is the Krishna of Vrindavan. And not just the
Krishna of Vrindavan. It is the Krishna of Vrindavan. Of madhurya-rasa in
Vrindavan. So, it is that Krishna it has been called. And, you know, Srila
Prabhupada does not focus on the specifics of the various sub..., sub..., gopis.
You know. He basically is relishing madhurya-rasa with His gopis. So, Prabhupada
does not focus on that. The focus is on "akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ". "akhila".
"mūrtiḥ". "mūrtiḥ" means form. "akhila-rasāmṛta". You know. "akhila-rasāmṛta".
Completely filled with "rasa". So, Krishna is the, is the res.., reservoir of
"rasa". He is embodiment of "rasa". He is the personification of "rasa". When we
say "embodiment" or "personification", that is not in a metaphorical sense. It
is actually, Krishna is filled with "rasa". He is nothing, but "rasa". So, and
this "rasa" is what attracts the devotee, the gopis in madhurya-rasa. In
conjugal mellow. And it is what attracts all living beings. So, what "Rūpa
Gosvāmī", through this invocation, is telling us is that my dear Lor..., that,
oh, Krishna, you know, you know, you know, I am writing this book about the
"bhakti-rasa", about the "bhakti-rasa". And You are the object of this book. You
are the, You are f..., re..., the reservoir of all "rasa". You are
"akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ". Or the form of all "rasa"s. And therefore, it is to
You, I offer my obeisances. So, actually, there being, if we go back to the
three objectives, it is to, you know, to, of three aspects of Mangalacharan. It
is tell the objective. So, objective is to reveal. Glorify this
"akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ". And, you know, implied in this is, what is the, he is
offering obeisances. "jayati". I offer obeisances to this Lord. And then, the,
what is the, you know, blessing that is offered. Implicit blessing. It is not an
explicit blessing over here. The implicit blessing is that, here, in it, it is
there, it s there in lat..., lat..., it comes later, also. But it is that, just
as the gopis are attracted to Krishna, who is "akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ".
Similarly, all of us can also become attracted to Krishna. We all of, all those
who read this book, may they also become attracted to Krishna. This
"akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ". And then, you know, you know, you know, so, now, let
us move forward. You know. So, here, we will see that, you know, you know,
"akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ". So, His Holiness Bhanu Maharaja has, you know,
translated, you know, the Durgam Sanga Manetika. You know. You know. That is the
commentary on the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" by "Jīva Gosvāmī". And therein, he
explains what is this "akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ"? He elaborates on this.

"His unique features which is the cause of all the qualities is His form of
supreme bliss (amrta-murtih) since He contains all the twelve rasas
(akhila-rasa) starting with santa."

So, we will discuss about these twelve, twelve rasas when we come to it, more.
But, you know, so, the, what is the speciality of Krishna who is being invoked
over here? He is, so, "akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ". "akhila-rasāmṛta" means all
twelve rasas are there. "āmṛta-mūrtiḥ". "āmṛta-mūrtiḥ" means the supreme bliss.
The form of supreme bliss. So, "āmṛta" can mean nectar. "āmṛta" can mean
happiness. The form of supreme bliss. That is Krishna. You know. So, this is the
sweet vision of Krishna that is being invoked by "Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī" when he
is, you know, chanting the, you know, when he is starting the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And then, he goes on. And there are several verses
which come up. So, one of the important verses here which comes up is this.

"I offer my respects to the devotees, who are like makaras, kings among fishes,
frolicking in the sweet ocean of devotional rasa; who disregard the
insignificant rivers of liberation; and who are free from fear caused by the net
of time."

This is a complex and sweet metaphor. Srila Prabhupada gives it partially in His
purport al..., in his explaina..., in his summary study, also. So, what is it
actually telling? It is telling that, you know, there are several important
points talked over here. So, first point is that, often, the impersonalists talk
about merging into the Supreme Lord. They talk about how, you know, we, just as
the river goes into the ocean and merges into the ocean, similarly, the "Jīva"
goes and merges into the Supreme Lord. That is the idea. So, countering that,
you know, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" says that, actually, the soul does not merge
into the, you know, Supreme Lord. Rather, just like, even in the ocean, there
are aquatics. And the aquatics sport and delight in the ocean. So, similarly, we
sport and delight in the ocean. So, "we" means the pure, we, the souls when they
become purified. When they develop pure devotion to Krishna. So, there are pure
devotees who delight in the ocean. So, he is comparing the pure devotees to the
makaras. To the fish. To the aquatics. So, through this example, he is
countering the idea of impersonal merging. So, there is, you know, the Supreme
Lord. And the Supreme Lord and the devotees, they all rejoice in the ocean of
devotion. So, there is the ocean of material existence. We want to come out of
the ocean of material existence. But after coming out of the ocean of material
existence, what do we want to do? We want to go to the ocean of devotion. And we
want to swim in that ocean of devotion. And rejoice in that ocean of devotion.
That is what is indicated through this first part. And then, you know, you know,
what is the characteristics of these devotees? So, he offers obeisances to the
Supreme Lord. He offers obeisances to, you know, you know, others, also. And
then, he offers obeisances to the grea..., devotees in general. Who disregard
the insignificant reverse of liberation. And, you know, you know, what does it
mean reverse of liberation? He is talking about different analogies. He is not,
this is, this is, this is not the same analogy as river merging into the ocean.
This is slightly different. He is saying that, as compared to an ocean, the
river contains very less water. You know. You know. When its own sense, the
river may have a lot of water. But as compared to the ocean, the amount of water
in the river is very, very tiny. So, like that, actually, the amount of, you
know, pleasure, you know, through liberation is very finite, is very limited. We
will discuss this later on. When:

        mokṣa-laghutā-kṛt

That the pleasure of liberation is made, is made insignificant, by the, you
know, you know, by the, you know, as compared to the pleasure of devotion. You
know. So, brahmananda becomes insignificant as compared to bhaktynanda. So, same
point, he is m..., taking over here. That they consider the plea..., the ri...,
ri..., liberation is like a river. Whereas devotion is like an ocean. So, you
know, as compared to an ocean, a river is insignificant. Similarly, as compared
to bhaktyananda, now, a happiness of the, you know, of liberation is
insignificant. And then, who are free from fear caused by the net of time. So,
again, he is taking another metaphor. That there is, you know, some oth...,
there is, sometimes, there are, you know, there may be fish. Aquatics in an
ocean. And there, the, some people may come and cat..., you know, some fisher
may, people may come and they throw their net. And the aquatics are happily
sporting in the ocean. But suddenly, they get caught. And they get trapped. So,
they get trapped. But then, what happens? He is saying that, actually, the
devotees are so deep in the ocean. That no net can trap them. And what is the
net he is comparing it to? It is time. So, in, somebody may say that, actually,
this "bhava sagha", are, you say, is the place of misery? No. I am enjoying
this. I am wealthy. I am young. I am powerful. I can enjoy. But then, all of us,
if we think that, we, this, we are going to enjoy over here, the net of time is
going to be there. That is going to catch us. And trap us. And then, we will be
slaughtered at the time of death. So, you know, you know, as compared to this,
in the ocean of devotion, the net of time cannot reach. You know. In the Brahma
Samhita, it is said, you know, you know:

        nimeṣārdhākhyo vā vrajati na hi yatrāpi samayaḥ

That even as much time as required for blinking an eyelid, that much time, also,
does not pass in the spiritual world. But at the, you know, that the, there is
an eternal present. Now, that does not mean there is no time in the spiritual
world. There is time. But time does not control. Or destroy. What makes time
fearsome, in this world, is that it control. And it destroys. You know. In the
spiritual world, time neither controls, nor it destroys. So, in that sense, in
the spiritual world, time is, you know, you know, there, but it simply adds to
the "rasa". So, the time, we, it controls and destroys, that is not there. And
that is what is being referred to over here. When, when it is said that they are
beyond the net of time. And then, you know, you know, Srila Prabhupada explains
further how, you know, you know, you know, just as an ocean can have different
parts. Eastern part. Western part. Northern part. Southern part. So, like that,
you know, you know, you know, Srila Prabhupada says, there are different, you
know, you know, even, the, even the Eastern Ocean, which is what is going to be
discussed, the varieties of bhakti, which, which verse, Chapter 19, will be
discussing this. So, there is, the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". You know. The
heading is Samanya Bhakti. So, that is like an overview of devotional service.
That is introduction in Chapter 1. And then, there is Sadhana Bhakti, which is
talked about. You know. Sadhana Bhakti will have two parts. Vaidhi bhakti. And
Raganuga bhakti. That is devotional service in practice. That is Chapters 2 to
16. And then, there is Bhava Bhakti. That is devotional service in ecstasy. That
is Chapter 17 and 18. And then, there is Prema Bhakti. There is devotional
service in love of God. That is Chapter 19. So, this is the overview of what is
being, you know, discussed, you know, in the Bhakti Shastri course. So, Samanya,
we will be discussing these four aspects in the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". You
know. In, in its Eastern Ocean, we will be discussing. Then, now, let us look
at, you know, you know, while talking about the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu", you
know, you know, the most important, one of the most important verses in the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" is this definition of pure devotional service. You
know. Srila Prabhupada calls it:

        Anyabhilashita shunyam
        Jnana karmadi anvrtam

"Ana...", actually, it is "anvrtam", it is.

        Anukulyena Krisnanu
        Shilanam bhaktir uttama

Let us come back to this now. You know. You know. You know. So, "Anyabhilashita
shunyam". This is an important verse. And let us try to understand this
properly. "Anyabhilashita". There are other aspirations. "shunyam". "shunyam"
means zero. "Anya". The, the important point is, the mayavadis say that,
ultimately, all emotions have to become zero.

        yogas chitta vritti nirodha

It is said in, what, "Patañjali's Yoga Sūtra". That give up all, you know, you
know, moment of consciousness. All emotions. But no. Here, he is saying,
"Anyabhilashita". Not jus..., that there is one "Anyabhilasa" which should
continue. That is a, the, the desire to love Krishna. To serve Krishna. That
should continue. And apart from that, everything else should be given up.
And it is not just "Anyabhilasha". It is "Anyabhilashita". Because sometimes,
when a devotee is in danger, a devotee may pray to Krishna for help. And the
devotee may pray to Krishna for protection at the material level, also. When
Draupadi, she has been disrobed. She posed to Krishna for protection. So, now,
that is not a fault in devotional service. And when there is extreme sudden
danger, a devotee may pray to Krishna for protection. But, you know, normally, a
devotee, so, that is, other time, an occasional "Anyabhilasha" may come. A
desire may come. But "Anyabhilashita" means a tendency. So, the devotee does not
Ghave a tendency to seek protection at a material level. A devotee seeks prot...,
simply to serve Kishna. And to love. Express the love for Krishna thereof. So,
"Anyabhilashita shunyam". So, all other tendencies are "shunyam". They are made
zero. But that does not, you know, so, that means, the heart's desire, a heart's
nature, a heart's tendency is primarily to love and serve Krishna. Nothing else.
And how is this expressed? You know. That does not mean that we give up
every things. "Jnana karmadi anvrtam". A "Jnana karmadi". So, you know, that
means, "jnana" and "karma". That is the knowing faculty. And the acting faculty.
We do not give them up. "anvrtam". "avrta". "avrta" means covered. So, actually,
our, you know, you know, the soul, in the pure spiritual state, has pure jnana.
And pure karma. You know. So, that is different from the jnana yoga. Karma yoga.
Or jnana and karma that is talked about in this world. So, in the spiritual
world, the soul knows Krishna. And the soul works to, you know, please Krishna.
So, you know, when the soul is covered over by the gross and subtle bodies, is
covered over by catential..., conditionings, then that jnana and karma are
directed towards other things. Towards, you know, material enjoyment. Or towards
liberation. You know. But "Jnana karmadi anvrtam". They become uncovered. They
become uncovered. That is what happens by the practice of, you know, you know,
bhakti-yoga. You know. So, or rather, the sadha..., the sadhana-bhakti involves
that one does not give up jnana. And karma. But one actually does jnana and
karma for the sake of Krishna. So, the covering, which causes misdirection of
jnana and karma, you know, that is given up. And when the pure jnana and pure
kama are invoked. So, there is, it is not "Jnana karmadi shunyam". It is "Jnana
karmadi anvrtam". So, the soul does act. And the soul knows in the spiri...,
in the pure, you know, in the spiritual world. When in, when in pure love for
Krishna. But then, it is not misdirected. Or, you know, covered. Or distorted by
anything. And then, you know, "Anukulyena". You know. So, the important point is
that a devotee is always favorably disposed towards Krishna. You know. Kamsa was
also constantly thinking of Krishna. And Kamsa, when he fought with Krishna,
also, or rather, when the asuras fight with Krishna, they give pleasure to
Krishna. But they are, Hiranyakashipu, Hiranyaksha, they, also, you know, you
know, you know, when there is fight between "Nrsimhadeva" and Hiranyakashipu,
the Lord got, you know, mutual, you know, vidya, rasa, mutual rasa in that, you
know, got, got the joy of fighting. But their intention was not to please
Krishna. That is why that is not considered a bhakti. So, a devotee should want
to please Krishna. A devotee should be favorably disposed toward Krishna.
"Anukulyena Krisnanu". And then, "Anu...", "Shilanam". "Anu...", "Shilanam" is,
bhakti is, first and foremost, a cultivation. So, this way, we discussed
elaborately in "Nectar of Instruction". We will not go over here. Bhakti is not
just an emotion. A sentiment. It is a cultivation. You know. There is systematic
activities that we do. And through those activities, the emotion of devotion
becomes systematically cultivated. And this is "bhaktir uttama". This is pure
devotion. Top class devotion. We will continue with the discussion in our next
class.

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
