Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xZmJpZWf4 Audio:
https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=W5xZmJpZWf4&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_154_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_04_%26_05_-_Bhakti_surpasses_liberation_%26_is_independent_of_everything_materialcut_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=7i1OVgF_wuS2iqa0JR2eYyiLYdN8MTU0ODQ5MDQ1M0AxNTQ4NDA0MDUz

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā
mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad, to the Bhakti Shastri course. In the
"Nectar of Devotion". In the previous class, we disussed about the eligibility
of devotional service. We discussed "kanistha". "madhyama". And "uttama". And
now, we move forward. So, before we move forward, we would like to discuss one
topic related with eligibility. That the important point in the process of
bhakti is recognising that we have a particular "adhikāra" based on our taste.
Our attraction towards Krishna. And attraction towards Krishna is not just
something sentimental. That, oh, how much do I speak about the esoteric pastimes
of Krishna? You know. How much am I always in, you know, you know, Vri..., the
mood of Vrindavan? That is all good. But actually, we see there were many
disciples of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur. Who were living in
Vrindavan. But, or in Mayapur. And they did not fulfill the instruction of
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur. They did not venture out from the holy dham to
travel all over the world to share Krishna Consciousness. You know. It was Srila
Prabhupada who took that mandate. It was Srila Prabhupada who had faith that Sri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's prophecy will come through. And not just will come
through. Sri Chait..., Srila Prabhupada took it as his responsibility to make
that prophecy come through. So, you know, the advancement, the, when we talk
about taste, the, the taste is not just something superficial. The taste is not
just, oh, I, I think about esoteric pastimes of Krishna. Kind of pastimes which
nobody has heard. And that taste is a sign of advancement. Actually. The, when
we talk about taste, you know, it is taste to serve and please Krishna. You
know. And speaking Krishna Katha in a way that will please Krishna. You know.
If, you know, if we speak advanced pastimes of Krishna, and the, all that we
think about conju..., intimate conjugal pastimes of Radha and Krishna, and then
that increases material desires in the people. Then, is that really helping
those souls come to close to Krishna. Will that really be pleasing to Krishna?
What Srila Prabhupada did, it was, he spoke the necessary message. When Srila
Prabhupada said, my purports are my devotional ecstasies. What did he mean? You
know. A devotee's ecstasy is not self-centered. It is Krishna-centered. That
means that which gives Krishna ecstasy, a devotee, for that devotee, Krishna,
you know, that, for that, that is the source of a devotee's ecstasy. So, what
will give Krishna ecstasy is when the souls, who are far away from Him, come
close to Him. So, whatever obstacles are there. Whatever misconceptions are
there, if we remove those misconceptions, then that will enable the souls to
come closer to Krishna. So, the, when we talk about who is an advanced stage.
Who is a "madhyama-adhikāri"? Who is an "uttama-adhikāri"? You know. That should
be based on how much that person has comitted to the service of Krishna. And
Srila Prabhupada had that kind of extraordinary, unparalleled commitment. And
that is how in an old age, he was ready to travel all over the world. You know.
Sharing Krishna Consciousness with the peop..., people. And then, you know,
Srila Prabhupada's followers, within ISKCON, are also doing the same thing. In
their own, according to their own capacity. According to their "adhikāra". So,
sometimes, you know, some people, they say, oh, in ISKCON, you do not talk about
advanced Gaudiya-tattva. Oh, you do not talk about rasa-tattva. You do not talk
about raganuga-bhakti. You do not talk about this. You do not talk about that.
And they try to min..., in, denigrate. Or minimise. No. The important point is
to recognise that what is appropriate for people that is talked about. And as
devotees advanced, you know, as devotees advance, you know, they will naturally,
you know, understand what they need for their nourishment. And they will seek
that. Prematurely jumping to advanced, you know, s..., topics is not necessarily
a sign of advancement. Most often, it is not a sign of advancement. Often, it is
a sign of, actually, arrogance. That one thinks that one is qualified. When one
is not qualified. At one time, the devotees in ISKCON, you know, some of the
devotee leaders, they formed a group. And they started focusing on the esoteric
pastimes of Krishna. And they called themselves as the "Gopi Bhava Club". They
say, no, we, ultimately, our goal is to develop "Gopi Bhava". So, they started
discussing about those pastimes. So that they will develop the "bhava" with the
"gopis". When Prabhupada came to know about it, Prabhupada was quite annoyed.
He was outraged in fact. And he said, you know, first, we have to, you know,
first, we have to become qualified. Otherwise, we will misunderstand these
things.

And Srila Prabhupada, it was not that he did not want devotees to advance to
higher levels. But he wanted them to move gradually to those higher levels.
Progressively. So, the, Srila Prabhupada was "uttama-adhikāri". And one who
follows his footsteps will also become elevated. You know. One who follows his
instructions. Sorry. Not exactly footsteps. Nobody can follow Srila Prabhupada's
footstep entirely. You know. What he has done is unparallel. Even if somebody
becomes a very great preacher. Still, Prabhupada is the first person who has
spread Krishna Consciousness all over the world. And he has done that. So, he
has done that all alone single-handedly. Without any institutional support. At
least, that is how he has started. So, Srila Prabhupada's instructions, if we
follow, we will all make spiritual advancement. And those who have followed his
instructions for 20, 30, 40 years, they have also made a lot of spiritual
advancement. And under their guidance, we can all, you know, chart the pack,
path back to Godhead. So, you know, whatever our advance subjects, they will
come. We should not think that, just because somebody has the taste for
speaking. Radha Krishna lila, that itself makes a person spiritually advanced.
No. The spiritual advancement of a teacher is based not, is based on how much
that person wants to please Krishna. And Krishna will be pleased when one speaks
appropriately according to the level of the audience. Now, in the next chapter,
we will move forward to, in "The Nectar of Devotion".

In, this chapter is entitled "Devotional Service Surpasses All Liberation". Now,
actually, this chapter is entirely, you know, set off quotations. Now, all that
is mentioned, there are various quotations which talk about, you know, a devotee
does not desire liberation. But a devotee instead desires simply to love and
serve Krishna. You know. So, Prabhupada now, for example, quotes "Pṛthu
Mahārāja". And, you know, you know, you know, he is offering prayers to the
Lord. You know. The Lord has appeared before him. You know. When, you know, his
hundred thou..., he decides to, you know, forego doing the hundred fire
sacrifice at the instruction of Brahmaji. And then, what happens? He is telling,
my dear Lord, I do not want liberation. Because:

“if after taking liberation I have no chance of hearing the glories of Your
Lordship,"

Then, I do not want that. On the other hand, what I want is:

"I shall simply always pray unto Your Lordship that You may give me millions of
tongues and millions of ears, so that I can constantly chant and hear of Your
transcendental glories.”"

You know. You know. So, here, you know, "Pṛthu Mahārāja" gives a very important
reason why, you know, you know, a devotee does not want liberation. Because in
liberation, there is no opportunity to serve Krishna. The:

        dīyamānaṁ na gṛhṇanti vinā mat-sevanaṁ janāḥ

In "Kapiladeva"'s prayers, in "Kapiladeva"'s instructions, "Kapiladeva" also
tells this that he gives the list of the five kinds of liberations. And then, he
says "dīyamānaṁ na gṛhṇanti". That even if that is given to such a person, given
to a devotee, the devotee does not accept it. Why? Because in that, "vinā
mat-sevanaṁ janāḥ". So, if there is no service for me available in this, then
the devotee does not accept it. So, of course, in one of the liberations,
"sāyujya". When we merge into Krishna. There is no opportunity for service. And
devotee certainly does not want that. But there are other liberations.
"sālokya". "sārṣṭi". "sāmīpya". "sārṣṭi". So, "sālokya" means living on the same
abode as the Lord. "sāmīpya" is living in close proximity of the Lord. "sārūpya"
means having the same form as the Lord. And "sārṣṭi" is having the same opulence
as the Lord. So, these are all different kinds of liberations. And they
"sāyujya". "sāyujya" is merging with the Lord. So, most often when the word
liberation is used by people, you know, it, they have the connotation of
impersonal liberation. That means "sāyujya". Merging into the Lord. And in
"sāyujya", when one, in the names of merging, then there is, you know, you know,
no chance for, you know, service over there. Now, in the other forms, of
liberation, there is a possibility of service. You know. But, if one gets those
other forms of liberations, without the opportunity for service, then it is said
that the pure devotee does not want this at all. So, cer..., certainly, the pure
devotee does not want "sāyujya". And he does not want other forms of liberation,
also, if the opportunity for service not great, is, is not there. And that is
why it, "Pṛthu Mahārāja" is saying that I want to serve. And how do I want to
serve? Serve with my senses. You know. I want to make, ears and tongue, you
know. tongues and ears. So that I can glorify you. I can hear you glories.
Relish your glories. You know. This is the mood of a devotee. So, you know,
liberation is considered to be the pinnacle of spiritual achievement. By many,
many imper..., many spiritualist. And by the impersonalists especially. And, you
know, you know, the idea that, you know, bhakti is greater than "mukti". Or,
bhakti, you know, yeah, bhakti is greater than "mukti". It is, you know, to many
people, it is quite scandalous. In fact, they feel, oh, mukti is the greatest.
How can bhakti mean greater? In fact, we see that, you know, when Sri Chaitanya,
in Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes. Or in Chaitanya-lila, not exactly Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu's pastimes, there is "Haridasa Thakur"'s pastime with, you know,
"Gopal Chakravarthy". And "Haridasa Thakur" said that just by the preliminary
chanting of the holy names, one can get liberation. And he says the real goal,
fruit of holy name is not liberation. Because liberation comes quite easily by
chanting. Actually, it is "prema". Attaining pure love of God. And, you know,
you know, he is, "Gopal Chakravarthy" is brahman. And he was outraged. He said,
liberation is such a great thing. How can you trivialise liberation like this?
And he said that, if I curse you that if, you know, what you have said is not
true, he actually first did a character assassination of "Haridasa Thakur". You
know. There is, there is, there is adhominem attacks. Adhominem means, instead
of arguing again..., against the, countering the argument of the person. We, of,
some, the opponent attacks the character of the person, only. So, that is
considered unethical many times. You know. So, he did adhominem attacks. He says
that this person, he is a "mlecchá". And he is claiming that he knows better
than us brahmanas? And he said, what does this "mlecchá"? The, actually, now, as
we, he was so self-righteous, he even went to the extreme of saying that,
actually, this is a sign of Kali Yuga. That "mlecchá"s are instructing
brahmanas.

And then, he almost spoke like a curse. He said, if what you have said is false,
if the holy name, they, cannot us grant lib..., you know, liberation, then let
your nose fall away. And when he spoke this, actually, there were many great,
you know, learned people over there. And they understood the exalted level of
"Haridasa Thakur". And they cha..., they started, they put their nose, ear, eye,
hands to the ears. And they started, you know, you know, chastising almost
"Gopal Chakravarthy". Now, he was also brahman, He could not just. He just
walked away from there in half. And eventually, after that, what happened, his
own nose fell away. Because what show, about "Haridasa Thakur" was saying, was
based on scripture. Scripture does say this. So, the point where I am discussing
this is that in orthodox soc..., society, orthodox Vedic society. You know. Now,
bhakti is, is it orthodox? Yes, it is orthodox in the sense that it has been
going on for millenia. But the way orthodox society was in India, you know,
during Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's times. And before that, also, was that the caste
system was quite deep-rooted. And brahmanas claim, claimed privileges. So, the
idea was, they did not recognise the power and glory of bhakti so much. And
their idea was "mukti" is very great. So, for such people, you know, the idea
that bhakti can be greater than "mukti" is something which is, you know qui...,
which is quite, as I said scandalous. But it is true. That is what the
scriptures tell. And Srila, this is such an important topic to establish that,
you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" in the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And Srila Prabhupada,
in his "Nectar of Devotion" devote a full chapter to it. So, this chapter is
actually nothing, but quotes. And this also illustrates the point of:

        nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saḿsthāpakau

So, you know, let us look at the various quotes briefly. I will not explain all
the quotes. But the, but the sheer fact that has, full chapter has been devoted
to this topic indicates the important of the topic. So, you know, you know, now,
there, Srila Prabhupada says that, "Śukadeva Gosvāmī" talks about "Bharata
Mahārāja". You know. And he says that, he did not, he did not accept material
opulences. And they said what to speak of material opulences? He does not even
care, he:

"does not care even for that liberation which is aspired to by many great sages,
what to speak of material opulences."

So, a devotee has such a higher taste that nothing is, you know, wanted for a
devotee. Neither liberation, nor material opulences. And similarly, "Vṛtrāsura".
You know.

        na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ

        na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā

So, "na", "apunar-bhavaṁ vā". He says, I do not want anything else. "na
nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ". He says, "na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā".
Then, "yoga-siddhīr". I do not want "yoga-siddhīr". "na". "apunar-bhavaṁ vā". I
do not want li..., "apunar-bhavaṁ" is liberation. I do not want even that. All
that I want is your association. And your service. So, the, here, we see so many
verses. You know. Which illustrate this point. And this is the famous verse.

        nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati svargāpavarga-narakeṣv api
tulyārtha-darśinaḥ

So, "api tulyārtha". Devotee considers everything material equivalent. So, what
has this got to do with liberation? So, Srila Prabhupada specifies that.

"or, in fact, in any situation whatever"

So, he says, then "na", "na kutaścana". "svarga". "apavarga". "narakeṣu". So,
"apavarga" refers to liberation. They get liberation from material existence.
Why they do not care? Because "nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve". They are completely
devoted to "Nārāyaṇa". And for them, in that devotion to "Nārāyaṇa", there is
such happiness that nothing else is wanted. "nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve". And like
that, there is, Indra is addressing "Diti", also. So, he is tell..., you know,
so, like that, there are verses. Many verses. And then, here, there is famous
verse of "Prahlāda Mahārāja". Then:

"what is the use for you of spiritual emancipation or liberation from material
bondage?"

If, as, if one is:

"always engaged in chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord and always relishing
the nectar of the lotus feet of the Lord, then there is no necessity for any of
these.”

And like that, the quotes go on. You know. We can look at the various quotes.
Then, you know, it is just an imp..., it is impressive compilation. And the
import..., now, it goes out into other books, also. Apart from Bhagavatam. You
know. There is also, "Hayaśīrṣa Pañcarātra" is there. And, you know, like that,
"Nārada Pañcarātra" is also there. So, there are various scriptures from which
Srila Prabhupada is quoting over, you know, from, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is quoting. And
Srila Prabhupada is paraphrasing over here. Now, of course, that the famous
quote of "Hanumānji". So, "Hanumān" certainly does not want liberation. In fact,
for "Hanumān", the idea of anything other than the serving, service of Lord
would be, you know, would be appealing. You know. How can he live without the
service of the Lord? So, "Hanumān" also says, I do not want liberation my dear
Lord. Nothing. I want, simply want to serve you. So, you know, you know, this is
the mood of a devotee. Now, you know, how does it apply practically to us? See,
liberation also has two aspects. Liberation has one aspect of what we are
liberated from. And second is, what we are liberated to. So, what is the
difference between the two? Lib..., what is, liberated from means? That, okay,
where am I coming out of? And what am I liberated to? So, where am I going after
that? Somebody is in a jail. And that person comes out of a jail. Oh, I am
liberated from the jail. But if a person is taken out of a jail. And is put on a
wasteland. You know. Whether there is no food. Where there is no water. Where
there is no other life. There were no other people. And such an island. And
cannot go out of the island, also. Then, the person says, ok, you are free to go
wherever you want. But it seem practically in a jail, only. It is a different
kind of jail. Then, it, so, there are two aspects we, where I am liberated from.
And where I am liberated to. So, if, you know, if I am liberated from one place,
that is because I want liberation from a place because I feel that is very
miserable. You know. And, but if I am, where I am liberated to is important. If
I am, for a devotee, for the impersonalist, the focus is primarily on where I am
liberated from. Because they think, oh, this world is a place of such misery.
And they are true. That there is a lot of misery in this world. And
materialists, who do not recognise it is, world is a place of misery, are even
more unfortunate. They are like so drunk that they do not even recognise that
they are drunk. So, it is important to recognise this world is a place of
misery. But their focus is only on, ok, this world is a place of misery. World
is a place of misery. Have to get out. But devotees' focus is on not where I am
get, you know, trapped. Not this, way from what I am liberated. But to what I am
liberated. You know. And a devotee see that if I am getting liberated into, you
know, the impersonal Brahman. Where I have no scope for serving Krishna. Then,
that is of no use to me. You know. Because there, I will be deprived of the
association in the service of Krishna. And the nectar that is available thereof.
So, if I want to, real liberation. The devotee's concern, what, not just what I
am liberated from. But what I am liberated to. And that is why the devotees pray
that if, as long as I am eng..., engaged in your service. So, often, the
rejection of liberation is done in parallel with an insistent, or a, rather,
strong request. Insistent request, almost. Insistent, not in a negative sense.
But, on an obstinate sense. Insistent in a sense of expressing the fervent
desire. So, in that sense, they want to engage in devotional service. Because if
you engage in devotional service, we are as good as liberated. By engagement in
devotional service, eventually, we will become liberated. One time, a reporter
asked Srila Prabhupada, so, Swamiji, how many pure devotees are there in your
movement? So, Prabhupada asked one of the devotees over there, how many devotees
do we have? And he told a particular number, that many pure devotees we have.
The devotee started saying, oh, pure devotees? You know. How can we be pure
devotees? We have so many material desires. I mean material desires. So,
Prabhupada said, you are of, following the process of pure devotional service,
you will become a pure devotee. Eventually. You are following the process. You
are aspiring for pure devotional service. So, you will become. So, there is,
like a raw mango is there. And a ripe mango is there. The only difference is
that a, the passage of time is required. And as long as the raw mango stay
attached to the ripe mango, it will become liberated.

So, the, what we are saying here is that, it, when a, when a devotee is
unconcerned. Devotee does reject liberation. What does it mean? They know that
devotional service itself is the supreme liberation. Because in devotional
service, one can get, one can do that activity which will please Krishna. And
that, thereby, that will give us happiness, also. And if we keep devotional
service, ultimately, we will become liberated. So, "Prabodhananda Sarasvati", in
his "Caitanya-candramrta", says that:

        kaivalyam narakayate

That "kaivalyam". Impersonal liberation is, that which is considered very
exalted destination by the, you know, "jñani"s. You know. And the yogis. He says
"narakayate". It is like hell. Because for a devotee, anything which is bere...,
which is without the service of Krishna is hell. So, naturally, "kaivalyam
narakayate". So, now, you know, we can read the remaining chapter. We will read,
move to the next chapter here.

Now, he talks about "The Purity of Devotional Service". You know. You know. You
know. So, what exactly is the purity of devotional service? Prabhupada uses the
word purity here in the sense that it is purely independent. It does not need
anything else. You know. You know. In fact, you know, you know, Prabhupada
summarises a theme of the previous chapter here. You know. When he says, you
know, you know:

"in his broad statements can be summarized thus:"

So, the previous chapter is summarised as:

"As long as one is materially inclined or desirous of merging into the spiritual
effulgence, one cannot enter into the realm of pure devotional service."

So, you know, that is why a devotee rejects liberation. And thereby, you know,
expresses the determination to enter into pure devotional service. And the
determination to stay situated in pure devotional service. You know. Then,
Prabhupada quotes:

        sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo
        yato bhaktir adhokṣaje
        ahaituky apratihatā
        yayātmā suprasīdati

That is "Rūpa Gosvāmī" quoting this. And now, this is an interesting application
of this verse. Generally, Prabhupada would quote this "ahaituky apratihatā".
Unmotivated and uninterrupted in terms of that this is how we should practice
bhakti. You know. When are we going to practice pure, when, when can you say we
are practing pure devotional service? When our devotional service is
uninterrupted. You know. No matter what happens, we do not let our devotional
service get interrupted. We keep steadily practicing, practicing, practicing
bhakti. Then, that is the indication that we are practicing pure devotional,
devotional service. But there is another way of looking at it. That pure
devotional service itself cannot be interrupted by anything material. Because
"ahaituky". It is not "ahai", it, it is not, you know, initiated by anything
material. It does, it does not have any material cause. That we have discussed
earlier how it does not depend on birth. Or piety. Or things like that. And that
is what he, will be emphasised over here again. So, because devotional does not
depend on anything material, it is not caused by anything material. So, it will
not be interrupted by anything material, also. You know. If an airplane is
flying in the sky, then even if there is some disturbance on the earth. You
know. Maybe, there is a, there is some flood. Or there is some fire. You know.
That is not going to have, affect the airplane. The airplane is high above. And
is going to keep flying like that. Flying like, so, similarly, pure devotional
service is transcendental. It does not depend on anything material. It is not
caused by and it is not interrupted by anything material. So, in this context,
it gives various, you know, you know, points. So, is "janma". Birth. You know.
You know. Affected in devotional service. So, categorically, no. And Prabhupada
quotes how there is a struggle in the history of Gaudiya Vaishnavism. Prabhupada
uses the word in the middle ages. So, in the middle ages refers to after
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's appearance. And, you know, after, I, sorry, his
disappearance. When there was a "Nityānanda-vaṁśa". Which, there was filled with
"caste Goswamis". You know. Caste Goswamis means, you know, you know, that these
people claim that because we are born in a particular past, we are brahmans. And
therefore, you know, we alone have a right to, you know, you know, you know, you
know, that the practice in spreading of, we can see this.

"They further claimed that the practice and spreading of devotional service
belonged only to their particular class, which was known as Nityānanda-vaṁśa."

"Nityānanda-vaṁśa.". So, the "Nityānanda-vaṁśa" refers to those people who claim
to be descendents of "Nityānanda" Prabhu. And they claimed that they have a
monopoly on the practice and the sharing of Gaudiya Vaishnavism. So, Prabhupada
writes how the acharyas fought against it. Now, Bhaktivinoda Thakura was a
reformer. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura was a revolutionary. So, reformer
means one who brings about gentle changes. But revolutionary is just shakes up
things. So, some, if a building has some problem. Ok. Can you repaint this like
this? Can you redo this? Can you change this slightly? That is a reformer. But
revolutionary means, yes, building has so many problems. Just blow it. Will
construct me building, only. So, in one sense, revolutionary does radical
things. So, actually, Bhaktivinoda Thakura started the program to rescue Gaudiya
Vaishnavism from the stronghold, from, from the, from the stronghold of the
caste Goswamis. Bhaktivinoda Thakura himself was actually born in a shakta
family. He was not born in a Goswami family. But he, by his own search for the
Absolute Truth. He studied, he studied Brahmo, Brahmoism. He studied
Christianity. Especially uniterian Christianity. There are two broad sects.
There are, in Christianity. There is uniterian. And trinitarian. So, those who
accept the concept of trinity. And tri..., those who are uniterian. Those who
accept, so, I will not go into theology of Christianity over here. But he
explored various paths. And finally, when he studied "Caitanya-caritāmṛta", he
was very profoundly attracted by Shri, by Shri ta..., Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. And
then, he took initiation within the Gaudiya Va..., Sampradaya. By, by taking,
giving, by accepting as his guru, "Bipin Bihari Goswami". And in that way, he
al..., when because he was well-educated. He was a part of the "Bhadralok". He
got, he brought respectability to Gaudiya Vaishnavism. He started sharing
Gaudiya Vaishnavism. Respectability among the educated people, also. And then,
he, from him, "Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura" was, you know, you know, born.
And "Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura" actually took things further. And that
is why there was a con..., you know, he, you know, he often had confrontations.
You know. That famous confrontation between, you know, which happened in
Midnapore. Brahmana versus vaishnava. It was a debate. And "Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura" comple..., whitewashed his opponent, practically speaking.
And there was a, you know, you know, stampede of appreciative people,
practically, over there. The, even "Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura" defeated
all of his opponents completely. And the people just came forward. And tried to
touch his feet. And everybody was coming forward so vigorously. There was
devotees in stampede. So, the local administrators over there brou..., they
brought buckets of water. You know. You know. Asked "Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura" to sit down. And put his feet in the wat..., buckets of water. And
then, they took the water. And sprinkled on the people. So, "Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura" was so profoundly learned. So, when there were also attempts
on his life, at one time, when he was in Nabadwip, people even attacked him.
And his Parikrama, When he was in Vrindavan, at that time, sometimes, the, you
know, main, main temples got closed. They were not allow..., they, they did not
open because he had, you know, actually initiated people who were non-brahmins.
And he had only made his, some of them into sannyasis, also. So, there were
things which were, you know, they said, I, no, no, we cannot do this. So, at
first, they said, actually, non-brahmins cannot even practice Gaudiya
Vaishnavism. Some of them would say like that. But then, they said, ok,
non-brahmins can practice. But they cannot teach. But actually, you know, you
know, there is no such rule. And Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu made, you know,
person who was, what to speak of non-brahmin, a person who was a non-hindu
entirely. You know. That is, that is, that is Haridasa Thakura. Into the topmost
teacher. He went into the nama acharya. And similarly, we see "Sanātana" and
"Rūpa Gosvāmī", they had lost their caste. But still, they were also accepted as
founding acharya. Founding teachers in our movement. So, Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu did not have this. You know. Any sort of thing. So, "janma" is not a
factor. Anybody can be born in any fam..., you know, family. But still, that
person can make rapid spiritual advancement by taking shelter of Krishna through
the process of bhakti. So, the purity of devotional service is such that, in, an
impure birth, it does not make any difference. Krishna also says in the Bhagavad
Gita.

        ye ’pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

In, people, who are born in lower caste, they do not, it does not make any
difference. So, Prabhupada writes:

"There was a great hard struggle"

You know.

"There was a great hard struggle for some time,"

For "Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakura". Attempts on his life. And we discussed
all that. You know. You know. You know. And then, Prabhupada writes:

"It is on the basis of his position that anyone can now become a Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava from any part of the world or any part of the universe."

Prabhupada gives a very universalist way over here. Any part of the worl...,
universe. And then, Prabhupada quotes various references for this point. You
know. He quoting from the "Skanda Purāṇa". "Kāśī-khaṇḍa" portion. And then, now,
this is a, you know, he is quoting on from the "Padma Purāṇa". "Vasiṣṭha" Muni
is telling "King Dilīpa". So, you can read the quotes. You know. You know. You
know. You know. So, the, now, this quote from "Mayūr...", "May...", or:

"In the country"

Of, from "Skanda Purāṇa". What does it state? It states, the:

"In fact, they look so very beautiful that immediately they surpass the ordinary
brāhmaṇas.”"

So, not only can they practice, but actually, they become greater than
brahmanas. That is the idea. So, now, Prabhupada, Prabhupada is so balanced. You
know. First, he says that, you know, just as, he gives the famous example that
just as by, you know, touching bare metal, you know, you know, he gives the
example which he has given in the "Upadesamrta", also. That just by alchemy, a
lower metal can be converted into gold. Similarly, a person, whatever be the
birth can be converted into an exalted soul by initiation. So, now, immediately,
Prabhupada balances by saying that, oh, do not think that just by initiation,
you already become a great soul. He says, you have to actually practice the
rules and regulations. Become purified. And then, you will become great souls.
But the point is that opportunity to become advanced is there open for everyone.
So, after talking about birth, then he talks about "prāyaścitta". Then, he talks
about fall down. You know. You know. So, now, the word fall down, generally, we
use in devotional service. Somebody is unable to follow the four regulative
principles. Or has some other, you know, you know, you know, immoral behavior.
Then, we call that as a fall down. Now, in the path of karma kanda, the idea is
that if one falls down, then one has to do "prāyaścitta". And only after doing
atonement, one becomes purified. Without that atonement, one remains pure,
impure. You know. In bhakti, one does not have to do any separate atonement. In
fact, bhakt..., continuation of bhakti is itself an atonement. So, when some
devotees would have some difficulties in practice of Krishna Consciousness, they
would report it to Srila Prabhupada. What would he tell them? He would tell them
to intensify their devotional service. Now, some, now, if some devotee has some
serious problem, you know, in the following the standards, then such a devotee
may not be given a leadership position in the movement. Or if the position,
devotee is in leadership position, the temple leader would worship, temporarily,
opponently, the leader, leadership position would be removed. Now, that is not
because devotional service is not potent. Devotional service is so pure that
whatever impurity a person may have. That impurity can be removed by devotional
service. But that removal is done through, protect that person. And to protect
others. To protect that person that the prote..., that person, if one, one has a
leadership position, one has so many responsibilities, that often, that may
distract one from focusing on tapping the potency of pure devotional service.
And, and becoming purified. And similarly, others may think, ok, if some, here,
that person is doing like that, that is ok. I can also do like that. No, that
should not be a wrong message conveyed. So, when we say that, you know, no
"prāyaścitta" is required, that means that, it is not that any kind of behavior
is ok. No. The point is that, actually, whenever there is in prob..., there is
f..., something which requires "prāyaścitta". What a devotee does is, practices
devotional service itself. And this is actually the theme in the Sixth Canto,
also, in the disussion between "Śukadeva Gosvāmī", "Parikṣit Mahārāja", about
the, about how as the "prāyaścitta"s do not purify as, they may just check the
counter. You know. They may just prevent the sinful reactions from coming. But
they do not purify the sinful mentality. That is purified only by bhakti.

        kecit kevalayā bhaktyā
        vāsudeva-parāyaṇāḥ
        aghaṁ dhunvanti kārtsnyena
        nīhāram iva bhāskaraḥ

Just as fog is removed, as soon as the sun rises, so, similarly, all impurities
are removed. All sins are removed. When bhakti to the Lord awaken. You know.
That is what is important. Now, after talking about this, you know, you know,
you know, Prabhupada talks about:

"Practically there are three processes for elevating one to the platform of
spiritual consciousness. These processes are called karma, jñāna and bhakti."

And then, Prabhupada quotes various places. "Nārada Muni" from the "Uddhava
Gita". And like that, he quotes various things. You know. Now, Prabhupada goes
on. So, now, actually, the way Srila Prabhupada gives the quotes, all of them
are combined together. But there are different issues which have been talked
about. So, one is where one is born. Another is, has one fallen? Even if one is
fallen, one can continue devotional service. Devotional service does not require
purification by any other process. So that the person can practice devotional
service. Similarly, now, the thing that is starting from here is, any person who
is, you know, is it, now, the theme is that, the devotional service is so
potent that one does not need to be a part of varnashram. So, any person can be
in any "varna". And any "ashram". One can practice devotional service. And
become elevated. You know. You know. And then, you know:

"giving up all occupational duties, is to be considered the first-class man.”

You know. So, in fact, what He, Krishna is telling is that surrender to a
person. Surrender to him makes a person a first-class man. It is not that there
is this, being in a particular "varna" or "ashram" is exalted. In fact,
surrender to Krishna is even more exalted. You know. And then, there are many
other quotes. There is the quote which is discussed in our Bhagavad Gita class
of "naham". You know. "mukta", you know, when in, that one, how one is not
deterred to anyone.

        na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan
        sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

If one surrenders to Lord Muk..., Lord Mukunda:

        gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

So, if one:

        devarṣi-bhūtāpta ...

        na ... ṛṇī ca rājan

So, the idea is that, whatever be a person's, you know, you know, you know, social
situation, like when varnashram or otherwise, one is not obliged to anyone else
if one surrenders to the Supreme Lord. This also indicates that there is no
contamination that can come for a devotee, who is engaged in devotional
seriously. So, you know, devotional service is not dependant on any "varna". Or
any "ashram". It is dependant simply on, you know, de..., is..., devotional
service itself. It is self-depend..., it is self-dependent. Or independent. It
does not require anything else. It is not that one has to be in a higher varana
to practice, nor does it that one has to be in a lower "varna" to practice. One
can be in any "varna". One can practice bhakti. And become elevated. So, we will
see in the medieval ages. There was a bhakti renaissance all over India. So,
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and his associates appeared in Bengal. But like that,
there were many other saints appeared in different parts of the country. And we
will see, most of these saints were from the lower castes. And despite being
from the lower castes, they were able to, they practiced devotional service. And
not only they practiced, they inspired many, many people. All over the country.
During their times. So, you know, their devotion was not interrupted by their
being from a lower "varna". Or having a lower birth. So, this may sli..., lead,
slightly different. Birth and "varna". But the point is, of course, in Vedic
culture. You know. You know. Bir..., "varna" was not determined only by birth.
But even if the person is taking up some lower occupation. That does not make a
person disqualified from practicing bhakti. Or even from teaching bhakti. You
know. When Srila Prabhupada came to India, you know, you know, and he brought
his western disciples with him. So, it created a sensation in India to see these
western devotees in dhoti, kurta, shirt, you know, you know, dhoti, kurta, and
saari. And dancing. And singing. And of course, there was, although there was
the appreciation. Along with that, there was some opposition, also. Some
criticism, also. So, some day, letters appeared. When the, when the big succ...,
big successful programme of Srila Prabhupada was reported in "The Times of
India". And other Indian newspapers. So, at that time, those newspapers, they
said that what is this? One, some people wrote letters. They were saying that,
you know, this, Bhakti..., Swami, Swamiji's, Bhaktivedanta Swami's disciples
were interviewed. And some of them said that, you know, that one of them said
that he was a truck driver earlier. And he said, this indicated he was shudra.
And he cannot become a proper Vaishnava. Now, now, now, I am just giving truck
driver as an example. Different devotees are coming from different backgrounds.
And they said, therefore, this person cannot. So, Prabhupada told, Prabhupada
read all the newspapers' rep..., reports very carefully. You know. If anything
very connected with ISKCON was there in the news, Prabhupada was very con...,
eager to know what it was. And to make sure that the public got the proper
perception about Krishna Consciousness. You know. You know. So, he told Tamal
Krishna Maharaja. Giriraja Prabhu at that time. So, now, he is Maharaja.
Giriraja Prabhu. That, you know, that you can actually respond to these letters.

And then, Prabhupada himself responded to one of the letters. Or he gave id...,
generally, ideas to devotees. This, you should write this. You should write
this. Write this. And Prabhupada told them that, actually, you know, whatever be
the background of a devot..., person, whatever be the place. You know. Job a
person was doing in the past. It does not matter. Because devotional service is
transcendental. And now, the person is engaged whole-heartedly in the service of
Krishna. That is what is important. What happened earlier, you know, what the
person was doing earlier does not matter. So, it is not that some, if I, if I
just change electricity bulb in my house, I become electrician by that. So,
similarly, somebody might be doing a particular activity, that does not
necessarily make that person belonging to that "varna". There may be devotees
who may be driving cars. There may be devotees who may be cleaning toilets.
There may be devotees who may be, say, you know, this, moving cloth. That does
not make them belong to any particular "varna". Just by that activity's
performance. Bhakti is transcendental. And all these can be means by which a
devotee can serve Krishna. And serve, move, move forward in Krishna's servi...,
in Krishna Consciousness. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. So,
actually, now, sometimes, we may get lost in seeing what is happening. So,
actually, this whole section, which is long section here. In several paragraphs.
So, from here to here. This section.

"The same thing is"

In:

"Karabhājana Muni addresses Mahārāja Nimi"

So, three paragraphs. All of it is talking about that one verse:

        devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

And the point of quoting that verse is to tell us that, you know, bhakti is not
dependent on anything material. Bhakti is supremely pure. So, nobody has to do
anything for him. Now, now, nobody has to do anything to become purified. So
that the person can practice bhakti. No. That person is alr..., everybody is
alr..., that person can, any can, any position can practice bhakti. And
Prabhupada quotes:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya

And then, he even quotes from "Agastya-saṁhitā". And even "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam".
So, Eleventh Canto often means here that there are quotes in this sub..., in
this section. From the Eleventh Canto. So, now, all this has concluded that pure
devotional service does not require anything else. It is ind..., it is pure. It
is independent. It can purify a person from whatever situation the person may be
in. And it can help that person to attain elevation. And ultimately, attain a
destination that is higher than liberation. You know. You know. So, now, we come
to the point of how to discharge devotional service. So, here, there is
basically, this chapter is basically a rule, a set of 64 rules. Of how to, 64
items to practice devotional service. So, I will not go into the items. Because
we will be discussing those items after some time. Now, let us focus on 64
items. So, they fall into two categories, actually. So, here, we can see that,
you know, you know, yeah, so, there is 64 items of "sādhana-bhakti". Out of
which, there are 20 items of primary importance. And those 20 items involve
"anukul". And "pratikul". That means 10 activities to accept, there is one to
ten. And eleven to twenty are 10 activities to reject. Or to avoid. This
"pravritti". And "nivritti". You know. You know. And then, you know, 40, 44
additional add..., items are also talked about over here. 20 plus 44. 64 is out
of this. 21 to 59 are the items of "sādhana". This is how one should practice
"sādhana". And then, 60 to 64, these are the five potent forms of devotional
service. Like, this will comprise a separate chapter. And we will discuss it as
we move forward. So, now, what are these items? Which are talked about? The
item, ten, the one to ten items? Activities to accept in "pravritti". Let us
focus on this first. You know. So, for this, we go into, so, this chapter. We
can just read this chapter now. This is a listing. And we can, you know, we will
discuss list, you know, later. As, as it is elaborated in
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". Now, "Evidence Regarding Devotional Principles". This
is, this chapter is, chapter is like this, are actually the, in one sense, the
most, you know, you know, difficult to, you know, translate. And they are quite
challenging to understand. Because the idea is that, these difficulties, sorry,
evidences regarding devotional principles, so, so, whatever principles, "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" men..., mention over here. He will say that, ok, for this principle,
this is the proof. For this principle, this is the proof. Proof means, he will
give quotes from scriptures to establish how this point is to, you know, you
know, so, now, what we will do is, we will look at waves of devotion, also. And
sanskrit equivalence of the terms. So, "ACCEPTING THE SHELTER OF A BONA FIDE
SPIRITUAL MASTER". That is the first. It is called as "adau guru-padashraya".
"adau" means the beginning. "guru-padashraya". We take shelter of the "guru".
Take shelter of the "guru". So, spiritual life begins when we get initiation. Of
course, what we are doing,pi..., spiritual life is never interrupted. So, in
that sense, what we are doing before initiation is also spiritual life. So, we
already have a relationship with the spiritual master. But that interr...,
relationship becomes solidified. You know. And as routinised. By the, you know,
determination of the candidates who are ...
