Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5lDZSO2D-F0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=5lDZSO2D-F0&redir_token=ZXh8z7K2IYkmoQXwmKGqeefGG2t8MTU0ODQ5MDM5OUAxNTQ4NDAzOTk5&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_152_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_01_-_Remaining_five_characteristics_of_devotional_service_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri, "Nectar of Devotion" classes.
Now, we are discussing the six characteristic of devotional service. So, in the
previous class, we discussed about, you know, about the quality of devotional
service to free us from misery. "Klesaghni". So, let us quickly recap that. And
then, we will move forward to the next discussion. You know. You know. So, here,
we will just, yeah, you know, so, we have discussed this. I will not repeat
this. But I just quickly summarise it here. We discussed how our suffering
origintes in ignorance. That is "avidyā". And then, it moves on to "kutam". It
creates a sinful proclivity within us. Which leads to sinful desires. That is
"bijam". Then, we do "papam". Then, or, or we do "punya", also. Whichever way it
is, then that reaction to "papam" or "punya" accumulates us the "aprārabdha".
The unmanifest sinful reactions. The unmanifest sinful reactions become, you
know, manifest as "prārabdha". And then, we undergo suffering or enjoyment. You
know. You know. So, now, of course, the "aprārabdha" also cycles back. And
because what, when we do some sinful activity, that sinful activity also creates
the sinful proclivity again. So, that is how this becomes a cycle. So, how does
bhakti counter it? Bhakti, we discussed, "avidyā" is uprooted. You know. So, how
it is countered, I have written in the red words over here. "avidyā" is
uprooted. Ignorance is removed because Krishna personally gives knowledge and
bhakti illumines us.

        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

Like that. Then, "kutam" is countered. Because even the sinful desires that we
do not know, they are flooded out of our heart by the process of bhakti. So,
"bijam", you know, is nullified. Nullified means, the sinful desires that we
ha..., may have, you know, which we have been indulging in the past, also. Those
desires, we realise that, they do not give me any real happiness. There is a far
greater happiness available in devotional service. And those desires become
undesirable. As Krishna uses the word, "na kāma-kāmī". One is no longer the
desirer of des..., desirer of desires. And as far as the suffering is concerned,
the suffering is, you know, irradicated. Or transcended. So, irradicated or
transcended means, you know, that either the suffering is, Krishna says:

        ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo
        mokṣayiṣyāmi ...

So, the suffering is either, you know, transcend..., eradicted. Krishna just
takes away the sinful re..., sin, reactions to, from us. The suffer..., Krishna
does not get the suffering come. And even if some sufferring has a, residue
comes along, a devotee transcends that suffering. Why? Because bhakti gives us
the higher taste. The remembrance of Krishna enables us to go beyond suffering.

        mad-āśrayāḥ kathā mṛṣṭāḥ
        śṛṇvanti kathayanti ca
        tapanti vividhās tāpā
        naitān mad-gata-cetasaḥ

The, in the third Canto of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". Lord Kapila Deva describes that
the devotees who take shelter of Him:

        mad-āśrayāḥ kathā mṛṣṭāḥ

My "kathā" is so deliciou..., you know, cor..., relishable that:

        śṛṇvanti kathayanti ca

They hear. And chant. Hear. And speak about it. And by that, you know, although:

        tapanti vividhās tāpā

Although various miseries come, those miseries do not afflict the devotees.
Because we:

        naitān mad-gata-cetasaḥ

Their consciousness is not in that situation. Their consciousness is high above
that situation. Just, you know, like outside, it may be very hot, we have given
this example several times. But if a person comes in the AC room, then the
person does not feel the heat. So, like that, a devotee, by absorption in
Krishna also transcends suffering. So, of course, bhakti eradicates suffering.
Oh, and in that way, a devot..., bhakti is "Klesaghni". So, you know, you know,
now, after "Klesaghni", the next characteristic is "Subhada". "Subhada" means
auspicious. Not just auspicious. But all-auspicious. So, now, Srila Prabhupada
explains what is the nature of all-auspiciousness? That which benefits everyone.
That which attracts everyone. That which produces good qualities. And that which
bestows superior happiness. That is the meaning of auspicious. All-aucpicious.
So, let us look at these one by one. You know. The word auspicious means, now,
what is the difference between "Klesaghni" and auspicious? See, one is to remove
misery. But, you know, just like in a diseased ca..., in a, when a person is
sick, there is one, pick, one part of the disease is removing of the infection.
The second part is the recovery of the energy and the normal health. So,
sometimes, when a person is, the disease has been removed. But the person has
not yet been, has, the, come back to normal health. So, that person is said to
be recuperating. So, it is not that person is sick. But the person needs rest
for recovery. So, like that, you know, you know, here, "Subha...", you know,
"Subh...", all-auspicious means that, you know, there is miseries removed. But
the future, positive happiness is guaranteed. And how does this future, positive
happiness? "Subhada". "Subha" is auspicious. That which gives. How is this
brought about? That is because, you know, the, for it is, for it to be
all-auspicious. Bhakti is all-auspicious. That means when one devotee advances
in devotional service, by that, everyone is benefitted. You know. When we chant
Hare Krishna attentively, you know, we are improving the world. One thought at a
time. Because ultimately, what, you know, what is the, what happens in the world
is determined by people's thoughts, desi..., and desires. Which translate into
actions. And the world is not going to improve by somebody just coming. And
ma..., waving a magic wand. The world is going to improve when then the people
within that are going to improve. And the people are also not going to improve
by some magic wand. People are going to improve when their thoughts and desires
improve. So, bhakti is "Subhada". Because bhakti improves our thoughts. And
desires. Bhakti purifies our, moves our negative thoughts. Selfish thoughts.
Distractive thoughts. And of course, desires correspondingly. Thoughts grow
into desires. And it replaces them with positive, selfless, noble thoughts and
desires. So, bhakti is, you know, "Subhada". So, actually speaking, you know,
bhakti benefits everyone. You know. It is not that, a person, you know, we have
discussed earlier, how, whenever we love some, one thing, then any other thing
apart from Krishna, then that love creates sectarianism. Ok. I love my country.
Then, that means, I am not loving the opposing country. So, if I love India,
then because of my love of India, I may well hate Pakistan. Because I consider
Pakistan as my enemy. Whereas when we love Krishna, we love everyone. You know.
Sometimes, we may say that, ok, devotees also have to fight. Say, you know,
there are opponent, opposition, opponents of devotees. And we have to fight
against them.

So, the Pandavas fought against Kauravas. But then, the Pandavas are still the
well-wishers of the Kauravas. And Lord "Rāma" fought against "Rāvaṇa". But after
"Rāvaṇa" was killed, Lord "Rāma" asked "Vibhīṣaṇa". Insisted, in fact, to
"Vibhīṣaṇa". That he also do the, you know, last rites of, you know, "Rāvaṇa".
Because he said that the soul is pure. And the soul, you know, you know, should
not have any, you know, antipathy. Any hatred for the soul. So, the point is
that bhakti benefits everyone. It benefits everyone. How does it benefit
everyone? Because bhakti directs our love towards Krishna. And purifies our
heart in a way that ultimately we become connected with everyone. So, it
attracts everyone. It benefits everyone. How can it attract everyone? Because
everyone ultimately is a soul. Everyone ultimately is a soul. And, you know,
that soul has, all souls have a natural relationship with Krishna. You know.
Which is just covered presently. And over a period of time, it will become
uncovered. So, by the practice of bhakti, we learn to rise beyond material
things to spiritual things. To spiritual reality. And by rising to spiritual
reality, we experience the supreme happiness. You know. So, you know, you know,
you know, it attract every..., it, it is, it attracts, our, even, it benefits
everyone. So, because everybody has a relationship with Krishna. When everybody
experiences spiritual happiness, then they give up inauspicious activities. And
they become situated in auspiciousness. And it is, it produces good qualities.
You know. So, so, Prabhupada also gives the example of how, you know, just by
practicing devotional service for a few months, young people, who are engaged in
all kinds of, you know, you know, inauspicious activities. You know.
Intoxication. Illicit sex. You know. You know. Meat-eating. Gambling. All sorts
of activities. You know. They give up those, you know, you know, self-defeating
activities. And they develop self-control. They develop, you know, respectful
attitude. Humility. Sensitivity. You know. Of course, their development of these
positive qualities is a progression. But, you know, those qualities are indeed
developed. You know. So:

        yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā
        sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ

"samāsate surāḥ". That actually, for "surāḥ"s. For those who are, you know, the
devatas. You know. As compared to the demons, devatas have many good qualities.
So, you know, one may say, that is why we say that a person ne..., who has good
qualities is godly. You know. So, like that, by the practice of devotion, by
developing devotion, all auspicious qualities develop in a person. Because
essentially, the soul has auspicious qualities. Ju..., and the soul is simply
covered over by the modes of ignorance. You know. By the lower modes. Because of
which, those pure qualities are obscured. And when, you know, a person becomes
purified, then good qualities manifest. And that is how, those good qualities
also become the cause of auspiciousness. You know. When we have good qualities,
naturally, we act positively. And when we act positively, naturally, that brings
positive results for us. So, bhakti is auspicious because it produces good
qualities. And then, it bestows superior happiness. Ultimately, you know,
something, if it is auspicious, if we say that, you know, you know, if we say
that, you know, it does not bring happiness, then the ausiciousness does not
have much meaning. So, bhakti gives supreme happiness. You know. That happiness
of bhakti will be talked several times in "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And we will
discuss it progressively as we move forward. Now, let us look at the references
that "Rūpa Gosvāmī" has given for this. And look at those references one by one,
briefly. So, you know, here, so, we see, Krishna Consciousness is
all-auspicious. You know. So, Prabhupada, you know, translates it, pure
devotional service is Krishna Consciousness. You know. Krishna Consciousness.
And he says, it should be meant, it:

"means welfare activities for all the people of the world."

For all people of all the world. That, so, universally attracted. And Prabhupada
gives example that, that, actually, when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu went, he
benefitted even the animals.

"traveling through the forests of Jhārikhaṇḍa ..."

"The tigers, the elephants, the deer and all the other wild animals joined Him
and were participating, in their own ways, by dancing and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa."

So, Srila Prabhupada would say that, you know, we do not have the potency to
make animals dance. But people who are like hum..., living like animals. They can
be made to dance by the chanting of the holy name. So, Srila Prabhupada actually
did that. So, there is universal benefit by the process of chanting. And by the
process of Krishna Consciousness in general. Chanting in specific. And we see
this that people, who have no knowledge about Krishna, also. They also relish
chanting. And they become attracted by it. So, that is what is being talked
about here. That bhakti gives us supreme happiness. You know. Bhakti is,
actually, attracts everyone. Even non-human beings. What to speak of human
beings. So, when a person becomes a bhakta, we see that the example of
"Jadbharat", also. You know. He was so sensitive that he did not even want to
step on an ant. That is how a person becomes the well-wisher of all living
beings. You know. You know. You know. Then, Srila Prabhupada talks about, you
know, how a devotee gives up all bad activities. And materialistic people, even
the be..., well educated. You know.

"He may be highly educated from the academic point of view, but in the actual
field of his activities he can be seen to be baser than the animals."

You know. Many of these so-called scient..., many of the scientists,
philosophers, who are very respected for the scientific, you know,
contributions. Or even the philosophical insights. So, if we look at the
personal lives, often, they, their personal lives are not marked by very high,
you know, you know, high personal standards in terms of their ability for
self-mastery. You know. They sometimes had illicit affairs. They may, some of, 
some famous authors, they may be chain-smokers. And some, you know, some of the
greatest authors of the last century. They all committed suicide in the end.
Because of frustration. So, because of, whatever situation was given. Basically,
they did not have much self-mastery. So, they did not have good qualities. So,
now, we may say that, ju..., isn't there scientific knowledge itself? Their
capacity to develop scientific, to do scientific research. Or their capacity, to
do, develop philosophical insight? You know. Isn't that itself, you know, a sign
of good quality? Not exactly. You know. He, actually, we get the capacity to do
intellectual processing by our past karma. So, some people are very good singers
by their past karma. Some people may be very good, you know, humorous by their
past karma. Some people may be very good intellectuals by their past karma. So,
you know, the, our, the con..., the abilities that we get, are largely developed
by our past karma. But how we uti..., but as far as our qualities are concerned,
you know, the qualities, do they come by past karma? Certain tendencies may
come. But our qualities are often result of our choices. And, you know, the
point here is that, material things do not lead to auspicious qualities. So,
material education does not lead necessarily to auspicious qualities. We will
talk about this more, you know, in the next part. So, now, Srila Prabhupada
talks about happiness in Krishna Consciousness. So, you know, you know, he,
here, he is talking about, you know, the, how, the, now, what is this point
about happiness in Krishna Consciousness as Srila Prabhupada is mentioning? He
talks about there are, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" now says three kinds of happiness.

"(1) happiness derived from material enjoyment, (2) happiness derived by
identifying oneself with the Supreme Brahman and (3) happiness derived from
Kṛṣṇa consciousness."

So, we could call it, you know, this is material happiness. This is impersonal
happiness. And this is, you know, devotional happiness. You know. So, now,
Prabhupada gives, quotes from several places. For example, he goes and quotes
"Satī". He goes, quote "Lord Śiva", to "Satī", in the "tantra-śāstra"s. He, you
know, you know, a devotee gets all other happiness, you know, happiness from the
material..., impersonalist. And he gets further happiness, also, more happiness
than that, also. So, let us look at this point more, now. When we talk about
happiness, Prabhupada explains analytically that the happiness that derived from
devotional service is the best because it is eternal. Whereas other happiness,
all other forms of happiness are temporary. And the happiness of devotional
service includes and excels the pleasures found in other types of happiness. You
know. So, what does this mean? This is, firstly, there is in terms of duration.
The other is in terms of quantity. In terms of duration, all other pleasures are
temporary. For purpose, and attain some very great fame. Or position in this
world. That person gets some plesure by that. But that is temporary. You know.
Person goes to heaven. Also, that is temporary. Person attains Brahma, ananda,
also. Brahmananda, also, does not satisfy the heart. You know. And, you know,
and, now, oth..., the other happi..., the other aspect is that the happiness
that we get by devotional service is, it, it is supreme happiness. So, if a
person, you know, if a person may get, you know, say, one rupee. Ten rupee.
Hundred rupees. But if a person gets a thousand rupee node, then all those are
contained within it. That person gets a one crore rupee cheque. Then, all the,
one, one rupee. Ten rupee. Hundred rupees are contained within it. So, like
that, devotional happiness is supreme happiness. And as compar..., and as
compared to that, everything else is so small. It is included within it. One
does not have to strive for it separately. Now, this does not necessarily mean,
you know, this, that the devotee gets sense gratification. A devotee may get,
also. Some time. Then, mat..., material enjoyment, also, devotee may get. But
the important point is that the devotee gets a happiness. Which is so great that
it includes the happiness. Which is there in sense gratification. So, you know,
that means, a devotee gets such a rich happiness. That devotee does not feel the
need for anything.

        yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ
        manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ

That once one has got this, one feels as no need for anything. Or "manyate
nādhikaṁ". There is nothing more that I need. So, that is the glory of the
happiness of pure devotion. That is the best happiness that one can possily get.
And this happiness is the nature of, you know, ever-lasting happiness. Now,
happiness derived from this is eternal. You know. And when Prabhupada gives the
example of, you know, now, Prabhupada compares this with different kinds of
happiness. So, one of the happiness he compares it is, the happiness from
impersonalism. And he gives the example that what happens to these "Māyāvādī
sannyāsīs"? The "Māyāvādī sannyāsīs", you know, sometimes, they claim that they
are liberated. That they have attained Brahman. But then, after attaining
Brahman, what, what do they do? They come back. And act at the material level.
In terms of doing social service. So, Prabhupada explains that this refers to
that they have actually not experienced spiritual happiness. If they truly
experience spiritual happiness, then, if at all, they were going to do something
to benefit people, then what they would do is, they would elevate people
spiritually. Not materially. So, now, you know, actually, in the path of bhakti,
also, there is something like coming from a higher level down to a lower level.
You know. There is a kanistha adikari. There is a madhyama adhikari. And there
is uttama adikari. So, you know, the uttama adikari is so absorbed in Krishna
that see, the uttama adikari sees everyone as a devotee of Krishna. In contrast,
you know, the madhyama adikari differentiates. Ok. This person is a devotee. Or,
is, is, it, this person is devotee. I should befriend this person. This person
is innocent. Let me share Krishna and this, with this person. And this person is
envious. Let me keep a distance. And pray, you know, so that the person does not
become offensive. Let me keep a distance. And pray, you know, so that the person
does not become offensive. Let me keep a distance. And let me pray for his
well-being from that dis..., from a distance. So, if a person has to preach, if
a person has to share Krishna's message, that person has to be able to discr...,
discriminate. Ok. This person is a devotee. This person is a potential devotee.
This person is non-devotee. Anti-devotee, in fact. So, the uttama, uttama
adikari does not do this differentiation. But when a pure devotee ha..., when a
pure devotee has to preach, then the pure devotee cannot preach from the uttama
adikari platform. So, from the uttama adikari platform, the pure devotee may
come down to the madhyama adikari platform. So, now, what is the difference,
between, say, the mayavadis, coming from the spiritual platform down to the
material platform? And the pure devotee coming from the kanistha platform to the
madhyama platform. There is a huge difference. The difference is that, one is,
both are at the spiritual level. Kanistha. Both the, uttama. And the madhyama.
Both are at the spiritual level. So, when a devotee is at the madhyama level,
also, a devote is experiencing spiritual happiness. And wanting to share
spiritual happiness with others. In contrast, when somebody, when somebody who
is a spiritualist starts doing material welfare work. Then, that person has
descended from the spiritual platform to the material platform. So, you know,
the point is not that material welfare is bad. You know. Material, we have
discussed this elaborately in our, you know, Isopanishad classes. When we talked
about Manava seva. And Madhava seva. You know. Social service in Krishna
Consciousness. In the purport of one of the Isopanishad verse. I think 13-14
verses, we discussed. You know. You know. So, you know, the point is
spiritualist doing material welfare work is not spiritual.

That means they have descended from the spiritual platform to the material
platform. Now, why would they descend from the spiritual platform to the
material platform? Prabhupada explains, that is because they have not
experienced real spiritual happiness. Because if one experiences real spiritual
happiness, then one will not, you know, you know, think of, pro..., providing
material happiness to others. One will understand that spiritual happiness is so
much greater than material happiness. That I should elevate people spiritually.
So, in this way, the, even the happiness of impersonalism is of impersonal
realisation. Of Brahman. And the, it is not very great happiness. Then, Srila
Prabhupada talks about the happiness of that comes from mystic perfections.
"yoga-siddhi"s. So, "yoga-siddhi"s, you know, can, you know, give a lot of
pleasure in terms of, say, a person, who can, say, there is, Prabhupada gives
the example. There are "prāpti-siddhi". "prāpti-siddhi" means I am sitting here.
But I just strech out my hand. And if I like, say, apples from Kashmir. You
know. I may be sitting in Mumbai. I just stretch my hand. And I move to get
apples from Kashmir. And I meet those, I enjoy those ca..., apples. You know.
So, this is "prāpti-siddhi". Now, with our sceptical nature, we may say that,
this is, you know, you know, this is impossible. How is this possible? But the
point is that there is the universe which is much subtler than what modern
science conceives. So, you know, rather than going into the specifics of the
mechanisms, Srila Prabhupada focuses on the principles. So, you know, I will not
go into the specifics of mechanism. But I will simply explain, you know, what,
how, with avi..., we, even with our scientific bent of mind, we can at least
find the siddhis intelligible. So, the idea is that the universe has multiple
dimensions. And when there, if a person accesses a higher dimension, then of
that which is, you know, you know, not easily accessible at a lower dimension
becomes accessible. So, we discussed this earlier that, you know, if an ant has
to go from this end of the room to that end of the room, say. Then, the ant will
have to come down vertically. And then, go across horizontally. But there is a,
it is going in, first, length-wise. And then, say, breadth-wise. But then, if we
have a diagonal, which goes across, we introduce another dimension. When the
distance, which the ant has to scale, decreases sign..., significantly. So, like
that, when may..., higher dimension is involved, the distance is decrease. So,
beyond the body is the mind. And the mind, you know, the, is not limited by the
laws of physics. Which modern science has discovered. The mind can be at one
place. And the mind can go down another place. Now, when we say, the mind goes
to another place, we generally think of it, oh, we are just thinking about that
place. But thoughts are not just thought. Thoughts are other things. The mind is
also not just something amorphis. Or abstract. The mind is also a thing. And it
is possible for the mind to travel, also. So, some people, who have access to
the subtle powers of the mind, can do things which we are not able to do.
Actually, even in today's world, there are many people who have the, access,
abilities, which are not compehensible by modern science. So, for example,
there have been people who, there have been many experiments which have, you
know, reasonably well-documented telepathy.

So, one person can convey a message to another person. And there is not, there
are no radio waves. There are no possible waves going between the two persons.
And two people are saved, kept, con..., placed in, you know, enclosures which do
not allow any waves to flow. And still, this person reads something arbitrary.
And thinks about that. And the other person comes to know about that. Now, that,
of course, this sort of experiments, there will be always naysayers. Who do not
accept it. But the point is not, we are not here to, you know, scientifically
prove the siddhis. The point is that it is intelligible. That when we understand
the concept, point that there is not just gross matter. There is subtle matter.
And subtle matter have, you know, does, is not restricted by the laws of
physics. So, then, many things become possible. The universe opens up to many
more possibilities. And rather than dismissing them as, just as imagination, we
understand that they are actually possibilties at another level of reality. So,
Prabhupada focuses, not on the technical mechanisms. He focusing on another
principle. What are people trying to do by acquiring siddhis? He says, they are
trying to gain control over matter. They are trying to gain control over matter.
Get control over things. And Prabhupada says, that is what people are trying to
do through technology, also. So, through technology, what are people trying to
do? You know. People are trying to manipulate matter in ways, in which, we
cannot normally manipulate matter. So, let us look at the example that
Prabhupada gives over here. So, so, Prabhupada says that:

"Aṇimā-siddhi refers to the power by which one can become so small that he can
enter into a stone. Modern scientific improvements also enable us to enter into
stone, because they provide for excavating so many subways, penetrating the
hills, etc."

You know. So, similarly, there is "laghimā". One may start flying in the air.
You know. You know. One may start flying in the air. And when one starts flying
in the air. That Prabhupada says, that, that is also performed by modern
scientists. So, one beomes light. And one starts flying in the air. Now, you
know, Prabhupada goes on. Gives many other examples of this. Now, the important
here is what? You know. You know. "īśitā". "vaśitā". These are various siddhis
which are there. You know. We can read the technicality, the depth, is,
definition of those siddhis. The important point is that these siddhis are, they
are still material. They are basically technologies. The mechanism of those
technologies may be different. So, for a person who does not know the mechanism
may consider it to be, you know, you know, con..., it, miraculous. Or even
mythological. So, as soon, person may say it is impossible. And when it is
possible. Ah, so, it is, how? It is impossibl..., it is mecha..., it is
miraculous. So, a person who does not know anything about, say, eletronic
communications. And, you know, that person may see, if, if I put a cellphone
near my head. And I am talking with somebody who is in America. This person may
say it is miraculous. But a person who has some knowledge of science understands
that it is not miraculous. There is a mechanism by which this is happening. And
once we understand the mechanism, then whatever seems miraculous becomes a
demystified. So, now, this, you know, remarkable, you know, parallel, which
Srila Prabhupada is giving between modern technology. Modern scientific
technology. And mystic perfections. Yogic siddhis. What is the purpose of that?
The purpose of that is twofold. One is that we should not get too excited about
modern technology. You know. That, that is one way we can look at it. Prabhupada
does not explicitly talk about it here. He talks about elsewhere. He says, you
know, and the other is, we should not get too excited about mystic siddhis,
also. Both are ultimately material. You know. Sometimes, when, you know, people
say that, oh, science has developed airplanes. And science has developed this.
And science has developed that. People think, oh, such extraordinary things have
been done. Yes. They have been done. And, you know, where credit is due, it can
be give..., it can be given. But we have to know that, actually, we have
developed airplanes, now. But there is nothing to get excited. In the past,
there were airplanes, also. You know. "Rāvaṇa" had his "Vimāna". His
"Pushpaka". And unlike modern planes, when "Pushpaka" was flying in the sky,
"Pushpaka" did not leave a trail of smoke behind. Polluting the environment. No.
It was using holistic technology. You know. It was using subtler mechanisms,
which, of which we have no knowledge. And there are some indications. Not, you
know, you know, about this sort of thing, even in, in a set of books, called the
"Vaimānika Śāstra"s. So, h..., there is nothing to get very excited about with
modern technology. You know. Nowadays, with so many gadgets coming up, you know,
we have iPods. And iPhones. And iPads. And smaller and smaller devices with
greater and greater capacities. So, some people can get very breast-bed. Oh,
technology is doing magic. Yes. Now, we may say the technology is doing magic.
But ultimately, what is it doing? It is simply, you know, gi..., giving us the
capacity to manipulate matter. And, you know, in the past, when people had yogic
siddhis. You know. They could do similar manipulation. Without needing external
gadgetry. You know. If a person has, you know, you know, you know, say, a
particular yogic siddhi. Then, that person can do the same thing without needing
all the elaborate technical gadgetry. So, what we could have done, earlier, what
we could do with the siddhis internally, internally means not spiritually, but
internally, at the level of the mind. Now, we have technology with us, it,
externally. So, one aspect of this is that do not get too excited about what
technology is providing. You know. If something is useful in Krishna's service,
we can definitely use it. And, you know, that is the principle of
"yukta-vairāgya". The other aspect of this is that, you know, you know, when we
look at siddhis, there is no need to get too excited about the siddhis, also.

You know. Many people, you know, they, you know, think that the siddhis are so
amazing. You know. Krishna says, somebody can walk on water. Or somebody can, as
I said, "prāpti-siddhi". You know. They can get anything that they want. They
think this is so amazing. And people get very still. And generally, what happens
is, that if, in gen..., in, among, gen..., you know, Prabhupada often says that
these yogic siddhis are childish. By childish, because children, often, when one
child is able to do something. Which other children are not able to do, then
that child becomes very impressed. Oh, you can do that? I cannot do that. So,
like that, you know, some people are able to do something. You know. Just move
some hand. And produce some ash. Or something Like that. And, you know, many
people who claim these are hoa..., hoaxes. But even if those people, who are
actually able to do it. Still, what is so great about it? It is something which
is ultimately material. It is not going to save us from the cycle of birth and
death. So, you know, in one sense, we can use the parallel of technology. And
siddhis to deglamorise technology. And in another sense, we can use it to
deglamorise siddhis, also. Deglamorise. That means, we understand, there is
nothing fanta..., nothing very great about it. Nothing to get worked up about
it. So, you know, now, after describing these various siddhis, then Srila
Prabhupada says that, actually, the happiness from all these siddhis is
temporary. And it is, the siddhis are not going to last forever. You know. I
have a siddhi. I do some tapasya. I will have a siddhi for one lifetime. Or
maybe, some siddhis may stay, I am, I am born with some siddhi in the next
lifetime. But even the lifetime is temporary. No siddhi is going to stay with me
forever. So, it is all temporary. And ultimately, what happens with, even,
actually, the siddhis are coming in the path of yoga. And they come in, they are
talked about in "Patañjali"'s "Yoga Sūtra". But even "Patañjali" says that
siddhis are actually distractions. You know. If one gets caught in siddhis.
Then, one becomes "yōgabhraṣṭa". One becomes deviated from the path of yogic
perfection. The purpose and perfection of the, if, even the path of yoga is
"Samādhi". Is absorption in the Supreme Lord. You know. Now, "Patañjali", in the
"Yoga Sūtra", does not describe who is the Ishvara. And does not very clearly
describe what exactly happens in the state of "Samādhi". That is described in
another yogic scriptures. And that is made clea..., more clear in the Bhagavad
Gita. And further in the Bhagavatam. Who is the Ishvara? That is Krishna. And
what is that "Samādhi"? That is that devotional absorption in Krishna. It is not
an impersonal merging. So, the point is, siddhis are distractions even from the
yog..., point of view of "Yoga Sūtra" given by "Patañjali". There is nothing to
get excited about in "Sūtr...", "Yoga Sūtra". And then, Prabhupada quotes from
"Prahlāda Mahārāja" over here. That I have got so much happiness that I do not
feel I need any more happiness. But I simply want to be engaged in devotional
service. And if I am engaged in devotional service, then I do not need anything
else. You know. You know. So, there are many prayers like that in the
"Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". Which talk about, I do not want anything except devotional
service. So, Prabhup..., "Prahlāda Mahārāja" is praying:

"My dear Lord, I repeatedly pray unto Your lotus feet that I may simply be
stronger in devotional service. I simply pray that my Kṛṣṇa consciousness may be
more strong and steady, because happiness derived out of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and
devotional service is so powerful that with it one can have all the other
perfections of religiousness, economic development, sense gratification and even
the attainment of liberation from material existence."

So, all these happiness come together. You know. Prabhupada further gives the
example of "Kholāvecā Śrīdhara" over there. You know. "Kholāvecā Śrīdhara" was
extremely poor. You know. Generally, most poor people, their aspiration is
wealth. So, I get money. And then, I become free from poverty. So, "Kholāvecā
Śrīdhara", you know, he was pure devotee. And when the Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's
"Mahaprakash Lila", he was calling all the devotees. Intimate associates.
"Haridāsa" Thakur. Advaita Ācārya. All of them. And he was blessing them with
profuse mercy. And at that time, he called "Kholāvecā Śrīdhara". And he asked,
whatever you want, ask from me. And what did "Kholāvecā Śrīdhara" say? He said,
my dear Lord, let me always remember You. And in the rasa, with which, which he
was relishing with "Kholāve...", with Lord, with Lord Chaitanya. Lord Chaitanya
would come. And argue with him. He was a seller of vegetables. And Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu would argue, haggle over the prices of vegetables. And finally, after
all the haggling, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu just take the vegetables that whatever
price he wanted. So, now, this is, even from the material point of view, is not
very attract..., not very attractive. But actually, the happiness of devotional
service far superseeds everything material. So, although, he was materially
poor. And with, by dealing with Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, he was getting a poor
mat..., poor deal materially. But still, he said, let me always remember You in
that form. In which you come. And you argue with me. And you take my vegetables.
At the price that you want. Why? Because he was seeing the Lord. He was talking
with the Lord. He was hearing the Lord talk. And in that, you know, remembrance
of the Lord, there was such happiness, there is nothing else required for a
devotee. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada writes over here. Further. He quotes
from "Nārada Pañcarātra". That:

"Any kind of happiness derived from religiousness, economic development,
liberation or sense gratification"

Dharma. Artha. Kama. Moksha. None of this happiness cannot, even, ev..., can,
this happiness:

"cannot even dare to enter into the heart of a pure devotee."

And then, Prabhupada quotes about, from, you know, you know, you know, another
script..., another scripture, he says that, you know, how, just as a queen comes
along, when the queen comes, then her personal attendants also come. So, like
that:

        muktih mukulitanjali sevate asman

So, you know, that, actually, it is said that when there is bhakti rises in the
heart, then "muktih" folds hands. And waits to serve such a devotee. So, just as
when a queen comes, or attendants come, so, that queen is Bhakti Devi. When the
queen or Bhakti Devi comes, everything else automatically comes. So, here, Srila
Prabhupada is quoting references based on "Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu", which illustrate two points. First is that a devotee
does not care for liberation. And other is dharma. Artha. Kama. Moksha. And
second is, devotee automatically gets dharma. Artha. Kama. Moksha. So, that is
how the two points which we mentioned earlier that everything else is temporary.
Only this is eternal. So, devotee cares only for the eternal. And in contrast,
the devo..., whatever is, you know, there in these pleasures, that automatically
comes for a devotee. So:

        na dhanaḿ na janaḿ na sundarīḿ
        kavitāḿ vā jagad-īśa kāmaye
        mama janmani janmanīśvare
        bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi

So, Chaitanya, so, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is saying over here, what do I want? You
know. I am getting such happiness. He is not mentioning the word happiness. But
he is, you know, that is implied in the, you know, in the inte..., in the prayer
itself that I simply want "ahaitukī" bhakti. I simply want pure devotion. You
know. Pure devotion, you know, I, just compared to that, I do not want material
enjoyment. I do not, I do not, not, artha. I do not want kama. "dhanaḿ".
"janaḿ". "sundarīḿ". So, I do not want artha. I do not want kama. I do not want,
you know, anything else. I do not want moksha, also. "mama janmani
janmanīśvare". So, I simply want your devotion. Now, again, that is subtle point
that, you know, you know, do we, if we practice devotional service to become
happy, then are we really selfless? You know. If, ultimately, I am doing
devotional service so that I become happy. So, then, I am wanting my own
happiness. Then, how is it selfless? Actually, it is selfish, only. No. A pure
devotee does not practice devotional service to become happy. A pure devotee
loves Krishna. And, you know, that love of Krishna impels the pure devotee to
serve Krishna. And now, you know, happiness is a natural result of pure love.
Happiness is not a motive of pure love. So, motive means that which comes
before. Result means that which comes after. So, a devotee serves Krishna
because the devotee loves Krishna. So, you know, that service to Krishna, that
bhakti is not motivated by the desire for happiness. Bhakti is, you know, bhakti
results in happiness. So, there is a difference. That is why, actually, a pure
devotee's bhakti is not selfish. It is selfless. And that is why we see the pure
devotees, when they are serving Krishna, it is not that they are calculating
whether this service to Krishna will make me happy. Then, I will do this
service. Otherwise, I will not do it. You know. You should, one might take
ser..., anxiety for Krishna. We see "Mādhavendra Purī", you know, when the Lord
told him, go and get, you know, "chandan" for me. Then, he went from Vrindavan,
which is way, way in North India. And he went all the way down to South, you
know, almost, you know, East India. South..., at that time, very difficult to go
through dangerous areas. Ruled by "mlecchá"s. He went and got chandan. So, he
was not thinking whether this will make me happy. At a physical level, it
brought a lot of trouble. So, a devotee is not motivated in the service by
pleasure. Actually, pleasure, or satisfaction, is a natural result of bhakti.
So, that is why there is a difference. It is not selfless. It is not selfish. It
is selfless. Now, you know, you know, you know, Srila Prabhupada, actually,
"Rūpa Gosvāmī", he, Srila Prabhupada, he said this is a summary study. So, the
exa..., some of the examples of happiness, which "Rūpa Gosvāmī" gives in the
category of happiness. Prabhupada gives it earlier in the category of "Subhada".
In the category of auspiciousness. But actually, both are related. And both are
applicable in both places. So, in that sense, you know, technically, there may
be a difference. But, you know, in terms of effective meaning. And application,
there is no difference. Now, let us look at the next characteristic which Srila
Prabhupada mentions.

That is the rareness of pure devotional service. "Sudurlabha". "Sudurlabha". It
is not, it is not only, "labha" is to attain. You know. "durlabha" is difficult
to attain. "Sudurlabha" is extremely difficult to attain. You know. You know.
So, why is it difficult to attain? Because of two reasons. So, here, we will see
these two reasons. It is unattainable by one's own efforts. And Krishna is
reluctant to give it. Let us try to understand this. It is unattainable by one's
own efforts. You know. You know. Bhakti is not something which is just our
emotion. You know. Bhakti is actually a gift of Krishna. "Jīva Gosvāmī" explains
in the "Prīti Sandarbha" that bhakti is a manifestation of "Hladini Shakti". So,
that means, it is not that when I think of Krishna, and I feel some emotion for
Krishna, that automtically by, by thinking of some emotion for Krishna, I will
dev..., I will develop bhakti. Or by feeling some, by myself, feeling some
emotion. I may feel some emotion for Krishna. And that is, you know, preliminary
stage of bhakti. But if I want to experience the full richness of bhakti, then
bhakti is a gift that comes from Krishna. Bhakti is not just a feeling in our
heart. Bhakti is actually Radharani. It is "Hladini Shakti". "Hladini Shakti" is
manifested as Radharani. Radha..., Radh..., and that "Hladini Shakti" manifests
in this world. In our heart. You know. When we serve and please Krishna. So, by
His mercy, bhakti manifests in our heart. So, you know, bhakti is not something
which we can ourselves get. Bhakti is something which is bestowed by Krishna.
So, that is first point. We cannot get it ourselves. And secondly, so, it,
"Prahlāda Mahārāja" actually tells this also, in several:

        naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ
        spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ

So, he says that, actually, one's "matiḥ", one's consciousness,
"urukrama-aṅghrim". That Lord, who does extraordinary activities, somebody, who
does extraordinary activities, actually, basically, to get attracted to Him. But
still, to get attracted to Him means, sustained way is not easy. And to do, you
know, to dev..., develop a transformational attraction towards Krishna, we need
a ma..., the mercy of devotees. What does he say? That unless one baths in the
test, lotus feet of the devotees. So, Krishna gives us mercy through His
devotees. When, you know, we serve the devotees, and we please the devotees,
then the devotees, you know, bestow their mercy. That is how Krishna's mercy
comes to us. So, bhakti is not very easy, it cannot be obtained by our own
efforts. You know. And secondly, bhakti cannot be, you know, you know, bhakti is
something which Krishna alone gives. And Krishna does not give bhakti easily.
Why does Krishna not give bhakti easily?

        muktiṁ dadāti karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam

"muktiṁ dadāti". Krishna may even give "muktiṁ". But He does not give bhakti
very easily. Actually, that will be related with a later point. That bhakti
attracts Krishna, also. Bhakti not only attracts Krishna. Bhakti controls
Krishna. So, Krishna allows Himself to be controlled only by those, you know, by
very intimate circle. So, only those who have no motive other than to love and
serve Him. Krishna comes under their control. So, that is how, you know, it is
a, you know, it is a reciprocal process. You know. We, the purer our love
becomes, the more Krishna gives us love. And the more Krishna gives us love, the
purer our love becomes further. And ultimately, Krishna, it is not that Krishna
wants to withhold it from us. But Krishna wants us to want it. Krishna wants us
to want it. Why? Because, you know, say, Krishna's love for us is like the Sun.
So, Sun can give all the light that it wants. You know. Sun can give all the
light that it contains, also. But if I close my eyes, then I cannot see the Sun.
So, now, if the Sun is to illuminate me, what do I have to do? I have to open my
eyes. Unless I open my eyes, no matter how effulgent the Sun becomes. The Sun's
illumination cannot benefit me. So, when Krishna, when it is said that Krishna
does not give bhakti easily, what does it mean? Krishna actually wants to see
our desire. Krishna wants us to open our eyes. That means, Krishna wants us to
show through our actions that we want to love Him. And as long as we have any
other desire, apart from the desire to love Him, you know, Krishna says, ok, if
that is what you want, I will give you that. And you can stay with it, satisfied
with that thing. Whatever it may be. So, in this way, Krishna does not
necessarily, you know, deprive, also, bhakti. But He does not give it cheaply to
us. Why? Because He wants us to see whether we want, want it or not. And when we
want it, then He gives it to us. He is eager to give it to us. It is not that He
is wanting to keep it away from us. He is eager to give it to us. But we have to
show that we want it. And we value it. And when we show Krishna that we value
it. And value it more than other things. Just like a child, the mother is there
when the child is there. You know. The child starts cyring. The mother comes.
And gives one toy to the child. Child starts saying, playing, oh, oh, becomes
happy. And starts playing with the toy. The mother will go away. And do her
work. And then, mother, child starts, starts crying again. The mother gives
another toy. You know. The child goes and becomes happy. And goes away. But when
the mother gives a toy. And the child keeps crying. Mother gives another toy.
And the child keeps crying. Mother gives third toy, child keeps crying. And
then, the child ask, mother ask, what do you want? You know. Mother, child says,
I want you. I want you. And then, what does, the mother will put everything else
aside. Pick up the child. So, like that, Krishna gives us various things. To see
whether we are ready to settle about that, only. And many says, we do not want
anything except Him. Then, He gives Himself to us. That is Krishna. So,
"Sudurlabha". It is very, very rare. Bhakti cannot be got easily. You know. Let
us look at this further. You know. So, you know, Prabhupada gives the example
over here of how, how, why is bhakti so rare? He gives, you know, that,
"Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja" is, you know, is, say, you know, "Nārada" is telling
"Yudhiṣṭhira" that the Lord becomes controlled by you. So, this is the point
which we are making. That now, sometimes, when the reference comes that, you
know, you know, the reference may not be very clea..., you know, clear.
Prabhupada of course makes it clear. You know. So, the ver..., verse may contain
a lot of points. And we have to learn to focus on what is the point which is
relevant to the context. So, the relevant to the context, the point is that the
Lord becomes controlled by the devotee. Just as the Lord became the servant,
practically speaking, of the Pandavas. You know. He was going as a messenger for
them. He has become a charioteer for them. He was acting like a guard for them.
So, you know, that glorious Lord, who became all this for His devotees, He was
controlled by their devotion. So, the Lord becomes controlled by the devotion of
only those who are His very intimate devotees. So, that is why "muktih", you
know, He is, bhakti is rarely achieved. Because it is, can, cannot be attained
by our own efforts. And gra..., it is attained by Krishna's grace. But Krishna
also gives that grace carefully. And then, after that, "Moksa-laghutakrt".
"Moksa-laghutakrt" is, this actually we already discussed it. You know. You
know. "Moksa-laghutakrt" means, you know, that, you know, "laghu" means tiny.
Small. It derides the happiness that comes from "moksa". And Prabhupada gives
two examples over. "Śrīdhara Svāmī". And "Prahlāda Mahārāja". That actually,
both of them indicate that, you know, you know, the happiness of bhakti is
insignificant. You know. At the happ..., the, it is, it is, sorry, this, the
happiness of, you know, bhakti is so great that all other happiness become
insignificant.

So, now, we go and discuss, Prabhupada talks, it, Prabhupada is talking about,
yes, he talks about "Sandrananda-visheshatma". Let us look at
"Sandrananda-visheshatma". What is "Sandrananda-visheshatma"? This is actually a
very, very dense concentrated happiness. So, now, he has explained happiness in
three levels. You know. The, as we have discussed, happiness is, there is
sadhana bhak..., there is sadhana, there are three levels of bhakti. There is
sadhana-bhakti. There is bhava-bhakti. And there is prema-bhakti. You know. So,
among the six characteristic of devotional service, the different
characteristics manifest in different stages. You know. So, the characteristics
of Shubhada manifest in sadhana-bhakti. "Klesaghni" and "Shubhada" manifest in
sadhana-bhakti. You know. Then, the next, including "Moksa-laghutakrt", mani...,
manifest in bhava bhakti. And "Sandrananda-visesatma" and "krsnakarsini"
matter..., manifest in prema bhakti. You know. So, now, in "Shubhada", also,
there is some happiness that is mentioned. "Rūpa Gosvāmī" talks about happiness
in "Shubhada". Then, he talks about happiness in "Moksa-laghutakrt". And then,
he talks about moks..., happiness in "Sandrananda-visesatma", also. Now, in each
of these, the happiness that a devotee is experiencing is far, far greater than
what is there in the previous. You know. So, you know, you know, what does
"Sandrananda-visesatma" refer to? "Sandrananda-visesatma", actually, just like,
there is, so, these three levels of happiness. If there is air, now, in the air,
there is space. Other things can go inside. In liquid, the molecules are more
concentrated. Something can dissolve into it. But when something is solid,
nothing can go into it. So, what is happening is, the content that is there, the
molecules that are there, they become more and more concentrated. So, like that,
you know, the happiness in devotional life, as one advances, it becomes more and
more concentrated. So that nothing can go inside. Nothing can go inside. So, it
is said in sadhana bhakti, the happiness is a little dissipated. In bhava
bhakti, it becomes more concentrated. In prema bhakti, it becomes most
concentrated. That is why it is said in, you know, you know, Rūpa Gosvāmī
explains that in sadhana bhakti, the happiness of devotional service is superior
to the happiness, you know, happiness of, you know, sense gratification. Other
happiness. So, even at our stage, as we keep practicing devotional service. We
start realising that, actually, the, we, the happiness that we get through
spiritual life is superior to the happiness that we get through material life.
But still, this happiness also seems real to us. It also seems appealing to us.
Because we have not yet developed the purity by which we can relish happ..., the
spiritual happiness. Just like sugarcane juice is sweet. But if my jaundice is
not yet fully cured, then I cannot taste its sweetness fully. You know. So, like
that, in sadhana bhakti, also, if we compare that weighing scale, then the
happiness of pure devotional ser..., happiness of bhakti is higher than the
happiness of sense gratification. That is the sadhana bhakti stage. Then, when
we go to bhava bhakti, then it becomes like that. You know. That the, the scale
becomes so different that, the distance becomes so great that as compared to the
happiness of devotion, the happiness of sense, other happiness, the happiness of
sense gratification, other happiness, they just become insignificant. And when
we come to prema bhakti, the happiness becomes, other happiness becomes
non-existent. It is not there, only. So, that is how the happiness in bhakti
keeps increasing. Increasing. Increasing. So, "Sandrananda-visesatma" means, the
con..., happiness is so concentrated. So deep. So intense. That one does not
need anything else. One does not care for anything else. In fact, the other
things do not exist, only, for a devotee. So, most, so, that is a far deeper
happiness.

You know. And then, you know, there is, so, this is the supreme happiness. And
"ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaḿ prati-padaḿ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
talks about something similar. When he talks about ocean of happiness. That
keeps expanding. You know. And then, there is "krsnakarsini". "krsnakarsini"
means that bhakti attracts Krishna. You know. We know everybody in this world is
attracted by cupid. And cupid is, cupid as a madan. "madan". One who churns the
mind of people. "manmarthi" is called. As "manmath". Who just churns the mind of
people. You know. The mind gets agitated. Maybe, I will do this. Then, I will be
able to enjoy it. Enjoy it. Then, do this. Then, I will be able to enjoy it. I
do this. Then, I will be able to enjoy it. Mind is churned by the, by cupid. But
Krishna is called as "manmath manmath". He is madan mohan. You know. He churns
the mind of madan. There is a place Vrindavan called "Tera Kadamba". At "Tera
Kadamba", you know, the madan was trying to, you know, Krishna was performing
lila with the gopis. And madan came over there. And he started to shoot arrows.
"Kāmadeva"s. His flower arrows to attract people. To which, which actually
pierce the heart. They are called as "Puṣpabāṇa". Flower arrows. You know. They
seem like flowers. But when they go inside, they cause pain like, you know, real
arrow. You know. So, and "Puṣpabāṇa". So, you know, cupid tried to shoot his
arrows at Krishna. He tried to induce, within Krishna, materially, you know,
material emotions. And what happened? Nothing happened to Krishna. But then
Krishna cast aside long-glanced cupid. And when Krishna cast aside long-glanced
cupid, it is said the eyebrows are like bows. The, when the person raises the
eyebrows, then what happens? It becomes shape like a bow. And it is said that
when, when the sexual attraction between people, then when a woman raises her
eyebrows. It is from her eyebrows, the cup..., arrows of cupid are shot. And
they pierce into the heart of people. So, Krishna raised His eyebrows. And when
Krishna raised, what happened? Then, the arrows of Krishna went into the heart
of cupid. And what happened? Cupid felt senseless. You know. Cupid was, his bow
fell away from his hand. He was captivated by Krishna. So, that is, Krishna is
called as "madan mohan". There is a, Kri.., Tera Kadamba a place where Krishna
conquered over "madan mohan". Madan. But then, Radharani is "madan mohan
mohini". You know. You know. You know. The, the cupid shoots, shot his arrows at
Krishna. But when Krishna shot His arrows back at cupid, through His eyebrows,
cupid foc..., forgot his bow. This bow fell away from his hands. He was so
captivated. So, Krishna plays His flute to attract the gopis. But when Radharani
comes in front of Him, Krishna is so captivated by Radharani. That His fingers
stay over there, only. But the flute falls away from His hands. And Krishna
becomes captivated by Radharani. So, in the "Gita Govinda", "Jayadeva Goswami"
described how, you know, Krishna actually begged, you know, fell at the feet of
Radharani. You know. Because He was so captivated by Her. So, "krsnakarsini".
The bhakti attracts, you know, pure devotion. Attracts even Krishna. And that is
why it is, this is the supreme potency of bhakti. It attracts everyone. Attracts
Krishna, also. And then, Prabhupada writes over here. He quotes from, you know,
you know, you know, Prabhupada, in the "Uddhava" Gita, is telling "Uddhava":

"My dear Uddhava, you may know it from Me that the attraction I feel for
devotional service rendered by My devotees is not to be attained even by the
performance of mystic yoga, philosophical speculation,"

And all these things. The, now, Prabhu..., Prabhupada paraphrases:

"These are, of course, very nice activities, but they are not as attractive to
Me as the transcendental loving service rendered by My devotees."

And then, Prabhupada again quotes the example of "Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja":

        yūyaṁ nṛ-loke bata bhūri-bhāgā

That, you know, you know:

"He is always with you"

The Lord is so attracted to you. The P..., Krishna is telling "Yudhiṣṭhira",
"Nārada" Muni is telling "Yudhiṣṭhira" that Krishna is so attracted to you that
Krishna comes and stays with you repeatedly. He goes away. He does not go
anywhere. He comes and stays with you. You know. Nor..., normally, the sages go
out to the forest to searh for God. They leave their home and go to search for
God. You are so exalted that you do not have to leave your home. That God comes
to your home. And God stays in your home. You know. "krsnakarsini". In the
Mahabharata, in the Shanti Parva, it is described, after the war is over, after 
"Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja" was installed as the king. When Krishna is staying, you
know, you know, with the Pandavas. And "Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja" comes one morning
to meet Krishna. And at that time, he says, Krishna is in meditation. And then,
he asks, hey, he is amazed. And Krishna is fixed, "Yudhiṣṭhira" speaks out
softly. Then, he says, oh, my dear Lord, how amazing is it that you, on whom,
the whole Lord meditates, you are in meditation. He says, can I know, whom on
you, on whom you are meditating? And Krishna slowly comes out of trans. Opens
His eyes. And then, He says, you know, that illustrious son of Ganga, you know,
who was the disciple of "Paraśurāma". Who was the disciple of "Vyāsadeva". Of
"Nārada". Of "Bṛhaspati". Of "Śukrācārya". Who learnt from all these great
souls. Who was such a great warrior. That he single-handedly defeated all the
kings of the world. You know. During the "svayaṃvara", v..., Amba. Ambika.
Ambalika. That king, person who was, who could not be defeated by that
"Paraśurāma". Who, who had defeated all the ksatriyas of the world 21 times.
That person, who was the personification of dharma. That person, who, as long as
he was on the battlefield, you know, there was no hope of victory for you. That
glorious Bhishma is in his final days. And he is meditating on Me. And because
he is meditating on Me with such devotion, My heart is attracted to Him. And I
am meditating on him. So, Krishna is attracted to his devotee. And "Yudhiṣṭhira
Mahārāja" was a greatly moved by this, you know, thesis. That yes, you know, he
should, he says that should we go to "Yudhiṣṭhira", to Bhishma Pitama's side?
Krishna says, yes, we will go by his side. And Krishna reveals his own darshan
to Bhishma Pitama when he is departing from the world. So, Bhi...,
"krsnakarsini". Bhakti attracts even Krishna. This is the speciality of bhakti.
Now, you know, let us look back at the six qualities once again. And then, we
will conclude this class. So, now, among these, the first two qualities,
Klesaghni and Subhada, they occur at the stage of sadhana bhakti. Then,
Moksa-laghutakrt and Sudurlabha, they occur at the, you know, level of bhava
bhakti. And Sandrananda-visesatma and Sri krsnakarsini, they attract, they
appear at the level of prema bhakti. In this way, you know, the, Rūpa Gosvāmī
describes the six characteristic of devotional service. And in this way, he
attracts our heart by describing the glory of devotional service through its six
characteristics. He inspires us. You know. That let us whole-heartedly practice
devotional service. And attain all these wonderful gifts that Bhakti Devi is
ready to give us.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
