Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PcPecItobAU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=PcPecItobAU&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_151_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Introduction_and_Chapter_01_-_Uttama_Bhakti_and_Kleshaghni_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=_67743eVJVF6vM36Nd8u8mNqMFN8MTU0ODQ5MDM3NkAxNTQ4NDAzOTc2

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavad, to Bhakti Shastri course.
Where we are now discussing "Nectar of Devotion". So, you know, you know, in the
"Nectar of Devotion", there are, you know, just like an ocean has two, can have
different section. The Eastern section. Western section. Northern. Southern
section. You know. So, you know, you know, "Jīva Gosv...", "Rūpa Gosvāmī" here
envisions the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". The ocean of devotion as having
different sections. So, we discussed briefly about the Eastern section. And what
he does is, every chapter, in this ocean, or a different parts of the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" are like a waves in a section. So, let us look
backwards to have an overview of the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". So, we are now
continuing with the introduction today. You know. You know. So, we discussed the
Eastern side of the ocean. The varieties of bhakti. Prabhupada translates it as
it has overview of devotion. Devotional service in practice. And ecstasy. And
love of God. Then, Southern side has these, you know, different emotions.
Vibhava. Anubhava. Sattvika-bhava. Vyabhicarebhava. And Sthayebhava. We will not
go into the detailed discussion of these. But we will discuss them at
appropriate time briefly. Then, there is, you know, the five rasas. So, in the
Western side, the five rasas are Shanta. Dasya. Shakya. Vatsali. And Madhurya. So,
you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" gives examples of these "rasa"s. You know. And he
explains those rasas systematically. And in the Northern side, he, you know, you
know, talks about the, you know, secondary "rasa"s. So, you know, there are
twelve mellows. So, twel..., out of the twelve "rasa"s, there are, five are
primary. And the secondary are Hasya. Asharya. Virya. You know. You know. You
know. Krodha. Bayanaka. Baya. And Karunya. So, Karunya is fourth here. And then,
then he talks about rasa basa and vikara of "rasa"s. Incompatible. Incompatible
and distorted mellows. So, this is an overview of the, you know, structure of
the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". Now, let us understand the concept of "rasa" a
little bit more. You know. There is, you know, the, there are two approaches to
understanding the Absolute Truth. One is the analytical. And the other is the
aesthetic. So, in the ana..., so, to understand it simply, one can look at a
flower. You know. Now, if we look at a flower, if I analyse a flower as a
botanist, then I will see, ok, a flower has a stamen. It has a carpel. It has
gynoecium. It has gynoecium. So, I can go into a bonatic, bot..., botanical
analysis of the various parts of a flower. Now, this analysis is valid in its
own way. But it will not lead me to appreciate the beauty of the flower. When an
artist sees a flower, the artist does not see the gynoecium. The gynoecium. What
the artist sees is, oh, how beautiful is the flower. Sees the shape. The
texture. The fragrance. The alignment of all, the petals. And the arrangement of
the whirl. So, the aesthetic vision is more suited for appreciation of beauty.
You know. Similarly, the Absolute Truth can be seen as an analytical object. And
when it is seen as analytical object, there there is "dhīmahi". Meditate.
Meditate. Meditate. So, this often leads to an impersonal sort of conception.
Where one does not relish the Absolute Truth. So, the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam" starts
with this conception. And it talks about it. The first verse, "janmādy asya
yato". It ends with "dhīmahi". Meditate. You know. You know. But then, the next
verse goes on. Then, towards, its later, it describes:

        pibata bhāgavataṁ rasam ālayam

So:

        muhur aho rasikā bhuvi bhāvukāḥ

"rasikā". So, be, become "rasikā"s. "rasikā"s means those who relish mellows.
So, become "rasikā"s. And relish the mellow of devotion. And in this way, you
know, you know, the, this is talking about moving from an analytical to an
aesthetic appreciation. So, "dhīmahi" is more of meditation in, you know, in, in
an analytical mode. How vast is the Absolute Truth. And "rasikā" in a, in a, in
a deep, in an aesthetic mode. So, "rasa" is possible not in analysis. "rasa" is
possible, the "rasikā", there is, the "Bhāgavatam" says, become a "rasikā". You
know. "rasam ālayam". So, "bhāgavataṁ" is a "rasam ālayam". It is a reservoir of
"rasa". So, "Śrīmad", in one sense, "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" is an elaboration
on the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". But, you know, you know, it is a significant book
because there is, there is this, the, there is philosophical books. And there
are "rasikā" books. Now, we use the word "rasikā" books generally to talk about
pastimes of Krishna. Those  past, you know, those which talk about pastimes of
Krishna. Which make us laugh. Which make us, which move us with emotions, we
call them as "rasikā". That is fine. But the word "rasikā" in the Indian
tradition has a different meaning. So, you know, there is a book called "Nāṭya
Śāstra". Written by "Bharata Muni". And in that, he introduces the concept of
"rasa". So, there, he describes, you know, that in theater. That means in drama.
You know. There are certain things. Which evoke a specific emotions in the
audience. So, you know, so, for example, you know, when a char..., when a
person, character laughs. Or does certain actions. Then, say, "Hasya Rasa".
Laughter will be in invoked in the audience. Or, suppose, there is fighting. And
there is beating up. Then, maybe fear will be invoked. So, like that, you know,
now, this is a very simple analysis. But, you know, you know, in the, in the
"Nāṭya Śāstra", "Nāṭya Śāstra" has also been commented by various people later.
So, there, what is described is, what are the various factors. There is, what,
what is discussed in second part of the, of "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". Anubhava.
Sattvika-bhava. All those. Vyabhicarebhava. All those are said to be factors
that contribute to the experience of "rasa". You know. So, "Nāṭ...", in the
"Nāṭya Śāstra", the idea is that the drama should be performed in such a way, on
the theater of that, you know, that specific "rasa" is invoked in the audience.
And what are, are the things need to be done to invoke that "rasa". That is what
is discussed in the "Nāṭya Śāstra". So, now, for the, before "Rūpa Gosvāmī",
ra..., you know, at least, in the "Nāṭya", in a, in the "rasa" tradition, "rasa"
was considered to be just an emotion that is experienced in the theater. In the
theater. That means when one sees a particular drama, one experiences emotion.
But, you know, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" took the concept from, of "rasa" from
the rasa shastra. And then, he conc..., took the, you know, philosophy from the
"Bhāgavatam". The bhakti from the "Bhāgavatam". And he brought bhakti and rasa
together. So, bhakti-rasa. And for "Rūp...", when "Rūpa Gosvāmī" explains
bhakti-rasa, he explains it in such a way that, actually, this is not something
which is experienced occasionally in a theater on a particular performance. No,
it is constantly experienced throughout life. Throughout life. Whenever a person
is practicing, you know, you know, whenever a person is serving Krishna, the
soul in the, pure, pure devotee in the spiritual world is serving Krishna, a
pure devotee experiences emotions.

So, rasa is not just a, you know, s..., you know, reduc..., re..., you know, is
not just, you know, limited to a particular, say, a drama in s..., you know,
in, you know, in a theater. But it is, pervades all actions of life. Now, with
respect to these 12 rasas, which we just now saw. There are five which are
primary. And there are, seven are, and the remaining are secondary. What does it
mean primary? And secondary? Actually, the five primary "rasa"s are also, you
know, the five primary modes of relationship with Krishna. In the spiritual
world. So, you know, there is no devotee directly in the, you know, "Bayanaka"
rasa. Or in the "Baya" rasa. You know. In the, that means, there is a devotee in
"Dasya" ra..., there are devotees "Shak...", "Dasya". "Vatsali". "Madhurya". And
the, all the devotees who are there, they fall in these five "rasa"s. And while
falling in these five "rasa"s, the, you know, seven, se..., next seven "rasa"s,
they add flavor to the relationships. So, for example, the vrajavasis, say, the
sakhas, you know, their normal relationship with Krishna will be, you know, you
know, Shakya rasa. But now, when they see Krishna, caught in the coils of
Kol..., Kaliya, at that time, they may experience an additional "Bayanaka".
Ghastliness. You know. What is going to happen now? Is Krishna going to die?
Similarly, the normal rasa of Yashoda Mayi will be, you know, to say, you know,
is, is "Vātsalya". But when she sees that Krishna is, you know, you know, is
stealing butter. Then, within that "Vātsalya", the addition rasa may be anger.
Krodha. So, the seven secondary rasas, they do not form a, you know, you know,
they do not form a, you know, you know, they do not form the basis for eternal
relationships with devotees. That, there is no, there is no devotee who is
primar..., who is permanently, eternally in Baya, in a, in Baya rasa. Or Hasya
rasa. You know. For example, you know, "Madhumangal". You know. He is a, he
makes a lot of jokes. And he, he laughs. He causes others to laugh, also. So, in
him, Hasya rasa is a little bit more. But his primary rasa of relationship is
not Hasya. His primary rasa is Sakhya. So, he is in Sakhya rasa. And Hasya is an
embellishment. So, like that. So, it, in, in, in our "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu"
study in the Bhakti Shastri course, we will be focusing on the first nineteen
chapters. So, this is an overview of the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". Now, let us
move forward. Yesterday, we have started discussing the definition of, you know,
you know, pure devotion as given in "Bhakti-rasāmṛta...", in
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". So, you know, let us look at this definition.

        anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ
        jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam
        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

So, for some cases, situations, I am using Dhanurdhara Marahaja's book, "Waves
of Devotion". You know. You know. You know. You know. To display sanskrit. Or to
show some diagrams. And things like that. So, "anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ". You know.
We discussed all this once. But now, if we will look focus primarily on
understanding "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa" and "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". So, "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa",
you know, "svarūpa" means primary characteristic. And "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa" is
secondary characteristic. So, you know, you know, "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa". And
"taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". So, for example, you know, water is liquid. You know. So,
liquidity is one characteristic. Then, we could say pure water. Impure water.
So, water has some defining characteristics. And one of its defining
characteristic is liquidity. But within that, there can be pure and impure. So,
like that, you know, you know, the characteristic, the primary "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa"
is that bhakti is:

        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ ...

It, you know, is, "śīlanaṁ". And then:

        anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ
        jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

So, "jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam" makes the bhakti, you know, makes the bhakti,
"anyā...", "jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam" makes the bhakti pure. So, let us understand
this once again. You know. You know. Yeah. Shown, is, so, let us come back to
this verse. We will see it here. You know. So, you know, you know, you know, so,
now, the primary characteristic is focused on this. It is "śīlanaṁ". "śīlanaṁ"
is, it is action. "ānukūlyena". It is favorable. You know. Or rather, it is
"ānu". You could put it "ānu-śīlanaṁ" as together. Kri..., and then "kṛṣṇā". So,
let us look at these three points. These are all, these three comprise the
primary characteristics. "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa". So, what is "svarūpa", you know,
"svarūpa-lakṣaṇa"? That is, it is for Krishna. So, devotion is for Krishna. Pure
devotion. You know. So, in that, now, we may say that the, oh, can I not have
devotion for my nation? Can I not have devotion for my family? For my parents?
Yes, we can. In a general sense, use the word for those things. But in a
technical sense, in a technical sense, the way "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is defining it
over here, devotion is for Krishna. Now, is it exclusivist or limiting? Oh,
should love Krishna, only? Can I not love anyone else? Normally, if we love one,
like we discussed earlier, if I love my country, then I am not loving other
countries. But because Krishna is the root of all existence, when I love
Krishna, I love everyone. So, because Krishna is connected with everyone. So,
the limit, love for Krishna does not limit, you know, us becau..., it actually
pervades everything. We love Krishna. And through Krishna, we love everyone. So,
one of its "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa" is that, it is for Kri..., it is for Krishna, only.
And then, it is "ānu", you know, it is actually, you know, "śīlanaṁ".
"ānu-śīlanaṁ" means, actually, it is act..., activity. It is not some, just
sentiment. It is not just some conception. So, you know, you know, "Jīva
Gosvāmī", in his commentary, explains that, actually, bhakti is, you know, a
result, bhakti is a result, is expression of the "Hladini Shakti" of Krishna.
"Hladini Shakti" is Srimati Radharani. And when that "Hladini Shakti" is
bestowed on a devotee, on a sadh..., on a seeker, then that seeker blossoms
into a proper devotee. Before that, also, there is some devotion. But it is
small level of devotion. So, "ānu-śīlanaṁ" means that it is not just a
conception. It is actions that are them. And Prabhupada explains that the
actions can be of two types. There can be pravritti. And there is nivritti. That
mean, there are certain actions which should be done. Because they help in the
con..., you know, grou..., cultivation of devotion. And there are certain
actions which should be given up. Because those actions will impede the growth
of devotion. The development of devotion. And then, third characteristic of
"svarūpa-lakṣaṇa" is "ānukūlyena". You know. So, that means, bhakti should be
performed with the intention of pleasing Krishna. There is a difference between
pleasing Krishna and the intention of pleasing Krishna. Even when the demons
fight with Krishna, when they give a good fight, Krishna feels pleased. Yeah. We
had a good fight. But their intention was not to please Krishna. So,
Hiranyakashipu, Kamsa, whenever Krishna fights with them, these kind of demons,
at that time, time, it is not that they, those demons intend to please Krishna.
And therefore, that is not considered bhakti. "ānukūlyena". You know.

So, "Jīva Gosvāmī" gives an interesting example here. He says that when it is
already mentioned, it is for, bhakti is for Krishna, then it is meant for
Krishna. Then, again, why is it meant? Why is it need to separately maintain,
men..., mentioned? "ānukūlyena". You know. So, he gives the examp..., Prabhupada
makes a general statement. He says, Krishna includes His paraphernalia. So,
Krishna is not just Krishna alone. Krishna means, He includes, the, is the
complete Absolute Truth. So, everything comes from Him. And in one sense,
Krishna includes everything. At the same time, Krishna is different from
everything. "na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni". "mat". Krishna says "mat-sthāni
sarva-bhūtāni" in 9.4. And then, 9.5, in the Bhagavad Gita, He says "na ca
mat-sthāni bhūtāni". He says, I am situa..., everything is situated in Me. And
then, He says, I am not situated in everyhing. So, there is an inconceivable
relationship. So, that has to be understood. So, He gives the example, you know,
when a king says, let the soldier go to the battlefield. When the soldier has to
go to battlefield. And he is going for war. That means, it is in, understood,
then the soldier will go with the weapons. Soldier will not go to the
battlefield without any weapons. Because it is understood that battlefield
means, there is likely to be a, of a war. And one has to be prepared for that.
So, one would say that, many, it is said, bhakti is for Krishna. Then, there is
no need for any separate statement. You know. You know. That, you know, it has
to be favorable to Krishna. Isn't it implied? So, soldier means, the weapons are
implied with the soldier. So, similarly, with Krishna, isn't it that the
pleasing Krishna is implied? You know. Here, so, you know, Jīva Gosvāmī says,
nor..., normally, it would be implied. But in special cases, if that, the king
gives, gives a command, you know, you know, you know, feed the soldier. You
know. So, when the soldier has to be fed, you know, that means, it is the
sold..., it is not the soldier's weapons have to be fed. It is the soldier who,
who has to be fed. So, in some cases, there may have to be differentiation
between soldier and the weapons. So, like that, in some cases, there has to be
differentiation between just, you know, the activity that pleases Krishna. And
the activity that is done with the intention of pleasing Krishna. So, you know,
may, even the demon's activities may please Krishna. But the demons are not
considered devotees. Because they do not do the activities with the intention of
pleasing Krishna. So, bhakti is that which is, you know, in, done with the
intention of pleasing Krishna. So, those three "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa"s are, that
it is, "ānu", so that they are actually in the C and D lines. "ānukūlyena kṛṣṇā"

        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ ...

So, it is "kṛṣṇā". It is for Krishna. "ānu-śīlanaṁ". It involves activity. It is
not just Absol..., it is not just an emotion in the heart. It is a cultivation.
It is activity. And then, it is "ānukūlyena". It is done with the intention of
pleasing Krishna. And then, the "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". So, this is what
characterises bhakti. So, as, as we would say, what characterises water is
liquidity. But then, we would say, pure, if pure water means, there is, the
other things are not present in the water. So, like that, the secondary
characteristic, you know, "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa"s are the "taṭ...", the "svarūpa",
primary characteristic is "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa". Secondary characteristic is called
as "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa" is that, you know, the bhakti should
be pure. Pure. How does the, so, that means, you know:

        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ ...

This is what defines bhakti. And what makes the bhakti "uttamā"? It makes it
pure is:

        anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ
        jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

So, "anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ". That means no other desire. So, yesterday, we
discussed abut this. "ābhilāṣa" is desire. "ābhilāṣa". "ābhilāṣitā" is
intention. Or motive. So, a devotee does not have any motive other than to serve
Krishna. Or, or to please Krishna. Although, occasionally, in emergency, some
other desires may come up. And "jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam" means, you know, that a
devotee does not let, you know, one's devotion get dominated by
"jñāna". Or "karmā". "jñāna" and "karmā" are both useful. And they are both
used. In bhakti. So, there can be bhakti pratikula "jñāna". And there is, can be
bhakti anikula "jñāna". Similarly, there can be bhakti anikula "karmā". Bhakti
pratikula "karmā". So, the "jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam" means that, you know, you
know, "jñāna" and "karmā" which do not cover bhakti. So, the uncovered "jñāna".
And "karmā". You know. You know. So, for example, a devotee may do certain, a
devotee can also do philosophical speculation. You know. When, we, scriptures
tell us certain statements, we can contemplate, connect with other scriptural
statements. Connect with what we have heard from different sources. And try to
understand what the scripture is saying. So, that is perfectly valid. And that
is considered to be philosophical speculation. So, that is not considered to be
"jñāna" which has to be given up. Rather, that is the "jñāna" which takes us
closer to Krishna. And that is positive. And, you know, you know, in contrast,
"jñāna-karmādy". Similarly, you know, if one tries to and speculates in such a
way one comes to the conclusion there must be some reality beyond Krishna. Some
reality. Oh, Kri..., maybe Krishna is, you know, you know, Krishna is, you know,
li..., light. So, maybe, I have to go beyond that light. You know. Maybe,
Krishna is black. Maybe, I have to go beyond the black to the white light. So,
Brahman is white. And that is really good, enlightenment. So, I have to go like
that. Behind. So, when one decide of, then, one does this kind of "jñāna".
Speculation. You know. Which is, which does not take us to Krishna. Which takes
us away from Krishna. That is pratikula. So, that has to be given up. Similarly,
"karmā". One can do "karmā", you know, acti..., it is not that we have to give
up all activities. It is not that we have to give up all dharmic activities,
also. The word "karmā" can refer to activity in general. It can also refer to,
in the act..., types of actions, "karmā", "vikarmā", "karmā", it can refer to
vas..., positive actions. "sukarmā". So, is it that we have to give up all
"karmā"? No. Not necessarily. You know. We have to, we can do those activities
which are anikula to bhakti. So, for example, devotee, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu also
did "śrāddha" for his father. So, devotees may do some "śrāddha" ceremonies for
their relatives. That sort of karma is not pratikula to bhakti. But if the
devotee gets too caught up in that, then that can become a problem. Astrology,
for example. You know. That involves karma. So, in a, if astrology, if we start
getting into astrology, and then the astrologers tell us that, you know, to get
rid of this problem, then one should worship, you know, you know, worship
Shi..., worshi..., wear this for "Shani". Or do this puja for Mangal. Or do this
for Guru. Do for this Saturn. Or Mars. Or Jupiter. Or whatever. Then, that will
become a contamination in our devotional service. Because we want to focus on
Krishna. So, it is not that devotees cannot do astrology. But astrology has to
be done cautiously.

And in the Vaishnava Sampradaya, it is explained how, you know, the various
"graha"s, the various planets are actually controlled ultimately by different
manifestations of the Supreme Lord. So, you know, when Vaishnava astrology, you
know, act..., actually, rather than worshipping the particular devatas, worship
of the particular forms of the Lord, who are super, who are over, supervising
those devatas, that is recommended. And in that way, you know, you know, one is
able to, you know, you know, rec..., integrate astrology into one's devotion.
So, for example, instead of one is worshipping Ganesh, Ganesh worships
Narasimha Deva. So, one worship, one can worship Narasimha Deva. And that way,
one can do whatever is recommended in astrology. Through the worship of
Narasimha Deva. But if one becomes too caught up in astrology, then one may lose
the perspective. So, that kind of "karmā" is unfavorable to bhakti. So, Srila
Prabhupada, for example, now, according to, this is just a tentative exampl...,
is example. Srila Prabhu..., according to some astrolo..., schools in astrology,
one should not travel on Thursday. So, Srila Prabhupada, Hari Sauri Dasa writes
in his transcendental diary that, some time that, Prabhupada, when he would plan
his, you know, travels. Sometimes, he would do it in such a way that, you know,
one, he did not travel on Thursday. But then, at other times, you know, if, you
know, preaching engagement came up, then, you know, and it was urgent. And it
required traveling on Thursday. Or some other service came up, which required
traveling on Thursday. And Prabhupada would do that. So, devotees do not
necessarily defy the principles of "karmā". But they do not, you know, you know,
you know, give up bhakti for the sake of principles of "karmā". So, if the two
can be harmonised, well and good. And if the "karmā" can help us, you know, in
any way, in, in our service to Krishna, then why not? So, this is, that is why
"jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam". So, these are "taṭasth...", "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". So,
what the "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa" does is, it makes the devotion pure. So, you know,
so, the, "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa". And "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". This is how we discussed
the, you know, the definition of bhakti. Now, "Bhakti-rasāmṛta...",
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" also quotes another definition of bhakti. Which also,
Srila Prabhupada would frequently quote. And that is given by Narada Muni.

        sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ
        tat-paratvena nirmalam
        hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-
        sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

So, actually, the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" quotes many, many verses. You know.
Frequently. So, when we, as we will go through the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu", we
will not go through everything that, you know, the, has there. Wherever some
explanation is required, we will discuss that. So, otherwise, all the
references will become, you know, quite exhaustive, you know, quite, it will,
quite time-demanding. So, for example, in the introduction, there is, you know,
offering of obeisances to, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" offers obeisances to "Sanātana
Gosvāmī". So, act..., that not discuss verses like that. Srila Prabhupada just
briefly described them. And, you know, when the reading, you will go, we will
not be able to go through it. So, I will focus on those sections, where the
references require some explanation. You know. Now, "sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ".
So, the, how does he define bhakti?

        tat-paratvena nirmalam
        hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-
        sevanaṁ ...

So, "bhaktir ucyate". "bhaktir ucyate" means this is bhakti.
"sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ". So, one gives up all designations. So, this is similar
to "jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam". You know. By our "jñāna". And "karmā", we acquire
some "upādhi". So, for example, I may acquire the "upādhi" that, I, by my
"jñāna", I may acquire the "upādhi" that I am a scientist. Or I am
intellectua..., I am a philosopher. I am an author. By my "karmā", I may, I may
acquire some "upādhi", you know, you know, I am a farmer. I am a housewife. I am
an engineer. So, of course, this is general. The, not a technical
classification. Just some simple examples. So, basically, you know, through
"jñāna-karmā", we get some different qualifications. So,
"jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam". So, "sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ". So, you know, as
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu told that even in the varnashram system, also, you know,
whatever designations are there, a devotee rejects them. Just as:

        nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir nāpi vaiśyo na śūdro
        nāhaṁ varṇī na ca gṛha-patir no vanastho yatir vā

So, he rejects the four varanas. Identifications of the four varanas. And
identification with the four ashrams. And he says, I am simply the servant of
Krishna.

        gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ

So, similarly, so, similarly, the point is:

        sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ
        tat-paratvena nirmalam

What happens is, one becomes "nirmalam". And then, what, it is not passive. 

        hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-
        sevanaṁ ..

So, "hṛṣīkeṇa". "hṛṣīka" means senses. So, we use our senses to serve the Lord
of the senses. Who is "hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ". So, when we serve the Lord with the
senses with our senses, that is "bhaktir ucyate". So, that is the, also
indicat..., serving the Lord with the senses, also indicated over here by,
you know, "ānu-śīlanaṁ". And "hṛṣīkeśa" is indicated by Krishna. So, the two
definitions are parallel. And basically, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is using
the, using this, you know, "sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ" definition to substantiate
what he is saying. Now, after this, you know, let us go to the, you know, next
part of the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta", of "The Nectar of Devotion". Which is the
characteristics of devotional service. So, there are six characteristics of
devotional service. And let us discuss them one by one. Yeah. So, what are the
six characteristics of devotional service? Prabhupada explains this. You know.
Klesaghni. Subhada. Moksa-laghutakrt. Sudurlabha. Sandrananda-visesatma. Sri
krsnakarsini. You know. So, "Klesaghni". That means relief from material
distress. "klesa" is misery. You know. Used to igni..., extinguish. So,
extinguishing, extinguishing of misery. We become free from misery by the
practice of devotional service. "Subhada. "Subhada" means it gives
auspiciousness. "Subha", "da". "da" means to give. "Subha" is auspiciousness. It
gives auspiciousness. We attain auspiciousness by the practice of bhakti. Then,
"Moksa-laghutakrt". "laghu" means, "laghu" means small. Tiny. "krt" means to do.
"laghutakrt" means to make as tiny. To reduce to insignificance. You know. So,
it makes the, makes liberation and the pleasure of liberation reduced to
insignificance. So, Prabhupada write..., he says, it derives even the happiness
of liberation. And then, "Sudurlabha". So, "labha" is obtained. "durlabha" is
rarely obtained. "Sudurlabha" is extremely rarely obtained.
"Sandrananda-visesatma". You know. You know. So, "Sandrananda-visesatma".
Technically, the word, what the, you know, Prabhupada, you know, it, you know,
explains, it, transcendental pleasure. "Sandrananda" means concentrated.
"visesatma". So, very "vises". So, this is what, this is tech..., slightly
technical thing. We will come to it later. Just like, you know, nothing can
penetrate a metal. So, the, you know, metal is hard. Concent..., you know, in
it, the atoms are concentrated together. So, like that, the bliss of devotion is
concentrated together. And then, "Sri krsnakarsini". It is the only means to
attract Krishna. You know. You know. You know. So, let us look at what, you
know, Srila Prabhupada states over here. So, this is what he describes. Now, the
way Srila Prabhupada does is it that he talks about, you know, you know, these
six characteristics. And then, he gives examples. And as I said, said, this is
summary study. So, in the summary study, Srila Prabhupada focuses primarily on,
you know, giving generic explanations. So, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" gives, you know,
specific verse, specific examples, or specific verses to substantiate specific
points. And Prabhupada elaborate, you know, Prabhupada states them. Elaborates
them. And in this way, Prabhupada, you know, in a, par..., you know, through a
paraphrase of the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" explains it to. So, what is, this
relief from material distress? Actually, everyone, you know, is trying to get
release from distress.

So, for example, when we have sickness, we go to a doctor. And we go to that
for, doctor, I am having pain. Please give me some med..., medicine. So, that
medicine is supposed to give dist..., dist..., di..., relief from distress. Now,
in the med..., in a particular sickness, particular place, if the disease is
diagnosed properly, then the medicine will work. But that sort of relief is
temporary. So, what bhakti offers us is permanent relief. It offers compl...,
permanent relief. Complete relief. So, that is "Klesaghni". Now, you know, you
know, we have discussed in our earlier, in the course earlier, how there are
nine stages of bhakti. So, there is "śraddhā". Then, there is "sādhu-saṅgaḥ".
Then, there is "bhajana-kriyā". Then, there is "anartha-nivṛttiḥ". Then, there
is "niṣṭhā". "ruciḥ". "bhāvaḥ". "āsaktiḥ". And "prema". The nine stages. So, you
know, we come to the association of devotees with faith. With little faith, we
come to the association of devotees. "sādhu-saṅgaḥ". Then, we do
"bhajana-kriyā". Start chanting Hare Krishna. Practicing devotional service.
Then, there is "anartha-nivṛttiḥ". Then, the "anartha"s start going away. Lust.
Anger. Greed. They start going away. And then, there is "niṣṭhā". At that time,
there is strong faith. So, at the stage of "śraddhā", the faith is very tiny,
is, it, a bit tender. Like a, say, banana tree. But at the stage of "niṣṭhā",
the faith is strong. Unshakable. Like a banyan tree. So, at the stage of
"niṣṭhā", when the faith has become very strong, you know, you know, this
characteristic develops. So, now, when we say, these are the characteristic of
devotional service, they are not necessarily manifest immediately. You know.
There are, the, you know, the, you know, you know, we are sadhakas. Sadhakas
means that we have not yet developed bhakti. We are trying to, we are going
along the path of bhakti. So, you know, we, we will, may not experience these
effects immediately. To some extent, we may experience a little bit glimpse. You
know. For example, when our mind is very, you know, fill..., is filled with
great anxiety. And we start chanting Hare Krishna at that time. And then, you
know, just as we get absorbed in Krishna, then we feel relief from the anxiety.
you know. The tension goes away. And we feel calm. So, that is an example of,
you know, some lev..., you know, some kind of "Klesaghni". But that is only
preliminary. That is just a, you know, glimpse. But actually, we will experience
much greater li..., relief as we move forward in our spiritual life. So, once we
come to the level of "niṣṭhā", then we start experiencing "Klesaghni". So, now,
you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" goes into elaborate analysis of what causes
"klesa". Now, the, I may say that, ok, you know, I am in a particular place. And
the atmosphere is very hot over here. So, what is causing "klesa" is the heater.
So, if I just have an airconditioner, the "klesa" will go away. Well, that is
very superficial analysis. That is true in one sense. But, you know, what put me
in a place where there is too much heat? Why is the atmosphere so hot over
there? So, heat, ultimately, these things happen because of kar..., our own past
karma. So, he explains how, you know, it, technically, how our, you know, how
miseries originate. You know. So, let us look at this here. You know. You know.
The, you know, you know, so, here, the diacritics is not displaying properly.
So, we will not be able to see, this "a" becomes a little distorted. 

But "avidyā". Root problem is ignorance. And then, "avidyā" leads to "bijam".
This is general definition. I will discuss technically more about this, about
later. Then, material desires. And then, this is "bijam", actually. And then,
there is "papam". "papam" is, you know, sinful act. And sinful act leads to
suffering. So, let us understand this simply once again. You know. With a simple
example. Say, you know, you know, you know, a child does not, is ignorant. Child
does not know that fire is bad. So, what the child does is, you know, you know,
child does not know, so, for, it with ignorance, the child start, I do not know
fire is bad. And then, he says, oh, this fire is shining so much. It looks so
nice. The child gets the desire. Let me go and touch the fire. And then the
child actually goes. And touches the fire. And tuck. Aaa..., the hand starts
burning. So, this is simple example of how, it, these four stages happen. You
know. Ignorance leads to a wrong desire. Wrong desires leads to undesirable, you
know, to a, you know, you know, to an unwarranted action. To a wrong action. And
then, that leads to suffering. So, "avidyā", you know, you know, he, you know,
Kunthi Maharani also talks about this in her prayers.

        bhave ’smin kliśyamānānām
        avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ
        śravaṇa-smaraṇārhāṇi
        kariṣyann iti kecana

So, she describes, when she is analysing the various reasons, why Krishna
appears, in 1.8.32 to 35. She concludes that analysis by describing how You
appear my dear Lord. You know. To free the conditioned soul from suffering. By
teaching them the process of hearing. And chanting. So, there, she describes
"bhave ’smin kliśyamānānām". So, "klesa". "klesa" is there. What is the cause of
"klesa"? She says, first is "avidyā". "avidyā" leads to "kāma". "kāma" is
material desires. And then, "kāma" leads to karma. And karma will lead to karma
phala. Which is "klesa". So, this is how "avidyā", "kama", "karma" and "klesa".
That is how it happens. You know. So, you know, now, if you want to remove
"klesa", what all has to be done? You know. There is, first of all, there is
multiple levels of removing that is required. So, you know, we have, we are
doing some bad karma. That will give reactions. So, what, what has to be done
is, the, whatever bad karma that we are doing, that, we have to stop doing bad
karma. Then, we will not get the reactions. But then, we already done some bad
karma. That will also give some reactions. That also has to be dealt with. And
then, there are some wrong desires which we have. So, we, we have to be, you
know, we have to give up those desires, also. And then, after that, the basic
ignorance, because of which, we got those wrong desires. We have to give them
up, also. Or examp..., example would be, say, a person is alcohilic. So, then,
if the alcoholic has to become free from suffering. Then, you know, you know,
karma, right now, say, the alcoholic, let us look at this with a further
example. I will explain this further. Just, you know, take this, the example of
alcoholic. You know. You know. So, now, "papam" is sinful action. You know.
Sinful action gives two kinds of reactions. "Aprārabdha". And "Prārabdha".
"Aprārabdha" is unmanifest reaction. You know. "Prārabdha" is the manifest
reaction. So, what is the mani..., manifest? And unmanifest? Say, you know, you
know, say, simple example. This may not be entirely technically accurate. But
when an alcoholic has drunk heavily, then, you know, by that, you know, now,
there is a hangover. There is a headache. And maybe, that person has lost the
money. That person has fallen. You know. In a dirty place. Or whatever. So, this
is the reaction which has come about. But that is, what is visible right now.
But along with that, that drinking of the alcohol may internally have started
spoiling the liver. And that may eventually lead to a disease in the body. So,
that is stalled. That has not yet come out. It will come out eventually. So,
like that, our karma, you know, you know, it is not exactly like that. But it is
general exampl..., bor..., example to illustrate. That there can be, you know,
acce..., reactions. Consequences that we are experiencing. And consequences we
are not experiencing. So, you know, there is "prārabdha" karma. Which is what we
are actually experiencing right now. And "Aprārabdha" karma is that which we are
not experiencing. So, if we can envision, say, our karma, you know, karmic bank
account like a water tank. So, if there is a water tank, in water tank, say,
water is coming in from above. And water is going out from below. So, water that
is coming, going out from below, that is falling. So, you know, that means, now,
what is this? So, if that is our karmic water tank, we could say, then whatever
karma we are doing right now, that is adding water to the karmic water tank. You
know.

And whatever, you know, water is coming out, that means that those are the
consequences that we are bearing right now. So, you know, you know, now, in the
water, there is further water, also. In the water tank, there is further water
which has not yet come out. You know. So, some water has come out. And there is
much water that is still remaining. Which is going to come out later. In due
course. So, suppose, there is a big water tank. And there is only a small hole
below. Then, you know, out of the water tank, small amount of water will come
out. You know. So, like that, "prārabdha" karma refers to what we are
experiencing right now. So, for example, I may have a particular body, which
will be little sickly. Or I may be born in a not so wealthy family. I may be
born in a, you know, you know, born in a place where there is a lot of violence.
And insecurity. And terrorism. And, you know, you know, or I may be born in
another place where there are natural calamities happening constantly. The
earthquake prone area. Or cyclone prone area. And other people may be born in
relatively peaceful areas. So, why this difference? That is "prārabdha" karma.
That is something which is, because of, of my past karma, this is something
which I am experiencing right now. So, but there is also more that, you know, I
am not experienced. So, "aprārabdha" is what is going to come to me in the
future. Now, you know, there are some technical words for this. Which, you know,
I just briefly myself..., so, the total water tank, that is there. That is like
the "sanchit karma". "sanchita karma". "sanchita" is accumulated karma. And out
of that accumulated karma, some of it is coming out. So, that is the "prārabdha"
karma that is coming out. And what is not coming out, what is still in the tank,
that is the "sanchita", that is the "aprārabdha". And now, in the "sanchit
karma", accumulated karma, there is something which is coming in. That which is
coming in, is called as "Kriyamana". "Kriyamana" means what I am doing right
now. So, what I am doing is adding to my karmic bank account. And what I am
enduring, is now exhausting my karmic bank account. You know. So, how does
bhakti remove these sufferings? Let us understand this now. So, that means, what
are the, all the causes of sufferings? Our past wrong actions, which are
bringing some reactions now. Or which will bring some reaction in the future.
Our wrong desires. Which, which will impell us to wrong actions. Which will
cause suffering. And our basic ignorance. Which also causes suffering. You know.
You know. So, actually, bhakti removes all these, you know, causes of suffer...,
all these causes of suffering. Over a period of time. How does that work out?
So, firstly, let us look at "avidyā". You know. Now, what happens is, by the
practice of bhakti yoga, as Krishna tells in the Bhagavad Gita:

        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ
        yena mām upayānti te

"dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ". You come. I give the intelligence. By which, you come
to Me. So, you know, you know, Krishna also says this in 10.10. And 10.11, He
says that:

        jñāna-dīpena bhāsvatā

I give knowledge. So, a devotee becomes illumined by knowledge from within. By
which, the devotee becomes freed. From the, you know, ignorance which impells
one to wrong actions. Which makes vul..., one vulnerable to wrong desires. Which
impell one to wrong action. So, "avidyā" is the foundation. And that becomes
removed. Because as we practice devotional service more and more, it becomes
clear to us. Ok. This is desirable. This is undesirable. Because I am a soul. At
the bodily level, enjoying things is not going to make me happy. Why should I
get so much into these things? So, in this way, one becomes purified. That is,
you know, how one becomes, you know, the "avidyā" is removed. Now, what to
speak, now, what about the wrong desires? The "kāma" that is there? That "kāma"
can be at different levels. And then, there is, actually, bhakti purifies us.
"It purifies us" means, you know, there is general example given in the
scriptures that just as, you know, just as fire, just if there is wood
accumulated in a place, and then, fire is set, the whole wood will get burnt.
So, similarly, Prabhupada quotes the shastric reference over here. Krishna, the,
similarly, you know, all the karmic reactions are burnt by the fire of devotion.
So, that is the general principle. How does it happen specifically? You know.
"kāma". We have material desires. Bhakti purifies us of these material desires.
It redirects our desires from the material level to the spiritual level. So,
therefore, what happens is that, "kāma" becomes, you know, spiritualised. So,
you know, there is, you know, you know, Narottama Dasa Thakura has sung a song
in which, he says that:

        kāma kṛṣṇa-karmārpaṇe

He is, the ex..., tells how all the anarthas can be purified. And how all of
them can be redirected towards Krishna. So, "kāma" goes towards Krishna. So, a
devotee starts desiring Krishna. And desiring to serve Krishna. And desiring to
offer everything to Krishna. So, instead of desiring things for our sense
gratification, we desire things for Krishna's pleasure. That is, "kāma" becomes
spiritualised. Then, after that, you know, you know, you know, let us move
forward. Now, "prārabdha" karma. You know. You know. So, Prabhupada quotes the
example of "Devahūti" over here. You know. You know. You know. So, here, what
it, "prārabdha" karma means. Let us come back over here, what is "Devahūti"s'
example? "aho bata", you know, he says that "savanāya kalpate". "savanāya
kalpate" means they become qualified to do sacrifices. Who? You know. "aho bata
śva-paco ’to garīyān". So, there are two different verses in different contexts.
Both of them emphasise the, you know, elevating potency of bhakti. And
Prabhupada quotes them, also. You know. Quote those verses here. You know. So,
the point is, you know, you know, that normally people who are born as
"mlecchá"s, "Chandala"s, you know, because of their sinful body, they cannot,
you know, they are not ori..., the, traditionally, they are not considered
qualified to do fire sacrifices. Because their body is considered contaminated.
And sinful. But if one becomes a devotee, then what happens is, he says that,
one becomes purified. And, you know, you know, "sravanam". "smaranam". You know.
So, if one remembers Krishna. One takes darshan of Krishna. One serves Krishna,
then one "savanāya kalpate". One becomes qualified to even do fire sacrifices.
This is an example of how the "prārabdha" karma goes off. So, traditionally, you
know, you know, you know, not everybody is qualified for these kind of karmas.
But bhakti makes them qualified. Bhakti makes one qualified. And then, you know,
one's birth, you know, one, the, the way we are born is a result of our past
karma. But that effect of the birth gets countered by the process of bhakti. And
Krishna also talks about this in 9.33. When He says:

        ye ’pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ
        ...
        te ’pi yānti parāṁ gatim

He says, He gives example of "striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās". These are generally
considered, you know, lower birth. But Krishna says that, if "māṁ hi pārtha
vyapāśritya". If they take shelter of Me, then "te ’pi yānti parāṁ gatim". They
can also attain the supreme destination. So, this "prārabdha" karma result of,
this result is removed by Krishna. You know. Now, what about "aprārabdha" karma?
Let us look at "aprārabdha" karma. We will come back to "prārabdha" karma a
little bit later once again. So, here, you know, you know, you know, you know,
there are different ways of analysing this. And we will not go into all of
these. We will just focus on some of, of, one way of analysing it. So, now,
"papam". Sinful action. It has two reactions. One is the unmanifest reaction.
"aprārabdha" one. And "aprārabdha" two. We could say. What is the unmanifest
reaction? That unmanifest reaction will lead to direct suffering. Physical,
emotional suffering. And indirect suffering will be by, it is "kūṭam". We will
discuss what is, "kūṭam" is the sinful proclivity. Increased sinful proclivity.
So, there is, let us take, understand this. You know. You know. Seven, an
alcoholic drinks alcohol, when, you know, a person drinks alcohol. So, at that
time, what happens? That is going to lead to some, you know, initially, there
might be some pleasure. But that is going to lead to some reaction. What is that
reaction? It is going to lead to, say, a hangover. Or vomiting. Or some pain in
the stomach. Or it may lead to, you know, some disease, also. So, that is the
reaction that comes. You know. At a physical level. But along with that, what
also happens is, you know, you know, that alcoholic becomes attracted to
alcohol. There is addiction results. When a person drinks once. Twice. 47:06
