Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vssZnanaq-A
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=GkblXpFoo_9T4H24EFooou2xch58MTU0ODQ5MDQ3OEAxNTQ4NDA0MDc4&event=video_description&v=vssZnanaq-A&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_155_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_06_%26_07_-_The_Items_of_Bhakti_Explained_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri course. "Nectar of Devotion".
Now, we are going to discuss, start our discussion on the 64 items of devotional
service. That have been enlisted by "Rūpa Gosvāmī". So, as we have discussed
repeatedly, you know, the verse.

        nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saḿsthāpakau
        
So, "sad-dharma-saḿsthāpakau". So, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" wanted to establish
"sad-dharma". Now, "sad-dharma" means, the, is, the true "dharma" is pure
devotional service. So, he has talked about it until now. About how it is
glorious in terms of its six characteristics. He has talked about how it is
glorious in terms of it being independent. And how it is glorious in terms of it
cannot be obtained by anything else. It has to be obtained by bhakti itself. By
devotion, coming from a devotee's mercy. You know. You know. So, that way, he
has talked about the glory of bhakti. In many wa..., in many ways, we can say,
this analysis, forward analysis, has established the supremacy of bhakti. That
bhakti is superior to liberation. Bhakti gives supreme, you know, freedom from
misery. Bhakti is not dependent on any other process. So, all this is the glory
of bhakti. Now, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is starting to talk about how to practice bhakti.
So, in this, there will not be much, you know, philosophical analysis. But it
will be statement. And scripture establishing statement. For example, if "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" says, ok, we should do this. Then, he will give some scriptural
references to tell, why, you know, ok, this is what the scripture is saying.
This, we should say this. For example, say, we should accept the garlands that
have been offered to the Lord. And acc..., and, and, you know, che..., cherish
them as the prasad of the Lord. Then, he will, gives a, say, a quote from
Uddhava Gita. Where Uddhava is saying this to Lord Krishna. So, like that, the
preven..., when Prabhupada uses the word evidencies regarding devotional
service, what he means is, the word evidence means scriptural evidence. So, you
know, you know, the principle is given, you know, the, by "Rūpa Gosvāmī". The
particular item of devotional service. And then, from various scriptures, he has
given the references to support that principle. So, now, what does it mean? It
means that, you know, bhakti has been practiced for a long, long time. And, you
know, what "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is doing is not something new. He is compiling the
items of bhakti together. So that for us, sadhakas, we will know, what all we
can, how we can practice bhakti. Now, we will see, as we move forward through
these items, how Srila Prabhupada has incorporated many, many of these items
within the Krishna Consciousness movement. Now, there are elements of bhakti.
And there are, the items of affair. And there are some items which are extremely
important. The five potent forms of devotional service. And those, Srila
Prabhupada has in..., incorporated very emphatically in ISKCON. So, not all the
64 items, we will be able to practice with equal frequency. But the idea is
that, the more we are able to practice, the more we will, that, that means these
are all avenues by which we can connect with Krishna. So, ok, this is also one
item by which we can connect to Krishna. This is also one item by which we can.
Like that, there are many items by which we can connect with Krishna. So, you
know, let us look at these items now. You know. So, he starts with
"guru-padashraya". Yeah. You know. So, here, we will see taking shelter of the
spiritual master. Now, actually, if we see, the first five items are almost
related with the same point. They are progressive. I will explain the sequence.
The progression in them. And then, we will discuss each of them. "Guru
padaasraya" means going to a guru. And taking shelter of the feet of the guru.
Then, after we take shelter of the guru, "Sri-krsna - diksadi siksanam". That
means, one takes initiation from the guru. And then, starts, you know, getting
siksa. Starts learning from the spiritual master. In a more systematic way. And
then, we are not just meant to learn from the spiritual master. We are also
meant to serve the spiritual master. And serve the spiritual master with, with
reverence. With, you know, with, with great respects. So, and with affection
come reverence.

So, "Visrambhena". "Visrambhena" means affection. And reverence. "guroh seva".
And then, "Sadhu-vartmanu vartanam". You know. "sadhu" refers to, now, we have
the common, you know, guru-sadhu-sastra tripod. So, "sadhu" refers to other
acharyas. Apart from the spiritual master. So, so, we have to follow, not just
the spiritual master. "vartmanu vartanam". "vartmanu" mean..., "vartanam" is,
you know, you know:

        mama vartmānuvartante

Krishna has used this phrase in the Bhagavad Gita, also. Twice. You know. So,
you know, you know, "vartma" is path. "anuvartante", "ānuvartanam" is to follow
according to path. So, to follow in the footsteps of the saintly path. That
means we learn from others, also. And, not just the spiritual master. And then,
"Sad-dharmma-prccha". "Sad-dharmma-prccha" means we acquire about the principles
of religion. And we ask questions from the spiritual master. And that is how we
learn. So, these are the five items. You know. So, now, Srila Prabhupada gives
the, these are the sanskrit which are given in the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu".
Srila Prabhupada, you know, in his, you know, format of summary study,
generally, does not go into the sanskrits too much. There is, sanskrit too much.
Just like in Krsna Book, also, he does not quote the sanskrit verses. Even when
he is, you know, he does not quote the sanskrit verses for the Tenth Canto
itself. And even when he is giving references to substantiate some of the points
which he is making. You know. In his interspersed, you know, comments. He
does not, you know, generally, quote the sanskrit over there. Summary study,
Prabhupada keeps things simple for the, and accessible for the people. So, here,
to really help us, you know, gain a clearer understanding. And, and to help us
gain a proper perspective. And also giving the sanskrit from, based on the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And, you know, you know, let us look at the items as
Srila Prabhupada has described it. Based on, you know, you know, "Rūpa", you
know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī"'s list. So, here, we will see, you know, yeah, you know,
so, let us look at these quickly. "ACCEPTING THE SHELTER OF A BONA FIDE
SPIRITUAL MASTER". So, now, here, we will see one aspect of Srila Prabhupada.
That when Prabhupada gives, you know, the translations of those verses. He
actually integrates the translation. And the purport. So, you know, you know,
the transla..., so, the, if we look at the translation of 11.3.21. It is a very
short translation. And this also helps us understand how Srila Prabhupada is
working. You know. You know. Let us try to understand quickly. It is an
interesting exercise for us to understand Srila Prabhupada's compassion. You
know. So, this is, 11.3.21. So, the, it, this is the translation.

"Therefore any person who seriously desires real happiness must seek a bona fide
spiritual master and take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of the
bona fide guru is that he has realized the conclusions of the scriptures by
deliberation and is able to convince others of these conclusions. Such great
personalities, who have taken shelter of the Supreme Godhead, leaving aside all
material considerations, should be understood to be bona fide spiritual
masters."

So, actually, you know, you know, this is the Eleventh, now, tasma..., if we
look at the original sanskrit, this is also, it is an elaborate translation. So,
if we look at the sanskrit, it says:

        tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

Therefore, surrender to guru. "tasmād". Now:

        jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

"jijñāsuḥ". What, a person who is enquiring. And what is that person enquiring
about? Not just ordinary things. You know. What is the cricket score? What is
the price of the stock, what is the rate of the stock market? What is the price
of the vegetables? No.

        jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

Long-term. The ultimate good. "śreya" refers to long-term or ultimate. And
"uttamam" is, "tamam" is darkness. "uttamam" is that which is beyond darkness.
That which is transcendental. "jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam".

        śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

And what kind of guru should that be? "śābde pare". That the "niṣṇātaṁ". That in
the transcendental worlds is "niṣṇātaṁ". Is perfectly knowledgeable. In the
transcendental words. And:

        brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam

He is not only learned in the scripture. But he is also "upaśamāśrayam", has
taken shelter of the Brahman platform. That means has "upaśamāśrayam", is
"upaśama-āśrayam". Is distur..., detached from material things. And is attached
to the Supreme Lord. So, now, this is the sanskrit. It is, it is such a short
verse, we can say. But let us look at, understand Srila Prabhupada's compassion.
In which, he is elaborately explaining, integrating translation and purport
together. So, what is Prabhupada say? This is a conversation between "Prabuddha"
and "Mahārāja Nimi".

“My dear King, please know for certain that in the material world there is no
happiness. It is simply a mistake to think that there is happiness here, because
this place is full of nothing but miserable conditions.”

So, now, all this, now, we may say where is all this in the translation? In the
verse. If we look at the verse over here. There is nothing like this. No
happiness in the material world. And everything. So, why does it? Actually, it
is all, Srila Prabhupada's purport of this word, "tasmād". "tasmād". So,
therefore, take shelter of the guru. What does therefore mean? Just like we have
"athāto". You know. We have:

        athāto brahma-jijñāsā

So, what does "athāto" mean? So, Srila Prabhupada explains "athāto" to me.
"athā...", now, inquire about Brahman. So, what does now refer to? Ex...,
Prabhupada explains that now that we have got a human form life, now, inquire
about Brahman. So, sim..., so, like that, Srila Prabhupada is incorporating
this, lot of philosophical substance. You know. In, unpacking even every word.
And he, in, because it is a summary study, so, Srila Prabhupada's focus is on
giving, you know, what is necessary for the audience. So, he takes the
scripture. And he integrates the translation with the purport in a way that
expresses the compassion of his heart. By sharing with us, what we need to do.
So, most people may, people may think that, oh, guru, why should I have a guru?
It is a fashion to have a guru. No. That, for, it, to go to a guru, if we
seriously want benefit from the guru. Then, we understand that, actually, this
world is a place of misery. And at a material level, the misery cannot be
rectified. If I want to rectify the misery, then I have to rise to the
transcendental level. So, "tasmād". Therefore. So, Srila Prabhupada unpacks
"tasmāt" as, you know, so, there is no happiness in the material world. And
the:

"It is simply a mistake to think that there is happiness here, because this
place is full of nothing but miserable conditions."

And then, "tasmād". He moves forward.

"Any person who is seriously desirous of achieving real happiness must seek out
a bona fide spiritual master and take shelter of him by initiation."

So:

        tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta
        jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

So, "jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam". What is the "jijñāsuḥ śreya"? Of, you know,
Prabhupada translate, "desirous of achieving real happiness". You know.
"jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam". And "prapadyeta". Prabhupada translates that as "take
shelter of him by initiation". Now:

        śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ
        brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam

Let us see how Srila Prabhupada translate this now. Or rather, he translates and
comments in a combined way over here.

"The qualification of a spiritual master is that he must have realized the
conclusion of the scriptures by deliberation and arguments and thus be able to
convince others of these conclusions."

So, "śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ". You know. You know. So, "pare", "śābde pare ca
niṣṇātaṁ", Prabhupada translates this two things. Realised the conclusions. And
capable of conclu..., convincing others of those conclusions.

"Such great personalities who have taken shelter of the Supreme Godhead,"

        brahmaṇy upaśamā...

"brahmaṇy". Such a, such a spiritual scenario.

"upaśamāśrayam". I am giving up all other things.

"leaving aside all material considerations, are to be understood as bona fide
spiritual masters. Everyone should try to find such a bona fide spiritual master
in order to fulfill his mission of life, which is to transfer himself to the
plane of spiritual bliss.”

So, so much, Srila Prabhupada is giving us. What is the mission of human life.
To transfer oneself to the plane of spiritual bliss. You know. You know. Then,
now, Srila, after that, Srila Prabhupada goes into explaining. Again, he is
looking at the context. You know. "The Nectar of Devotion" is a book which is
written 500 years ago. And Srila Prabhupada is translating it, not just in terms
of the, you know, language. He is translating it in terms of the context, also.
You know. Today, there is this situation where there is so many people claim to
be gurus. And so many people who easily get mislead. So, therefore, Srila
Prabhupada, you know, translates, you know, Prabhu..., in his explanations. He
explain, he talks about the qualification of a bonafide guru. And how a guru,
you know, one should select a properly qualified guru. And not an unqualified
guru. So, this is Srila Prabhupada's comment about, you know, the, you know,
first element. "guru-padashraya". So, Srila Prabhupada is giving us firstly, you
know, why one should take, take shelter of guru. "Śrī Jīva". "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is
simply giving the item, take shelter of guru. But first, he says why? Because
this world is a place of misery. And the guru can, shows the way out of misery.
Then, he is telling, also, what, what is the kind of guru that we should take
shelter of? So, "guru-padashraya". So, why take "ashraya"? And what is the guru?
And that, also, Prabhupada describes. So, in this way, Srila Prabhupada unpacks
that for us. And then, after unpacking it, then he moves unto the next item.
Now, what Srila Prabhupada has done over here is, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" has just given
"guru-padashraya". And after that, he has simply said "tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta".
He gives this as an example. Ok. This is the word. This is the item. And this is
the ref..., reference. This is an example for it. And Prabhupada elaborates
further for our understanding. Now, after that "sri":

        kṛṣṇa-dīkṣādi-śikṣaṇam

"sri", "kṛṣṇa-dīkṣā". So that one has to take "dīkṣā". And then, "śikṣaṇam". One
has to learn from it. So, actually, our parampara is primarily a "śikṣa"
parampara. You know. Sri, it, it, you know, if we look at the history of our
sampradaya, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" himself, you know, if there is no mention in the
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta", or any other "Caitanya", of any of the other literature
like that. That Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did a fire sacrifice to initiate
"Rūpa" and "Sanātana Gosvāmī". Now, actually, "Rūpa" and "Sanātana Gosvāmī"
first corresponded with Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. They asked him. You know. We are
trapped in such a miserable situation. Where we have to serve "mleccha", you
know, "mleccha"s. How, how can we be delivered? And then, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
was moved by the sincere, you know, you know, sincerity within the, in their
letters. And while going to North India, he came to "Rāmakeli". And they came at
night. Secretly meet him. And they, oh, f..., surrendered their life to him. You
know. "Jīva Gosvāmī" was their nephew. Little "Jīva" at that time. He also came
secretly. And he saw how, with complete humility, and, you know, you know, utter
surrender, his uncles offered themselves to the feet of Lord Chaitanya. You
know. You know. So, that way, you know, basically, "Rūpa" and "Sanātana", they
have surrendered at that time. Now, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was actually traveling
with his associates on harinaam sankirtana. So, there was no, you know,
content, no place over there for him to do any diksha. And then, after that, he
went it, he meet him, he met, met "Rūpa" and "Sanātana Gosvāmī" in, you know,
"Varanasi". And, you know, "Vara...", that area when, the, he was in North
India. And they had left home. And come. And then, again, "Rūpa" and "Sanātana
Gosvāmī" once came to Puri when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was leaving. So, they came,
so, like that, there were a few meetings. That is, were all the meetings that
were there. But what happened? They completely offered their heart and life to
Lord Chaitanya. Just based on these meetings. Now, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave
elaborate instructions in, you know, in, you know, "Varanasi". You know. To
these two. "Varanasi". You know. To these two great souls. ""Rūpa" and "Sanātana
Gosvāmī". So, basically, it was dik..., so, is, diksha was more in the heart.
And then, there was siksha. There was transmission of instruction. So, now, the
essence is siksha. But that, you know, the sta..., that essence of siksha is
formulised. So that both parties become aware of the seriousness of what is
happening. So, for us, we, Srila Prabhupada, and before him, Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura had proper diksha ceremonies. Where fire
sacrifice was down. And the spiritual master, the, the disciple comes forward.
And makes vo..., takes vows. And the disciple, and the guru gives a new name.
All this was done. Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu of course gave a new name to them.
So, in that sense, we could say that, he, that was the diksha for them. You
know. So, what is, the important point is, "sri":

        kṛṣṇa-dīkṣādi-śikṣaṇam

So, "dīkṣādi-śikṣaṇam". So, "sik...", the "śikṣaṇam" is the important. And in
that, diksha is also included. So, diksha is like the formalisation. So that
siksha can go on. Just like anybody can learn from anywhere. You know. But if a
student registers in a University. Enrolls in a University. Then, that
formalises the education. So that now the student has officially entered into
the University. He has become a, you know, properly registered student. And now,
the student, you know, is expected to learn. Now, of course, the infrastructure
of the co..., institute is also available. To help the student in learning. So,
similarly, diksha is like the formal entry into the University. And with respect
to Kri..., our current, the situation, with, we have, we, Srila Prabhupada's
disciples and grand disciples initiating, the spiritual master is, you know,
there are different ways to understand this. The spiritual master is like the
person who guides us into the University. And he will act like one of our
primary teachers. You know. But he is not the only teacher in the University. In
the University, there are many teachers. And they all help us to learn. So, this
is, we are now discussing about:

        sadhu vartmanu vartanam

Which is one of the later items. We will come to that. But this University
example is important to understand. That, you know, actually, our formal, you
know, connetion with the spiritual, our, we are not just connecting with the
guru. You know. In the history of ISKCON, there have been issues. Sometimes,
disciples have become fanatical about their guru. You know. They think, my guru
is the best guru. And they try to drag other people to take initiation from
their guru. But actually, that guru is a pro..., is a pr..., like a professor in
a University. And ultimately, you know, what is going to elevate people is not
just affiliation with a particular guru. What is going to elevate people is
graduation from the University. Graduation from the University. You know. So,
what we have to impro..., recognise is yes, our spiritual master will be our
primary guide. And it is very important that we, you know, try to serve and
please him. And imbibe his mood. And learn from him. You know. Properly. But
along with that, it is also important that we learn, you know, the proper
understanding. We cannot divorce the guru from the sampradaya. The guru is
representing the sampradaya. And the sampradaya has many representatives. You
know. Even in our times. As well as in the past. And in the future. So, we learn
from all of them. And in that way, move forward. So, diksha is a part of siksha.
Sri:

        kṛṣṇa-dīkṣādi-śikṣaṇam

And initiation is extremely important. Because that is the time when we make a
vow. A serious vow. That this is the way I am going to, you know, I am going to
follow these principles. I am going to chant 16 rounds. Like that. So, it is
very important. By no means is it to be undermined. But at the same time, we
should not assume that diksha is everything. And this also can help us to un...,
make sense of another unfor..., you know, un..., unfortunate, even
heart-breaking situation that happens sometimes, you know, with the devotees.
If some time, some devotee, if sometimes, some spiritual masters have
difficulties in their spiritual life. And they may not be able to continue their
service of guru. So, what happens at that time? You know. Some devotees is, may
just lose. Oh, I thought, you know, my spiritual master is a pure devotee. And
then, he has had difficulties. And then, maybe the process of pure devotion does
not work. The process of devotional service does not work. All of ISKCON is
bogus. This heard, very thing is nonsense. And then, what happens is people
just, you know, lose faith. And often, sometimes, they go on a rampage of
accusation. And blasphemy. And there is no need for such a thing. You know. We
have to un..., actually, you know, "Jīva Gosvāmī", in the "Sandarbhas" also
talks about it. It is possibility. Even, you know, the Mahabharata talks about
it. Or sometimes, even the acha..., the acharya, the spiritual master can, you
know, can succumb to improper behavior. And Bhaktivinoda Thakura has talked
about it. So, it is not that it is a, you know, you know, it is something that
can never occur. It can occur. And the acharyas, and the shastras have
recognised that possibility. And then, they have told us how to deal with it.
So, they say that, generally, you know, we should stay in the community of
devotees. If it is possible that we can help the spiritual master. The spiritual
master has done, is, a lot for us in the past. And if we can help the spiritual
to, in a journey back to Krishna. Well and good. If we cannot, then we continue
our journey to Krishna. You know. With the guidance of other vaishnavas. So, you
know, the spiritual master i..., i..., is connecting us to Krishna. By
connecting us with the sampradaya that is connected with Krishna. So, the
spiritual master does not monopolise our connection with Krishna. So, so, it,
with respect to, you know, with respect to the current ISKCON situation. You
know. We, Srila Prabhupada is our link with the Gaudiya Sampradaya. And Srila
Prabhupada's mercy manifests in three ways to us. So, Srila Prabhupada's mercy
manifests as, you know, our guru. Our diksha guru. Who may be his disciple.
Grand disciple. And in future generation, that will go on. Then, Srila
Prabhupada's, you know, mercy, also manifests through his books. You know. That
is how we are getting siksha. So, Srila Prabhupada is the pre-eminent siksha
guru of all of ISKCON. Every devotee in ISKCON in every generation is connected
with Srila Prabhupada. And Srila Prabhupada is the pre-eminent siksha guru. He
is the founder acharya. And he is the preeminent siksha guru of all devotees.
So, every devotee is connected with Kri..., Srila Prabhupada through his books.
And along with that, we are all connected with Srila Prabhupada. You know. You
know. Through the sadhus he has given us. That is the body of devotees in
ISKCON. In general. And especially the GBC. Srila Prabhupada instituted, you
know, ISKCON in a such way that GBC is the, you know, primary governing
authority. And all these three are actually, so, all these three are coming from
Srila Prabhupada. So, all these three are manifestations of Srila Prabhupada's
mercy. And that is how we are all connected with, you know, the parampara.

So, in one sense, for us, we could say, it is not limiting. But in one sense,
understanding. So, guru, sadhu, shastra. So, for us, you know, we have our
spiritual master. Then, Srila Prabhupada, Srila Prabhupada's books of the
shastra. And, you know, the GBC. And the body of devotees in ISKCON are the
sadhus. So, that is one way of understanding it. Of course, the previous
acharyas are also sadhus. And there can be Gaudiya Vaishnavas, who are outside
ISKCON, also. And they are, they may also be very advanced souls. And they may
also be very learned. And we should also respect them. So, just because they are
not a part of ISKCON does not mean that we should respect them. You know. Now,
just because, and sometimes, they may have certain pos..., philosophical
positions. You know. And certain practical stances. Which are different from
what Srila Prabhupada has given us. So, we do not have to, you know, we do not
have to offend them because they are holding different positions. They
understand that, even they are exi..., they are, they are serving in a, they are
serving Krishna. And Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu in the mood different from what
Srila Prabhupada has taught us. Therefore, we respect them from a distance. We
respect them from a distance. And we, you know, follow Srila Prabhupada. So,
Srila Prabhupa..., it is by Srila Prabhupada's mercy that the name of Krishna
actually spread far and wide. And chant the holy, and we had it not been for
Srila Prabhupada, we would not have been int..., introduced to Krishna
Consciousness. So, you know, we are forever indebted to Srila Prabhupada. At the
same time, this is not a limiting thing. We recognise that there can be, you
know, other vaishnavas. There can be other Gaudiya Vaishnavas, also. And they
can be in good standing. But because their mood is different from Srila
Prabhupada's. So, therefore, we do not focus on them. We focus on Srila
Prabhupada's representatives as a, manifesting to us. So, this is how we are
getting siksha. So, "sri":

        kṛṣṇa-dīkṣādi-śikṣaṇam

And, you know, by taking, you know, shelter of the process of bhakti, as is, it,
outlined here, so, we learn more. So, first is, we go and take shelter of a
guru. So, now, in the Krishna Conscious movement, sometimes, there, that there is the
situation that, you know, for, you know, actually, the guru and disciple should
mutually test each other. You know. It is not that the disciple should just, you
know, oh, because this guru has so many thousands of disciples. Therefore, I
will take initiation from this guru. Oh, because this guru is, you know,
everybody exalt..., everybody praises this guru. And the devotees whom I met,
they have said, oh, you should take initiation from this guru. I should take
initiation from this guru. That is why I should take initiation. No. Actually,
Srila Pra..., the way Srila Prabhupada has explained is, the disciple should
test the guru. And the guru should test the disciple. Both have to happen. So,
the first item, "guru-padashraya", is, that is actually indicating that the
disciple test the guru. And disciple understands, ok, yes, this person is
spiritually advanced. This person is following the teachings of guru, sadh...,
guru, shastra. He is following Srila Prabhupada. And this person can guide me in
my spiritual life. In a wonderful way. So, therefore, I take shelter of the
guru. So, that is the tea..., so, so, that means "guru-padashraya" indicates
that the disciple has tested the guru. And has, you know, there, I, you know,
thereby decided, ok, this is the, this is the guru I should take. Now, by
testing, we do not mean that we have to, you know, we do not have to consider
that I am superior. And guru is inferior. That you know, that is the idea when I
test, a teacher's f..., tests a student. So, we may wonder how can a disciple
test a guru. But the idea is that we are entrusting our life. The relationship
with a, between the disciple and the spiritual master, is the most important
relationship that we can ever have. It is more imp..., more important than even,
say, the discip..., relationship between spouses. So, it has, it can, should not
be taken sentimentally. We have to think seriously about it. So, we evaluate.
Ok. You know. And then, we take shelter of the guru. Then, after that, there is
that dis..., the spiritual master test the disciple. And in general, that
happens by having a period. One year. Two years. Whatever. That one has to keep
steadily practicing devotional service. In the association of devotees. And
then, the local temple guides. The temple president. Or the counsellor. They
recommend that ok, this person, this devotee is practicing sincerely. So,
please, help him to get initiated. Please initiate him. And then, the spiritual
master initiates the devotee. So, "sri":

        kṛṣṇa-dīkṣādi-śikṣaṇam

And then, the third item is:

       visrambhena guroh seva

So, now, before that, you know, "sri", "kṛṣṇa-dīkṣādi-śikṣaṇam". So, you know,
you know, so, here, Srila Prabhupada quotes another ver..., you know, verse from
the same, you know, so, prabhuhda, from the Navyoga Indra section, Prabhuhda.
So:

        ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān
        navamanyeta karhicit

Prabhupada quotes. "ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān". Understand that the spiritual master
is as good as Krishna. You know. Being non-different from Krishna. And
"navamanyeta karhicit". Now, do not disrespect the guru. Do not become envious
of the guru. So, und..., the, so, here, when we take initiation, we understand
that, generally, Krishna's grace will manifest to me through the spiritual
master. And then, further, you know, Prabhupada also quotes the well, well-known
verse: 

        yasya deve parā bhaktir

We have discussed this verse in our course earlier. That one who has implicit
faith in the guru and Krishna, you know, in guru and in Krishna, that to him,
the imports of the Vedas are relea..., released. Revelaed. And then:

        visrambhena guroh seva

So, now, the relationship, the, you know, the disciple has accepted the guru.
And the guru has accepted disciple. Then, what happens is:

        visrambhena guroh seva

Intimately, one star..., one, reverentially, one starts serving the guru.
Respectfully. You know. You know. So, actually, you know, now, when we talk
about "visrambhena guroh seva", what does it mean? It means that one is, you
know, that one should serve. How? What is the meaning of "visrambhena"?
Reverence?  Actually, the disciple, now, the reality of ISKCON is such that, you
know, not many devotees may get the opportunity to personally serve the
spiritual master. If we get the opportunity, that is wonderful. But even if we
do not get that opportunity, we hear from the spiritual master. And understand
the mood of that spiritual master. Mood of, so, okay. Now, this is some, some
devotees within ISKCON. Now, Srila Prabhupada has given us many definitions of
success. And Srila, the different devot..., different disciples of Srila
Prabhupada. The different spiritual masters may take up different aspects of
Srila Prabhupada's missions. Some may want to, the, say, construct temples. Some
may want to, you know, build communities. Some may want to establish varnashram.
Some may focus on book distribution. Some may focus on harinam sankirtan. You
know. So, like that, you know, these are just, you know, these are the, I mean,
very visible specific activities. But beyond that, also, some spiritual master
may focus more on devotee care. Some spiritual master may focus on different
things like that. So, we have to find out, by hearing from the spiritual master,
what, you know, what was it that the spiritual master would like us to do. And
of course, if we are fortunate, we can ask the spiritual master. And, and we may
get some specific instructions, also. Oh, should I collect this? Like this. Like
this. And even if that does not happen, what we do get is, the, you know,
general instructions by hearing from the spiritual master. And of course, this
also applies, we, we study Srila Prabhupada's book. And understand Srila
Prabhupada's mood and mission. And serve accordingly. So, actually, Srila
Prabhupada would very strongly emphasise that all devotees, especially all
serious devotees, initiated devotees, should have some ser..., responsible,
committed service. So, that is how our relationship with Krishna will become
real. And tangible. In the sense that, you know, okay, we are just chanting some
rounds. And we are reading the books. All this is good. But when we take a
service, then we, we take up ownership of Krishna Consciousness movement. In the
sense of, not that proprietorship, I demand, I have these rights. But rather, we
take up ownership. Yes. I also have responsibilities. I have responsibilities.
This is my movement. It is, we do not remain, you know, guest in this Krishna
Consciousness. We become a host in Krishna Consciousness. What can I, okay, this
Krishna, you know, the Krishna Conscious society is my home. What can I do? In
my power. And part over here. Maybe, I can, you know, distribute books. Maybe, I
can help in deity worship. Maybe, I can do preaching. Whatever. So, we take up
ownership. And that is a very serious commitment. And that will be, you know,
defining moment in our onward journey towards Krishna. When we no longer remain,
you know, guests. You know. We expect to be welcomed. And to be cared for. But
rather, we take up the responsibility. Yes. I have to welcome others. And I care
for others. Then, you know:

        sadhu vartmanu vartanam

So "sadhu". We discussed this that, you know, we learn from the various saintly
people. You know. From the various saint, saintly teachers. And based on that,
we practice devotional service steadily. So, "sadhu vartmanu vartanam". You
know. Now, we may have some local temple authorities. Our temple president may
be there. Or the local, in charge, may be there. And, you know, sometimes, in
the past, there has been conflict between, say, the local temple authorities.
And the, you know, and the guru. So, the devotees get a little, you know,
disturbed. You know, what, our, confused. You know. Should we, I, should I be
serving my spiritual master? Or should I be serving the local temple authority?
Ideally speaking, both of them should work in cooperation. You know. And there
are parallel lines of authority. But ultimately, both of them are coming from
Krishna. And coming from Srila Prabhupada. You know. With, with respect to the
Krishna Consciousness movement. And both of them are ultimately helping us to
turn, come closer to Krishna. So, the ideal situation is, where the spiritual
master and the local temple authority, they cooperate with each other. So, we
should not think that I should just serve my spiritual master. And do not care
for my local temple authority. No. We have to, you know, adjust according to
time, place, circumstance. And we should not think that only I have to serve
my spiritual master. No. The diksha guru is there. And there are siksha gurus.
We may learn Krishna Consciousness from many other devotees, also. And they are
also very important in our spiritual life. So, we learn from all of them. And we
move forward. And similarly, as we become more serious in our devotional life.
After we have studied Srila Prabhupada's books systematically, then we can also
study the previous acharyas' books. By that, we will understand the depth and
the glory of the Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition. And we will also understand the,
you know, the magnificent way in which Srila Prabhupada has presented this
Gaudiya tradition to us. So, this is all, you know, "sadhu vartmanu vartanam".
Then, after "sadhu vartmanu vartanam", you know, now, Srila Prabhupada gives an
example of "sadhu vartmanu vartanam" is that, what kind of "sadhu"s do we
accept? We accept those "sadhu"s who are in agreement with our guru. If there
are sadhus who are not in agreement with our guru, then we do not accept them.
And "Rūpa Gosvāmī" only gives the example for this. Of Buddha. You know. Buddha
is not just, Buddha was a, if we could say, at one level, he was a, he was a
renunciate. He was a seer. He was a great, you know, you know, great, that way,
a, a great spiritual person. And that is from the object, or from even the
secular perspective. And from the scriptural perspective, we know that he was
the Supreme Lord Himself. But what He is teaching is a path that is not in
according to scripture. So, we accept Buddha. But we do not accept the specific
teachings that Buddha has given us. So, like that, you know, when we say, you
know:

        sadhu vartmanu vartanam

We follow the "sadhu"s. But which "sadhu"s? Those "sadhu"s who are actually
representing the Sampradaya. And are, you know, and are in accordance with our
guru. And this is one of the main reasons why, as devotees, we have to be
careful about other vaishnavas. You know. As devotees in ISKCON, we have to be
careful while associating with other Gaud..., Vaishnavas. And other Gaudiya
Vaishnavas. We respect them. But in, sometimes, their mood may be different from
the mood of Srila Prabhupada. So, "sadhu vartmanu vartanam". And then, there is:

        sad-dharma-pṛcchā

Then, Prabhupada jus..., just gives a simple one, you know, you know, "Nāradīya
Purāṇa" reference first. So, "sad-dharma-pṛcchā" means one enquires. Okay. What
should I do? How should I learn? How should I move forward? "sad-dharma-pṛcchā".
So, we ask, how can I make spiritual advancement? And how can I apply, so, the,
a..., "pṛcchā" should be "sad-dharma". You know. It should be, you know, "Jīva",
see, we see in the Mahabharata that, you know, or rather, in the Bhagavad Gita,
the start is, "Dhṛtarāṣṭra" is also inquisitive.

        kim akurvata sañjaya

He asked in 1.1. But his inquiry does not lead to any change of heart. You know.
Arjuna is also inquisitive. And he is asking:

       pṛcchāmi tvāṁ dharma-sammūḍha-cetāḥ

"pṛcchāmi tvāṁ". I am asking You about "dharma". So, what happens at the end of
the Bhagavad Gita? Arjuna's heart is transformed.

        kariṣye vacanaṁ tava

I will do what You say. But "Dhṛtarāṣṭra"'s heart is not transformed. Why?
Because "Dhṛtarāṣṭra"'s inquiry is very superficial. He is inquisitive. But not
submissive. Now, his inquisitiveness is more like, you know, you know, inquiry.
A news report. Asking for a news report. What happened on the battlefield? But
Arjuna's inquiry is much more serious. You know. What is the right path? What
should I do in life? You know. He is not just, he is asking specifically. How?
What? Should I fight or not? But actually, Arjuna's kritu..., question is much
deeper. He is asking about, you know, you know:

        yac chreyaḥ syān niścitaṁ brūhi tan me
        śiṣyas te ’haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam

Tell me what is "śreyaḥ". So, his question actually is much deeper. You know.
Not just asking about what is going to happen on the battlefield. Or what he
should do in the battlefield. So, but, what is, what should, what is the right
po..., path of action in, course of action, in life itself. So, that way, you
know, we should be inquisitive about "sad-dharma-pṛcchā". Real principles of
spiritual life. And by that, we will be able to make advancement. Now, after
that, "BEING PREPARED TO GIVE UP EVERYTHING MATERIAL FOR KṚṢṆA’S SATISFACTION".
You know. So, let us look at these over here. You know. So, "BEING PREPARED TO
GIVE UP EVERYTHING MATERIAL FOR KṚṢṆA’S SATISFACTION". So, this refers to, as we
have discussed over here, yeah, you know, first five others.
"sad-dharma-pṛcchā". Then, there is "yavad-arthanu-vartita". "yavad-arthanu", as
much as needed, we take "vartita". Accept that much. So, let us look at the
list. "harivasara sammano". "harivasara sammano". That means what? The occasions
of Lord Hari, like ekadashi, we honor them. And "dhatry asvatthadi-gauravaram".
We respect secretaries. And then, like that, there is a list of items.
"sri-krsna-vimukha-sanga-tyagah". That we give up the association of
non-devotees. "sisyady ananu-bandhitvam". We do not accept that this is, do not
accept too many disciples. And do not build too many temples. Read too many
books like that. So, we will discuss each of these one by one. You know. You
know. Just looking here at the sanskrit of these. So, let us go back now. You
know. At the, you know, you know, for Krishna, we should be ready to give up
ever..., anything and everything. Everything material. So, Prabhupada quotes
from the "Padma Purāṇa" over here. Based on "Rūpa Gosvāmī"'s quote. If we are
ready to give up:

“For one who has given up his material sense enjoyment and has accepted the
principles of devotional service, the opulence of Viṣṇuloka [the kingdom of God]
is awaiting.”

Is awaiting. So, you know, the idea is that, you know, if our heart is filled
with material things, then there is no place left for Krishna. So, the things
which are material, which are occupying and dominating our heart. When we give,
when we are ready to give them up, then that frees space in our heart. And that
allows Krishna to enter and reside over there. And as Krishna reveals his
all-attractiveness to us, he charms our heart more and more. And when our heart
is completely attracted to Him, then we return back to Him. That is why
willingness to sacrifice. So, for Krishna's sake. So, of course, what we do is,
we follow the four regulative principles. And then, there are further things
which we can do, specific accoriding to our conditionings. And our nee..., needs
for our spiritual advancement. That we can decide, okay, I will give this up. I
will give this up. So, for example, in "Caturmasya", there is a time when we can
give up certain things. We can intensify our devotional service. So that we can
go closer to Krishna. And then, residing in a sacred place. So, this will come
again als later. We will discuss about this later. In the five items of
devotional ser..., in the five potent forms of devotional service. But the idea
is that, by residing in a sacred place, you know, you know, you know, by
residing in a sacred place, actually, what happens is that, we move forward
closer to Krishna. So, actually, that "yavad-arthanu" was this one. Accepting
only what is necessary. You know. So, "sri-krsna", "artha", "shila", "tyagah".
So that, earlier one was, actually, giving up things for Krishna. And then, the
idea is, we reside in a holy place. In a holy place, there is a lot of, you
know, there are a lot of potent, lot of spiritual potencies there. Because the,
you know, you know, you know, Lord, ma..., many places, the Lord Himself has
performed pastimes over there. Some holy places, there are many places which are
"tīrtha". Which are like places where sacred things have happened. And dhams are
not just "tīrtha"s. Dhams are even greater. More potent. Dhams are not just
place where the Lord appeared, you know, some time ago. And performed a pastime.
That dham is a place where the Lord resides forever. And they are even more
potent. And along with that, also, further, there is the, you know, you know,
there are the great devotees who have performed, who have performed bhajan over
there. And further, when we go in the association of devotees, then it is even
more potent. So, that way, going to the holy places is extremely beneficial. And
then, you know, accepting only what is necessary. So, "yavad-arthanu". So, you
know, "vartita". That means, as devotees, we have to live in the material world.
And we have to act in the material world. But how we should act? We should act
in such a way that, you know, we do not get, you know, get too caught up in
accumulating too many things. This is similar to way, we discussed
"atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś" in the, you know, "Upadesamrta". So, if our mind, the
si..., simpler we live, simple live, living helps us for high thinking. The
thinking about Krishna. And he, Prabhupada gives a reference from the "Nāradīya
Purāṇa". For this. And then, "OBSERVING FASTING ON EKĀDAŚĪ". So:

        harivasara sammano

So, you know, what is the idea of fasting? You know. Fa..., the purpose of
fasting is not self-torture. Oh. You should not eat food. You should not eat
food. You should not eat food. Actually, you know, the purpose of fasting is to
redirect our consciousness from material things to Krishna. So, when we fast,
then, you know, the idea is that if we still keep our body at the material,
if our consciousness is at the material level, we will feel the torment. Oh. I
would rather, not got any food to eat. I have not got any food to eat. I have
not, and that will turbul us. So, rather than just wasting our time in many
trouble like that, we chant more. We hear more. And we absorb ourselves in
service to Krishna. And that way, our consciousness rises. So, you know, the
holy eka..., you know, place, times, like ekadashi, what, you know, these are
having special spiritual potencies. So that devotional service that we do in
those times, you know, is much more potent, you know, in terms of, the bhakti is
always supremely potent. But at that time, further blessings are available. More
mercy is available. Because of that particular sacred occasion. So, there are
books like "Ekadashi Mahatmya". You know. Which compilations of the "Mahatmya"s
of various ekadashis. Which describe the glory of ekadashi from a karma-kanda
perspective. In terms of, if you do this ekadashi, you will get this. If you do
this ekadashi, you will get this. So, devotees are not interested in the, that
sort of thing, primarily. Devotees' interest is, primarily in ekadashi, is to do
spiritual advancement. So, earlier, Krishna has earlier already talked about, or
rather, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" has already talked about how:

        jnana-karmady-anavrtam

So, we are not doing ekadashi for karma-kanda purposes. It is the devotees
trying to increase their devotional service. So, one way of increasing
their devotional service, or rather, increasing our availability in terms of
times and consc..., time and consciousness for devotional service, is by
fasting. So, our focus should, you know, fasting is one part of ekadasi vrata.
The another, more, more important part of an ekadashi vrata for a devotee is to
increase devotional service. So that we chant more. To read more. To do more
seva in different ways. And in that way, we can tap the, you know, spiritual
opportunities that is there. And then, you know, "OFFERING RESPECT TO THE BANYAN
TREES". And sacred trees like that. So, the idea, now, Prabhupada, you know, you
know, now, Prabhupada quotes from the "Skanda Purāṇa". And "tulasī" tree.
"āmalaka" tree. And cows. "brāhmaṇas". And all these, so, Prabhupada does not
li..., limit it to "banyan" tree. Ok. Banyan tree is sacred. And that is why one
should respect it. That is a way when we, Sri..., you know, so, now, what
happens when we respet that which is sacred? Which is connected with Krishna, is
through that, we make spiritual advancement. 45:21
