Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9U1Rydq5DZA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=9U1Rydq5DZA&redir_token=Gpta72yM5XC_wxNN_Uz9jJ-OdHh8MTU0ODQ5MDUyMkAxNTQ4NDA0MTIy&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_157_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_10_%26_11_-_Hearing%2C_remembering_and_other_items_of_bhakti_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhakti Shastri course. We are now in the
middle of the 19 Chapters of "The Nectar of Devotion". Let us begin with the
Tenth Chapter. You know. We are discussing the 64 items of devotional service.
And this chapter, Srila Prabhupada titles as the "Techniques of Hearing and
Remembering". So, in "The Nectar of Devotion" itself, you know, the division is
differently. It is primarily in terms of Eastern side. Western side. And within
that, there are waves. So, this, these chapter division is primarily Srila
Prabhupada's, you know, division. And the titles are also given by him. So,
here, you know, basically, there are primarily, talking about "śravaṇaṁ". And
then, "smaraṇaṁ". Some other, this is "Tat-kṛpāpekṣaṇam". Expecting the Lord's
mercy. Then, there is, this is "smaraṇaṁ". And "mananam". This is re..., this,
this is remembrance. And this is deeper remembrance. That is meditation. So, we
look at each of these one by one. "śravaṇaṁ" is the first among the processes of
devotional service. As described by "Prahlāda Mahārāja". So:

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
        smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

"śravaṇaṁ". So, it is the first. And basically, "śravaṇaṁ" means that we hear
from advanced devotees. And there are three references given over here. And the
"śravaṇaṁ" can be of different things. Normally, we think, we, "śravaṇaṁ" means
hearing of Krishna Katha. But actually, even kirtan, that is there. You know.
When Krishna, when advanced devotees sing Krishna's names, even hearing them
singing, that is also "śravaṇaṁ". Of course, generally, when that happens, there
is kirtanam, also. That means, the advanced devotees sing the kirtan. And then,
we repeat it. So, that is why it can be called kirtan. But "śravaṇaṁ" applies to
that, also. When we hear, we hear not only the spea..., pure devotees speak about
Krishna. But when they sing about Krishna, hearing that, also, is purifying. So,
here, we will see, three references are given. And each of these talks about
one-one specific, you know, you know, different theme. So, there can be nama
"śravaṇaṁ". There can be carita "śravaṇaṁ". And then, there can be guna adi
"śravaṇaṁ". So, nama "śravaṇaṁ" means, let us look at this, nama "śravaṇaṁ"
means hearing about the holy name. So, Srila Prabhupada explains, he gives the
example from the "Garuḍa Purāṇa" over here. That as just a person who is
unconscious that there can be, you know, because of a snake bite. That
unconsciousness can be, you know, recover..., rec..., recountered. And the
person can be brought back to consciousness by the sound of mantras. So,
similarly, we are all spiritually unconscious. We are, you know, bitten by the
snake of illusion.

        samsara-sarpa-visha-digdha mahogra-tivra
        damstragra-koti-paridashta vinashta-murte
        nagari-vahana sudhabdhi-nivasa shaure
        lakshmi-nrisimha mama dehi karavalambam

So, this metaphor of material existence being compared to a snake bite is quite
common. And this verse, which are recited, it is different from the "Garuḍa
Purāṇa", "Purāṇa" reference. But the point is similar that material existence is
like a snake bite. "samsara-sarpa". So, "samsara". Like a "sarpa".
"visha-digdha". Very poisonous. "mahogra-tivra". Extremely frightening. And
"ugra". "ugra" is horrible. And "tivra" is very sharp. "mahogra-tivra".
"damstragra". "damstra" is teeth. "agra" is the front part. Sharp fangs are
there. And how many fangs are there? Normally, even if a snake has one fang, it
is dangerous. If it has four fangs, it is even more dangerous. But this has
"koti-paridashta". "murte". "koti". Actually, practically, every alluring sense
object is like a fang of material existence. Because what does that sense object
do? When we, "dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ". When we meditate on the sense object,
then, tuck, the enjoying mentality gets injected into our consciousness. And
that enjoying mentality poisons our spiritual awareness. And the more a person
gets injected with the enjoying mentality, the more that person becomes
unconscious of spiritual reality. So, all of us are in that way unconscious.
Because not only in this life, but even in previous lives, we have been bitten
by so many snake bites. And, you know, you know, some of the examples that are
given in the scriptures, we may not be able to immediately comprehend them.
Because we live in a different culture. So, we normally, if there is somebody
who gets a snake bite, normally, we will go to a doctor. And we will get an
antidote. And some injection will be given. That is how we will cure it. But in
the Vedic culture, it is understood that sound has a connection with everything.
And the connection of sound with, you know, you know, the connection of sound
with, you know, the effect on the body is something which is being increasingly
researched by scientists. So, we know that, just as the sound can pacify, you
know, a person. You know. When we, when people are agitated, people whom hear
music. Not even just devotees hearing devotional music. But even materialistic
people. If they hear some coo..., relaxing music, they feel relaxed. In fact,
they call it as a relaxing music. So, sound affects. Sound has affects. Subtle
affects. So, one of the affects of sound is that when a person is poisoned,
actually, by spe..., cha..., chanting specific mantras, that affect of poison
can be countered. You know. It is a subtl..., it is very subtle. And it is not
ordinary. You know. There are specific sounds need to be chanted in a specific
way. Then, the poison gets countered out. So, that, that, that is an example
which we are not be able to comprehend immediately. You know. But the principle,
we can understand. That just an unconscious person can be brought back to
consciousness in that case of a snake bite, through a mantra, similarly, by the
chanting of the Hare Krishna mantra, a person can be brought back from
unconsciousness to consciousness. So, this is an example of nama "śravaṇaṁ".
That means hearing about the name, hearing the name of Krishna. So, there can be
different kinds of hearing. Let us look at the next reference now. So, in the
reference, you know, "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam", it is "Mahā...", "Śukadeva Gosvāmī"
telling "Parīkṣit Mahārāja". And it is, this is about tra..., speak about the
transcendental activities of the Lord. So, this is carita, adi "śravaṇaṁ",
carita "śravaṇaṁ". The character of the Lord. The pastimes of the Lord. The
transcendental activities. So, you know, so, it says, just like from the
moonlike faces of great devotees, what should happens?

This is a nectarian river flowing. And one hears it. And by that, one becomes
free from material miseries. And then, Prabhupada quo..., gives general
philosophically background to explain how hearing is important. And then,
lastly, this is guna adi "śravaṇaṁ". So, hear, this is a, hear about the
transcendental qualities about the Lord. Now, this is a small differentiation.
It is not a very serious, you know, differentiation in the sense that there can
be overlapping categories. But we can generally understand that there is nama
"śravaṇaṁ". There is carita adi "śravaṇaṁ". And there is guna "śravaṇaṁ". So,
these are all related with the Supreme Lord. And there may be some, there, there
is a continuity, also. And there is a distinctiveness, also, in it. The
essential point is hearing about Krishna is extremely important. And, you know,
in the "Caitanya-caritāmṛta", where Lord Chaitanya is intri..., exa..., is
instructing the goswamis, he describes how hearing and chanting is like watering
the, you know, "bhakti-latā-bīja". So that it, once it starts growing, then
also, it needs water.

        śravaṇa-kīrtana ... secana

He says. It is "secana". It is watering the tree. You know. Watering the
"bhakti-latā". The creeper of devotion. Now, after this, the next item is
expecting the mercy of the Lord. That is "Tat-kṛpāpekṣaṇam". "Tat-kṛpā".
"Tat-kṛpā" of the Lord. You know. Expecting it. Now, this is interesting.
"Tat-kṛpāpekṣaṇam" means what? Actually, if we understand that bhakti is a path
of grace. We cannot make spiritual advancement just by our endeavors. Our
endeavors are no doubt very important. Very, very important. But along with
doing our endeavors, we also need, you know, Krishna's mercy. Our endeavors are
basically to show Krishna that we want His mercy. So, as devotees, we expect
Lord's mercy. So, the example often is given of "cātaka" bird. How it waits for
the water to come from the sky. And when the water comes from the sky, it gets
nourishment by that. There, all the water is available, elsewhere, it does not
take. So, like that, a devotee expects the Lord's mercy. And here, "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" quotes the famous verse from, you know, the prayers of Brahmaji in the
Tenth Canto.

        tat te ’nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo
        bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam
        hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
        jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk

So, "tat te ’nukampāṁ". That your "anukampām". Your mercy. "su-samīkṣamāṇo".
"īkṣamāṇo" is, is, eyeing. Waiting for. "bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam".
"bhuñjāna". "bhuñjāna" means undergoing. One is undergoing various, when
a devotee is suffering, undergoing miseries, what does devotee? "ātma-kṛtaṁ
vipākam". One thinks, this "ātma-kṛtaṁ". It is because of my own bad deeds that
I am getting the reactions now. So, devotee thinks just as karmic sufferings are
coming, because of my own misdeeds. But what is Krishna's mercy? Krishna is
minimising those sufferings for me. So, Krishna is just giving me a sample. And
moreover, Krishna is giving me His remembrance, by which I can shield myself
from those sufferings. And I can go deeper into taking His shelter. Into His
remembrance. And then, you know, "hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te". "namas
te". "namas te" means offer obeisances. how? "hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir". "hṛd" is the
heart. "vāg" is speech. "vapur" is body. So, completely. With, you know, body.
Speech. And heart. One utterly offers obeisances. "hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan
namas te". And "jīveta yo". One who lives like this, "mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk".
"mukti-pade". For liberation. "dāya-bhāk" means Pra..., Pra..., this is,
Prabhupada translated this as, "dāya-bhāk" means inh..., inheritance. So,
liberation has become the inheritance of such a person. Just like if a person is
a, is the child of a billionaire. Then, whatever is the billionaire's property,
the, of, child is going to inherit it. What does the child have to do? Just, the
child has to live. The child just lives, then, then it, then inheritance will
come. Similarl, we just have to live in bhakti. Now, the tribulations that come
in life, may make us feel like giving up bhakti. But then, you know, we have, we
have this devotional disposition. My dear Lord, please, have mercy on me. I am,
I am so fallen. Please have mercy on me. So, that "Tat-kṛpāpekṣaṇam". Begging
for the mercy of the Lord. Srila Prabhupada was once in a morning walk. And at
that time, they passed by a, you know, lake. And there were some birds in the
lake. And there was a man who was feeding those birds. And then, he was throwing
some food crumbs at all the birds. And all the birds doing, were quacking.
Asking for more and more food crumbs. And he was giving to all of them. And
there was one bird which was quacking very fiercely. Very fervently. Repeatedly.
Again. And again. And the bird was quacking more. And more. And more. You know.
Much more than the other birds. And this man was giving more food crumbs to that
bird. So, Prabhupada said this is how mercy is given. He said, actually, you
know, none of the birds can make any demands. This person is completely free to
give, you know, the coo..., food, whoever, whichever bird he wants. And he is
just completely free not to give to anyone, also. He is not bound to give. And
then, he can give to anyone. Is free. But then, why is this person giving more
to this bird? Because this bird is calling out more. And more. Calling out more.
And more. So, like that, when we sincerely, urgently call out to Krishna, then,
you know, Krishna bestows His mercy. "Tat-kṛpāpekṣaṇam". So, of course, when
there is, we, with, there, when, we the devotee asks for the mercy, also, the
devotee feel..., I am, you know, at one level, we understand Krishna has already
given me the mercy. What is the mercy? The very opportunity, to practice
devotional service itself is a great mercy. The very opportunity, to be in the
association of devotees itself is a great mercy. Along with that, as I, you
know, can, as I get myself absorbed in devotion. As I get taste in devotion,
that is a greater mercy. So, a devotee is grateful for whatever mercy has been
given. And devotee wants, longs for more and more mercy. But then, wri..., Srila
Prabhupada writes in the Third Canto, also, the devotee desires. But does not
demand the mercy of the Lord. You know. Desire is natural. Because we have
devotion. Or we want to have devotion. Naturally, we want, you know, the mercy
of the Lord. But at the same time, a devotee does not demand. Demanding is not
in the mood of devotion. Krishna is the master. And we are the servant. Whenever
He wants, He will give. But surely, we long for it. And we express that longing
through our, you know, you know, sincere, urgent calling out. Now, that
calling out is, of course, when we are chanting, we chant urgent, seriously.
That is just one way of calling out. But actually, our whole life can be a
calling out to Krishna. When we do our services, we show Krishna. You know. We
do the service responsibly. Committedly. We show that. By that, what do we show
Krishna? Krishna, I am serious about my relationship with you. You know. I
understand that, what, do, I am, if I am doing this for you, this will please
You.

So, therefore, I will do it. And I will do it seriously. I am serious. And when
Krishna saw, say, the seriousness, then Krishna bestows His mercy. So,
"Tat-kṛpāpekṣaṇam". So, now, it is interesting that, you know, you know, many of
the other opt..., items that we have discussed until now, they were having some
tangible activities associated with it. For example, you know, worshipping the,
bow..., bowing down before the deity. Or circumbulating the deity. Or just
before we had hearing. Now, "Tat-kṛpāpekṣaṇam", this seems to be a little
intangible item. This is intere..., what, it is not associated necessarily with
any specific, you know, you know, devo..., form of devotional service. But the
idea is, this is essential. And this can be, you know, because it is distinct.
And it can often be missing. You know. I can come. And sit in the, sit and hear
a class. Or I can go and take darshan. And I may not, I may just do it as a
ritual. So, to emphasise its importance, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" gives it as a distinct
item. "Tat-kṛpāpekṣaṇam". "Tat-kṛpā". Asking for the mercy of the Lord. Let us
move forward now. And here, we see, the next item is about, you know, you know,
"REMEMBRANCE". So, now, here, remembrance and meditation are similar. But, you
know, the way Jiva, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" explains is remembrance is general. You know.
You know. You know. So, Prabhupada quotes two verses that how remembrance brings
all auspiciousness. There are many, many verses about remembrance of the Lord.
You know. With the famous verse that we turn..., seeing  at the time of
initiation:

        om apavitraḥ pavitro vā sarvāvasthāṁ gato ’pi vā/ yaḥ smaret puṇḍarīkākṣaṁ sa bahyābhyantaraḥ śuciḥ/ śrī-viṣṇu śrī-viṣṇu śrī-viṣṇu

So, "bahyābhyantaraḥ śuciḥ". So, remembrance of Krishna is extremely potent in
cleansing us. The way it can cleanse, nothing else can cleanse us. So,
therefore, remembrance of Krishna. It is very important. Now, meditation is
much, much deeper than remembrance. So, the way "Rūpa Gosvāmī" describes
meditation, he talks about three cat..., four kinds of meditation. There is, you
know, nama dhyana. There is rupa dhyana. There is krda dhyana. Or lila dhyana.
And then, there is seva dhyana. So, what are, what are these referring to?
Actually, now, if we see, look at the different references which are given. They
are all talking about, so, these things, in, one by one. So, I will just
explain. Nama dhyana means, we meditate on the name of the Lord. So, when we are
chanting, often, when we are chanting, it is just a lip service. We are not
really concentrating. Leave alone meditating. Actually, concentration is one
stage. Meditation is a deeper stage. Concentration means, there is a, there is a
possibility for distraction. And there is a conscious attempt to focus one's
attention. That is concentration. But meditation means, one's goes so deep
inside that one becomes unaware of anything else. So, hear what, "Rūpa Gosvāmī"
is talking it about meditation over there. Now, nama dhyana. So, when devotees
absorb themselves in the holy name, they forget everything else. And just lose
awareness of everything. That is what would happen with Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. And associates would do kirtans. That they were completely absorbed
in it. Nama dhyana. Like that. Now, if we see, you know, and there are different
kinds of meditations. Then, you know, then after that, after nama dhyana, there
is also rupa dhyana. Rupa dhyana means that one meditates on the form of the
Lord. So, when we go in front of the deities. Then, we look at the deities. If
we look at the Third Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, it is described how the yogi
meditates on each limb of the Supreme Lord. In fact, there is a description of
each limb, also. Right starting from the lotus feet. How the lotus feet of the
Lord is. And then, moves up to the knees. And the ties. And the belly. And the
chest. Which is the abode of, you know, Lakshmi Devi as "Shrivatsa". And then,
moves to the lips. And the nose. And the eyes. And the forehead. And like that,
complete form of the Lord. One can meditate on. So, rupa dhyana. You know. And
when there is, now, actually speaking, in the material world, when there is
male-female attraction, there is raganuga rupa dhyana nuga over there.
Spontaneously, when a man is attracted to a woman, or a woman is attracted to a
man, you know, actually, one goes deep into the, you know, you know, it is, one
starts meditating on that constantly. So, of course, that is a meditation, the
difference between the wordly beauty and Krishna's beauty is that worldly beauty
is agitating. Krishna's beauty is pacifying. You know. When we are attract...,
we may say that, worldly beauty, there is so, so pleasu..., so much pleasure
over there looking at. In fact, there is, the whole industry, in the movie
industry, it focuses on depicting this beauty of the world. And then, the, the,
there is actually, you know, this is, it is attractive. But the end result is,
it is agitating. You know. It agitates us with sensual desires. It agitates lust
within us. And then, after the lust is indulged in, if a person indulges in
lust, then one, it is frustrating.

So, actually, Krishna's beauty is not like that. Krishna's beauty, the more we
behold that beauty, what happens is, the lust becomes pacified. It is not
agitating. It is pacified. Now, we could say, it is spi..., in spiritual sense,
it is agitating. In the sense that, the devotees are eager to see, behold the
form of the Lord. But that spiritual hankering is wonderful. Because that
spiritual hankering purifies us of all material hankerings. In the First Canto
when, you know, Narada Muni, in his previous life, was a boy. Who just, who was,
lost his mother. And then, starts doing meditation. And after doing meditation,
he gets a brief experience of the Lord. And after that, he has, the Lord, when
he sees the Lord, actually, all his senses gave it enlivened. By the, you know,
beautiful darshan of the Lord. And then, the Lord disappears. He is extremely
agitated. So, at that time, the voice comes. And that voice says that because
you are impure in, at heart. And incomplete in service. So, therefore, you will
not be able to see me again. In fact, the Lord says, I regret that you will not
be able to see. You know. The Lord is expressing His endear..., His sweetness.
The Lord wants to reveal Himself. But when we are not pure-hearted, we cannot
see Him. Just like if somebody might be right in front of us, but if my eyes are
closed, then I cannot see that person. So, what I have to do is, I have to do
the endeavor of opening my eyes. So, as long as we are impure, that impurity is
like the closing of the eyes. We cannot see. When, the more we become purified,
the eyes open, and then we can start seeing. So, you know, it says that, you
know, actually, you know, the, you know, you have this one darshan of My, Me.
And by this darshan, this will create a constant hankering for Me within you.
And by this hankering, your, you know, you know, worldly hankerings will go
away. We all have the power to desire. And that power to desire, if it is
directed towards Krishna, then all our other desires get driven away by that.
So, our process, the process of bhakti yoga is not to empty the heart of desire.
You know. Of material desires. It is, the process of bhakti yoga is to crowd
material desires out of our heart. What do we do? We do not empty material
desires from our heart. We crowd material desires out of heart. Crowd means, we
fill the heart with spiritual desires. And when the heart is filled with
spiritual desires, then material desires have left, left with no place in them.
So, our focus should not be on speaking no. No. No. Our focus should be on
saying yes. Yes. And the more we say yes to Krishna, and we become eager for the
different process of devotional service, then the more material desires
automatically go away. So, Kri..., with Krishna's form, when we take, you know,
darshan, then that actually, you know, paci..., drives away our material
desires. And fills up with spi..., with spi..., with spiritual desires. And
actually, the spiritual desires fill us with ecstasy. So, that is rupa dhyana.
And then, there is lila dhyana. Or krda dhyana. That is meditating on the
pastimes of the Lord. So, we see, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu do rupa dhyana.
You know. Sometimes, he would just, you know, the, from far away, outside the
Jagannath temple, practically, if we go to Jagannath temple, and, you know, see
where Chaitanya Mahaprabhu would stand, near the Garuda Stambha, actually, it is
quite far away. From there, it is difficult even to see the Lord very clearly.
But Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was so absorbed. That even from the, you know, he
just, the whole, when he would come in front of the Lord, the whole world would
fade away. To practically disappear for Him. And completely absorbed in
beholding the form of Lord. So, he, this example of rupa dhyana. And, you know,
then, there is lila dhyana.

Lila dhyana means, one becomes so absorbed in hearing the pastimes that one
lo..., one just gets lost. You know. Ecstatically lost in that. So, that is how
there is lila dhyana. Lila dhyana means, one gets absorbed in the pastimes of
the Lord. And we see this in many cases. Especially, we see this in how Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu want to hear the pastimes of "Dhruva Mahārāja". And the
pastimes of "Prahlāda Mahārāja", especially. The, he was, hundred times. And
again. Again. He had, I want to hear again. I want to hear again. Because their
devotion is so extraordinary. Just relished that devotion. And want to relish it
again. And again. And again. That is, you know, lila or krda dhyana. And then,
last is, actually, what all of us need to do the most. You know. We can do, we
can and should do nama dhyana. Rupa dhyana. Lila, krda dhyana. But we cannot do
it too much. In the sense that if we have to do it all day, then our dhyana will
go into something else, only. That is why we have seva dhyana. Seva dhyana means
absorption in service. So, at one level, seva dhyana can be, if one is doing
deity worship, then one gets absorbed in the deity. Okay. I have to cook this
for. Maybe, oh, this is, you know, if I decorate this. Maybe, I can celebrate
this festival. We can do this. We can do that. That is seva dhyana. One gets
absorbed in service to the Lord. And seva dhyana can also be, you know,
different services that we are doing. Whatever services we are doing. If a
devotee is doing book distribution. A devotee can think, you know, how can I,
you know, you know, attract more people? What can I speak? How can I approach?
How can I distribute books more? Let me learn from others. So, a devotee can get
absorbed in seva. And whatever service our, we have, each of that seva, that
service can become the source of absorption for us. And once we become absorbed
in service, then through that absorption, we become connected with Krishna. Seva
dhyana. So, we say, Srila Prabhupada was so absorbed in service. You know.
Constantly thinking of how to share Krishna Consicousness with people. And that
is why one day he was in, in San Francisco. He was just, you know, in the
temple, there was, there was a balcony sort of thing, the, he was walking on the
balcony chanting. Just looked out. And he saw a flatbed truck. And what did he
think? Oh. We can put Jagannath. Baladeva. Subhadra. And have a Ratha Yatra
festival over here. Now, how many people see a flatbed truck? And how many of
them will ever think of Jagannath, Baladeva, Subhadra? Of converting, you know,
just, a flatbed Jagannath, truck into Jagannath, Baladeva, Subhadra cart? That
was Srila Prabhupada's genius. He was so absorbed. Constantly looking for an
opportunity to expand the service of Krishna. Seva dhyana. So, a devotee,
wherever the devotee goes. Now, if we go to some place. You know. Srila
Prabhupada would go, you know, even he went to Moscow. He saw some buildings
over there. And he started, oh, in Mayapur, the temple we have, we can have a
dome like this. Or wherever he would go, which is something wonderful, he would
think how this can be used in Krishna's service. So, the idea is that a devotee,
especially we are doing seva, then seva dhyana can be a constant way in which we
can connect with Krishna. And especially the seva that we can do is, whenever we
are meeting people, you know, we can be in the mood of serving Krishna. How can
I help this person come closer to Krishna? So, that meeting can become a form of
devotional service if that is our meditation. Seva dhyana. And in this way, we
can all be absorbed in service. And that is why we see Srila Prabhupada
translated bhakti also, as, not just as devotion. But as devotional service. A
devotional service. Let us look at the references now. So, you know, Srila
Prabhupada gives many of the references. And not, you know, they are not
specifically divided over here. You know. The way they are in
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". They generically mention over here. You know. So, in
the sweet pastimes. "Padma Purāṇa" reference. This refers to lila dhyana. And
then, you know, you know, you know, here, it talks about remembering the
qualities of the Lord. So, one of the qualities is beauty. So, this can also be
used to ref..., refer to rupa dhyana. And then, lastly, there is this seva
dhyana. There is this story. Beautiful story of, from the "Brahma-vaivarta
Purāṇa". Of the brahmana in "Prati...", "Pratiṣṭhāna-pura". Of how he was doing
manas puja. So, how he was preparing a kheer for the Lord. And when he prepared
that kheer, in his mind, he was preparing it. But when he was preparing it in
the mind, you know, he wanted to check whether it, he prepared it very lavishly.
And then, he wanted to check whether it is adequately hot. Or it is cold. Or
what. And he put his finger. In the mind, only. And his..., his finger started
burning actually. And Lord Vishnu with Narayana was watching. And he started
smiling. You know. Lakshmi. Lakshmi. Nara..., started, Lord Vishnu with Lakshmi
was there. And then, La..., Laskshmi asked. What is happening? And then, Lord
Vishnu caught that devotee back. So, just by manas puja.

So, actually, manas puja is something which we can always do. You know. Even
when we are not able to do service. Still, we can always do manas puja. You
know. Now, of course, we should not only do manas puja. You know. We see that
the birth of Krishna, you know, normally, the Vedic tradition is whenever there
is birth, one gives charity to invoke auspiciousness. So, at the birth of
Krishna, Vasudeva wanted to give a lot of charity. But he could not. Because he
was in prison. So, in his mind, he gave thousands of cows in charity to the
brahmanas. And then, later on, when Krishna killed Kamsa. And restored Vasudeva
to this position of power. And glory. Then, Vasudeva actually gave the charity,
also. So, he actually gave, whatever he desired to do in the mind, he just could
not, not keep it as a desire. The desire expressed itself as an action. So, that
way, when we are, whenever we are able to do, we do actions. In devotional
service. And whenever we are not able to do, then in our heart, we desire. Let
me do this service. Let me do this service. And by that way, we can keep
ourselves Krishna Conscious all the time. So, manas puja, that means the two
things. When, only when it is not possible for us to do physically, then we,
then manas puja is acceptable. And then, whenever the opportunity comes up, we
should accurately translate that manas puja, actually, into direct, also. But
this story illustrates that if there is a sincere heart which wants to serve the
Lord, then manas puja can be so glorious. The Lord becomes so pleased by the
sincerity of the, you know, devotional attitude. That the Lord can elevate and
liberate a person for doing service. Even in the mind. In fact, one of the
characteristics of Kali Yuga, that is described in 16th Chapter of the First
Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam is that, you know, in Kali Yuga, even if a person
does bad things, you know, as, if it, the person does bad things, the mind, one
does not get any reaction for that. But if a person does good things in the
mind, one gets the benefit for that. That is the speciality of Kali Yuga. And we
can tap into that speciality. So, now, let us move to the, this is the, you
know, chapter on techniques of hearing. And remembering. Let us go to the next
chapter now.

So, "Aspects of Transcendental Service". So, service is "SERVITORSHIP". So, now,
these are, they are further items of devotional service. And there is, you know,
"dāsyaṁ". "sakhyam". And "ātma-nivedanam". That are talked about over here. In
the, in this particular chapter. You know. "dāsy...", "dāsyaṁ sakhyam
ātma-nivedanam" are what? They are the last three items among the nine items of
devotio..., nine forms of, nine limbs of devotional service. Nine forms of
devotional service that are mentioned by "Prahlāda Mahārāja". So:

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
        smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam
        arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ
        sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

So, the other items have already been mentioned by "Rūpa Gosvāmī" in different
ways. Now, he is mentioning these two. "dāsy...", so, there is "dāsyaṁ".
"sakhyam". And "ātma-nivedanam". Now, "dāsyaṁ", servitorship can be in two
different ways. Let us look at it. You know. You know. So, the, you know, we
can, we can see over here. So, servitorship can be in two ways. "karmarpanam".
And "kainkaryam". "kainkaryam" means servitorship. The mood of "karmarpanam"
means, we do the karma. And we offer it to Krishna. And there are two ways.
"karmarpanam" that we can do is, offering the fruits of varnashram. That will be
karma. I, I will explain this. And offering the nine main devotional activities.
There is "śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ". That is bhakti. Let us try to understand this now.
Karma, first, let us look at "karmarpanam". So, "karmarpanam". Offering of
karma.

        sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya
        siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ

In the 18th Chapter. From verses 41 to 48, Krishna talks about how varnashram
can be used as a stepping stone for bhakti. Actually, it is in..., intended for
that. It is meant to be, lead one to bhakti. So, the mood of varnashram is,
whatever is our karma. "sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya". Worship that Supreme Lord.
That is what the, you know, you know, purpose of varnashram is. To wor...,
worship the Lord. Now, while talking about this, you know, this is not
necessarily pure devotion. This is actually, you know, depending on the
consciousness of the person. Most often, it is karma. That means, a person is
doing the activities within varnashram. But one offers those works to the
Supreme Lord. So, this technique, so, some people consider this also to be
bhakti. We see in the hierarchy that Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and Ramananda Ray
discuss in the Madhya Lila of Srimad Bhagavatam, of "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". You
know. Ramananda said what? There, when Chaitanya, when Ramananda Ray talks about
offering varnashram. He quotes the famous verse from "Viṣṇu Purāṇa":

        varṇāśramācāravatā
        puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān
        viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā
        nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam 

So, the purpose of varnashram is to do "viṣṇur ārādhyate". And "nānyat
tat-toṣa-kāraṇam". There is no other purpose of "varṇāśramā" than the
satisfaction of Lord Vishnu. So, what does Chaitanya Mahaprabhu reply? 

        iha bahiya ageka ho ar

"iha bahiya". This is external. Speak further. Speak further. So, Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu considered it to be peripheral. It is also a principle of dharma. But
it is a peripheral principle of sou..., external principle of dharma. So, the
Gaudiya Vaishnava acharyas consider this part of offering one's, you know,
varnashram karma to Krishna, it is not exactly pure devotional service. It is
one level below. So, Srila Prabhupada explains that yes, it can also be, it, you
know, these peop..., these people who are offering their fru..., karmic
activit..., of their worldly activities, their varnashram activities to Krishna.
Because they have some feeling towards Krishna, that is why they are offering
those work to Krishna. So, that is how it is a part of bhakti. But it is not a
part of pure devotion. And that devotional disposition will eventually lead to,
you know, you know, to the advancement towards pure devotion. So, we will see,
we discussed when it, you know, in the 12th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. We
discussed about the various levels at which bhakti can be performed. From 12.8
to 12.12. So, there, we discussed about how one of the levels is working for
Krishna. Then, another level is offering the fruits of our work to Krishna. So,
that way, there are levels. So, this is the kar..., so, in "karmarpanam", doing
our varnashram duties, and offering them to Krishna, is not necessarily
considered to be par..., para bhakti. But it is anikul to bhakti. And it can
help us to advance in bhakti. And that is what we should do. We have to do our
varnashram duties. And what we do is, you know, we use, we direct those
varnashram duties towards Krishna. And by that, you know, even our material life
gets spiritualised. But this differentiation makes it clear that they alone do
not constitute bhakti. And so, so, people say, you know:

        karma hi puja hai

Work is worship. So, work is worship. If work is worship, then the donkey is the
greatest worshipper. Isn't it? The donkey works so hard. You know. Work is
worship is not taught anywhere in the Bhagavad Gita. What is taught is how to
make work into worship. It is not that work automatically is worship. So,
"sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya". By your work, worship Him. And for that, what do we
have to do? We have to have a relationship with Krishna separately. And that
relationship is developed through sadhana bhakti. So, when we do systematically
sadhana-bhakti, by that, we develop a relationship with Krishna. And then, on
the foundation of that relationship, then when we do our worldly duties, they
can also become a form of worship. That is why we have the morning programme. We
do our sadhana in the morning. Hear. Stu..., study scripture as much as
possible. A little bit. And then, when we go for work, then that work is, we do
that work with the foundation of a spiritualised consciousness. And then, that
work can also become worship. So, in "karmarpanam", the other part is offering
the ninefold items of devotional service to Krishna. That means one understands
that these items are, I am doing this for Kri..., you know, Krishna.

        iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau
        bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā
        kriyeta bhagavaty addhā
        tan manye ’dhītam uttamam

"iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau". That these, when one item, one offers to Krishna, then
they are the "lakṣaṇā" of bhakti. What has to be done? It, "puṁsārpitā viṣṇau".
One has to offer them to "viṣṇau". So, this is actually bhakti. That means when
one hear..., comes and hears. One comes and chants. These are activities of
bhakti. And then, this is, both are "karmarpanam". Both are, we are doing
activities. So, I am coming to the temple to hear about Krishna. That is
offering of bhakti. And similarly, there can be, you know, the worldly duties
that I do for Krishna. That is a step towards bhakti. From "Rūpa Gosvāmī"'s
analysis, that not exactly bhakti. But higher than this is "kainkaryam".
"kainkaryam" means servitorship. In "kainkaryam", I offer myself to Krishna. So,
it is not that I am doing these activities to Krishna. I am, for Krishna. I am
offering myself to Krishna. It is "kainkaryam". So, let us look at the limbs
over here. So, when we talk about "kainkaryam". That is servi..., you know,
off..., you know, Kri..., id..., identifying oneself as a servant of Krishna.
And offering oneself. Not just one's activities to Krishna. So, the word
"kainkaryam", actually, it, if we look at the sanskrit itself, what it means is,
"kim karoti iti kinkara". "kim karoti". What should I do? So, servant asked the
master. What do you want me to do? What do you want me to do? So, "kim karoti".
What, what do I? What, what should I do? So, "kim kara" means, this is the mood
which Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu also has. That:

        aynanda tanuja kimkaram

Oh, Nanda Tanuja, I am your, oh, oh, Lord Krishna, I am Your "kiṃkara". I am
Your servant. So, this is a deeper identification. Now, we may say that I am a
servant. But how much we feel I am a servant? You know. Oft..., often,
sometimes, if somebody calls us and does not address as Prabhu, let me start a
way, who do you think? Do you, don't you know who I am? So, what happens is, we
still think of ourselves as masters. And, you know, you know, you know, so, the
idea is that we are servants. And we have to internalise this mood of
servitorship. So, that is "karmarpanam". And "kainkaryam". Both of these are
moods of service. And Prabhupada quotes from "Nāradīya Purāṇa". You know.
"Nār...":

"In the Nāradīya Purāṇa there is a statement of how this servitorship is
transcendental. It is said there that a person who is constantly engaged in
devotional service by his body, mind and words, or even a person who is not
practically engaged but is simply desiring to be so, is considered to be
liberated."

The idea is that this mood of servitorship can eventually lead to liberation.
Then, there is "sakhyam". Prabhupada writes, "sakhyam" is of two types.

"the first is to act as the confidential servant of the Lord, and the other is
to act as the well-wisher of the Lord."

So, "viśvāsa". And "mātra". So, "viśvāsa" means, you know, in, as, one considers
the Lord to be a friend. And one has very great confidence. Great confidence.
The Lord is my well-wisher. The Lord is my benefactor. The Lord is my protector.
And in that way, sa..., one does, one does not treat the Lord, so, although the
mood of, the Lord be my protector is there. But still, the relationship is very
intimate. That is why it is considered to be a "sakhyam". So, the mood, here,
the example is given of "Draupadi". So, "Draupadi", when she called out for the
Lord, she has "viśvāsa". So, the Lord will come and protect me. And her
relationship with Krishna is not exactly conjugal. She is not in madhurya. You
know. She is actually, you know, her relationship is different. So, the example
is given. You know. Not exactly madhurya, like the gopis of Vrindavana. Because
she has her husbands. And they are also devotees. So, the idea here is that she
is calling to the Lord. With great intensity. And she has pro..., confidence
that the Lord is going to protect me. So, this mood of "viśvāsa" is, is, is a
deeper result of faith. You know. "śraddhā" is the beginning stage. "ādau".
"śraddhā". So, that is the first stage in the nine, nine lim..., stages of
bhakti. And then, "śraddh...", from "śraddhā", we move forward. Move forward.
Then, we come to, there is, another stage of bhakti is "niṣṭhā". That is the
fifth stage. And the ninth stage is "premā". So, actually, all of them, if we
see, they are just progressions of faith. Initially, the faith is we, tender. At
"śraddhā" level. Then, at "niṣṭhā", it is very strong. And we may have faith in
some. For, for exa..., from person. For example, if I go to a doctor. And I
have known the doctor is good. And doctor can cure me. So, I have faith in the
doctor. But that does not mean I really love that doctor. You know. Love is
much, much deeper relationship. And of course, in love, trust is implied. Faith
is implied. Without that, how can there be love? So, that trust is much deeper.
So, essentially, the, the process of bhakti is a deepening of faith. From the
level of "śraddhā" to the level of "premā". So, "śraddhā" is initial. So,
"viśvāsa" is an advanced level of faith. Level, level of faith. And at the level
of "viśvāsa", one is confident the Lord is my protector. And then, Lord is my
well-wisher. Now, Srila Prabhupada gives us special taste to this. And he says,
that not only is the Lord the devotees' well-wisher. But when a devotee starts
preaching Krishna Consciousness, the devotee becomes the Lord's well-wisher.
What does it mean? Let us vi..., see how Prabhupada explains this that so, you
know, Prabhupada quotes that in, Prabhupada quotes Bhagavad Gita. You know.

        na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu
        kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ
        bhavitā na ca me tasmād
        anyaḥ priya-taro bhuvi

So, he says that there is no one more dear to me than one who is preacher. So,
you know, you know, you know, "name". This is a famous verse. "Kunti ma...",
"Draupadi" is quoting:

         na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

That she quotes this. And she says, by, just by remembering this, I am, I am
able "pranam sandaram yaham". That I am able to maintain my life by remembering
that you will always protect me. You know. So, you know, you know, the other is
"mātri". "mātri" means very intimate relationship with the Lord. So, Prabhupada
writes over here.

"Sometimes it is found that a pure devotee lies down in the temple of the Lord
in order to serve Him as a confidential friend."

"confidential friend."

That means that, you know, now, normally, when we go to the temple, we lay down
to offer dandavat. But we do not lay down to go to sleep over there. Of course,
you know, in some cases, it may that, in the temple hall, if there is no sp...,
place, some devotee may sleep in the temple at night. But that is different. Not
when the Lord is giving darshan. That time, nobody is supposed to sleep.
You know. Sometimes, people offer dandavat. And they are so tired while doing
dandavat, they go to sleep. You know. That is not at all a good, good thing to
do. But sometimes, in, you know, when a devotee is in a very intimate
relationship with the Lord. When we are in the presence of the deities, we
should be sitting attentively. In attention. You know. Remembering the, the
Lord, Himself is present over here. And the whole idea is, the mood of, you
know, preverence is important for us to develop our relationship properly with
the Lord. But then, as we, as the relationship with the Lord becomes more and
more intimate, then the devotee may do something like this. Which normally
anyone will not do. We see that more, normally, as sadhakas, you know, we
consider great fortune if we can get the dust of our feet. You know. Rest of the
Lord's feet on our head. We can touch the feet of the Lord. But then, you know,
what do the, you know, you know, gopas do? You know. The gopas get, ask Krishna
to, if they wrestle, and when they def..., when Krishna is defeated sometimes in
wrestling as a part of the lila. In fact, in Gopala-champu, he, he, he
describes, you know, "Jīva Gosvāmī", actually, what happens in, you know, when
Krishna defeats all the wrestlers of "Kamsa". "musti kaca".

        mushtikasur chanur
        mallayudha visharda

So, "mull...", they are "mallayuddha". They were very "visaradha". Very expert
in "mallayuddha". But he just defeated them completely. And after defeating
them, what happened then? Then, Krishna called all His gopa friends. And He
wrestled with them. And when wrestling with them, all the gopa friends defeated
Krishna. And "Kamsa", you know, his brain just got, went haywire. He said, what
is this? My wrestlers. This boy. Krishna defeated. And this simple cowherd boy,
they have defeated Krishna. What is this? They just could not figure it out. So,
when Krishna gets defeated in the wrestling match, then, you know, you know,
Krishna is expected to, as a punishment, carry the gopas. So, when they carry
the gopas, what is happening? It is, their feet is touching the Lord's body.
Now, that is scandalous. You know. Normally, we can, cannot let our feet touch
any, any sacred object. Even a book is, our feet should not, if a book like
Bhagavad Gita, our feet should not touch. What to speak of the deity? And then,
what to speak of the Lord Himself? But the gopas do that. And that is matri.
That is an intimate relationship. So, this is also one item of devotional
service. To have the mood that the Lord is a very close friend of mine. Again,
this is very advanced. And we cannot prematurely jump to it. But just as when
there are two very close friends. If one friend is in trouble, then the other
friend knows. You know. The, that this friend knows that. My friend will come to
help me. So, like that, the devotee has faith. At least, we can try to act at
the level of "viśvāsa". Yes. The Lord will come to help me. And then, the next
item is "ātma-nivedanam". "ātma-nivedanam". So, now, Prabhupada explains that
according to different authorities, self is differently divined, defined. Self
is sometimes referred, re..., considered to refer to the spirit self. Or soul.
Self is considered some, to self, to refer to the mind. Or to the body. So, you
know, then depending on what, you know, the self is referring to.
"ātma-nivedanam" can refer to, actually, surrender of the body. It can refer to
surrender of the mind. Or it can be surrender of the soul. So, so, surr..., it,
all three are self-surrender. So, self-surrender. All three are glorious.
"ātma-nivedanam". Now, we see the example that is normally given of, it is of
Bali Maharaja. So, Bali Maharaja, what did he literally do? You know. First,
with the first two steps, Lord Vishnu offered, Lord Vishnu expanded. And as
Vamana Deva when he had come, he expanded. And he covered the whole universe.
And then, nothing was left. Then, what, then Bali Maharaja offered his body. He
practically offered his head. And he said, put my, put your third foot on my
head. So, the idea is that he offered his body over there. So, of course, we can
say that, while offering the body, he also had the mood of offering his entire
existence. That is true. You know. That, but then, the, essentially, what he
offered, there was the body. So, there can be offering of the body. That is also
"ātma-nivedanam". Then, offering of the mind. That is also "ātma-nivedanam". And
offering of the complete, of the "ātma", itself, that is also "ātma-nivedanam".
So, you know, you know, now, here, we will see, Prabhupada quotes over here that
my mind, my mouth, mouth hold affair, whatever is in my position, my dear Lord,
I offer to You for Your service. He is offering complete surrender. Complete
surrender. Entire existence is offering. Then, here, also, Yāmunācārya" is
saying that whatever specy I go through, but I do not, I do not mind it. Because
is, what is:

"simply by-products of the three modes of material nature, and I, who am in
possession of these bodies, am surrendering myself unto You.”

So, here, he is saying that I surrender onto You. That means the idea is that
the, whichever way the body, I surrender onto You. So, it is not the body that
is being surrendered. It is I who am being surrendered. And Prabhupada, now,
this example is, he is giving mind as well as body. But this example has:

        mānasa, deho, geho, jo kichu mor

This can be an example of surrender of the mind. And then, you know, you know,
"Hari-bhakti-viveka", Prabhupada quote..., you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is quoting
over here. And Prabhupada is repeating.

"as a sold animal has no need to think about his maintenance and sustenance, so,
because I have given up my body and soul unto You, I am no longer concerned with
my maintenance and sustenance.”

So, now, this is an example which, Prabhupada says, is, can offer his body. In
self-surrender. Now, again, in these, the important point is not to do a
hair-splitting analysis. It is not that sometimes I will offer my body. And not
offer my heart. I will offer my mind. And not offer my body. That is not the
point. This is for us to understand from an analytical perspective how
"ātma-nivedanam" can be done. So, generally, when the "ātma-nivedanam" is done,
you know, often, it is that the body, mind and the self, everything is offered.
But there can be different levels of offering. And to help us understand how to
deepen our surrender, this sort of analysis can be done. But specific
references, the important point to learn from the exp..., you know, references
is the principle of surrender. You know. You know. Now, after "ātma-nivedanam",
then there is "OFFERING A FAVORITE ARTICLE". "OFFERING A FAVORITE ARTICLE"
refers to, you know, yeah.

        nija priya upaharanam

"nija priya upaharanam". "nija priya upahar". You know. what is very dear, we
offer. You know. So, Prabhupada quotes from the Uddh..., the, the, quote from
the "Uddhava" Gita is here from "Rūpa Gosvāmī".

"someone offers Me the best thing in his possession, or anything which is very
pleasing to him, he will be eternally benefited.”

You know. So, what does this mean? Now, this offering the favorite thing can
refer to two things. You know. Now, how do I decide what is favorite? You know.
When I offer something favorite, it can be something that is favorite for me. Or
something that is favorite for Krishna. So, both are included in this. "nija
priya upaharanam". What does it mean? If I, for example, we know from, say, the
Goswami literature that Krishna loves food items. Then, we can cook those food
items and offer to Krishna. And that is "nija priya upaharanam". And similarly,
say, if something which is very dear to us. And which is very, which we value
very much. And then, we offer that to Krishna. So, when we offer that to
Krishna, that is also a form of devotional service. See, basically, the point
is that we want to have a heart to heart connection with Krishna. So, that which
is in Krishna's heart, we offer to Him, that is very pleasing to Krishna. And
when, that which is in our heart, we offer to Him, that is also pleasing.
Because by that, our heart is getting linked with Krishna. So, the idea is to
connect ourselves with Krishna more and more. And "nija priya upaharanam"
enables us to do that. You know. And then, there is "PERFORMING ALL ENDEAVORS
FOR KṚṢṆA". So, what, "akhila krsna artha cesta". Like that. All the endeavors,
one does for Krishna's sakes. So, Prabhupada says, gives an example over here.

"devotee who has a great establishment or factory may offer the fruits of such a
material possession for the service of the Lord."

So, this is talking about how when we do the work, we offer the fruits of the
work to Krishna. Now, "ātma-nivedanam". And here is "saranagati". Or
"saranapatti". So, you know, that way, examples, you know, from
"Hari-bhakti-vilāsa". And "Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa". Now, what is the difference between
that for, earlier and this one? "saranagati". And "ātma-nivedanam". It is
similar. But "saranagati" is deeper. You know. Sometimes, one may do
"ātma-nivedanam" without the attitude of surrender. One is offering oneself.
Because one is obliged to. Or because one is expected to. But "saranagati"
means, whole-heartedly, one offers oneself to the Supreme Lord. And then, after
that, there is, you know, you know, "SERVING TREES SUCH AS THE TULASĪ". This is
an important limb of devotional service. And then, Prabhupada quotes from the
"Skanda Purāṇa" as well as other places. How, what is the glory of serving
"Tulasī Devi". You know. Simply by provi..., quote from "Skanda Purāṇa".

"Simply by seeing, simply by touching, simply by remembering, simply by praying
to, simply by bowing before, simply by hearing about or simply by sowing this
tree, there is always auspiciousness. Anyone who comes in touch with the tulasī
tree in the above-mentioned ways lives eternally in the Vaikuṇṭha world.”

So, now, "Tulasī", what does it? "Tulasī" is actually a manifestation of the
Supreme Goddess of fortune. "Rādhārani". And there is a festival "Tulasī
Saligrama Vivaha". "Saligrama" is a form of "Viṣṇu". And "Tulasī" is a form of
the consort of the Lord. Ultimately, she is an expans..., so, all the devis, all
the gopis in the spiritual world, they are expansions of "Rādhārani". And
"Tulasī" is also one of the expansions. So, "Tulasī Saligrama Vivaha" basically,
you know, represents the union of the Lord. And His greatest devotee. And the,
when we worship "Tulasī", "Tulasī" is the giver of bhakti. Just as "Rādhārani"
is the giver of bhakti. "Tulasī" is the giver of bhakti. And by worshipping
Krishna, "Tulasī Devi". We actually make a lot of spiritual advancement. Now,
now, nowadays, or in general, also, in the past, also. People, some people value
"Tulasī" because they consider it is a med..., it has lot of medicinal value.
Oh. "Tulasī". Medicinal value is there. So, I will take "Tulasī". Now, the
medicine value is a side thing for devotees. You know. There may be medicinal
value. And when devotees take "Tulasī", they do not take it because its
medicinal value. They take it, it is offered to Krishna. It is dear Krishna. And
that is why this is actually Krishna's mercy manifesting. And that is why we
take "Tulasī". Now, some devotees say that because "Tulasī" is actually
manifestation of, you know, is such a spec..., spec..., special to Krishna.
Manifestation of the, you know, expanded manifestation of "Rādhārani". So,
actually, they say, we should not chew "Tulasī". We should just, you know, suck.
And swallow "Tulasī". That is not necessarily like that. One can chew, also. The
idea is, there are different forms of Krishna. And we reciprocate with them in
different ways. Now, if we say then, "cāpāṭi" is also Krishna, only. Then,
"prasāda" is non-different from Krishna. So, can I say, because it is Krishna,
how can I chew Krishna? So, then, how will I eat "cāpāṭi" then? So, there is a,
there are different ways in which we reciprocate with the different
manifestations of Krishna. So, "Tulasī", we can take. And we rever...,
respectfully honor "Tulasī". When we take "prasāda", we do not say we are
eating. "prasāda". We are honoring "prasāda". Honoring means Krishna is
manifesting. And when we eat, we are honoring Krishna's manifestation as
"prasāda". And that way, we can make a lot of spiritual advancement. So, these
are all the limbs of devotional ser..., items of devotional service. Through
which, we can make swif..., swift spiritual advancement. We will continue this
discussion in our next class.

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
