Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ocjUznqBQgc
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=dRZcYO6Dc1Pfb4K6kwmAFZSbfuh8MTU0ODQ5MDU0N0AxNTQ4NDA0MTQ3&v=ocjUznqBQgc&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_158_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_12_%26_13_Five_potent_forms_of_devotional_service_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri course. We will be discussing
the last, among the 64 items of devotional service. So, until now, we have
discussed various items which demonstrate, you know, how, bha..., there can, the
bhava, that devotional emotion towards Krishna can be evoked by various
activities. You know. When they are done with a proper attitude. Let us now look
at this Chapter, 12, which Srila Prabhupada has entitled as further aspects of
transcendental service. So, here, we will see, you know, "HEARING THE REVEALED
SCRIPTURES". You know. You know. You know. You know. So, normally, you know, in
our ten offenses, we change, say, talk about the Vedic scriptures. So, Vedic
scripture..., Ved..., Vedic scriptures, and books that are in pursuance of the
Vedic version. That means that Srila Prabhupada's books, you know, are also
Vedic scripture. Because they are telling us the same message. You know. The
Vedas themselves, the letters, I mean, the Upanid..., the Vedas, Rigveda, and
other Vedas are meant to be recited. Here, and they are very precise in
specific. Even, in which pronunciation written. And they were memorised in
multiple ways so that the pronun..., you know, the exact letter could be
preserved. And the potency there is primarily in the precise recitation. Whereas
in the Puranas and the "Itihasa"s, the way, they are also recited. No doubt. But
the focus there is on meaning. And the Puranas and "Itihasa"s are an open-ended
body of literature. Open-ended means, the acharyas comment, or in fact, the very
word "Smṛti" indicates that which is remembered. And then, explained. So, you
know, you know, "Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura" would give the example that
just as a person may change the dress, according to the season, so, similarly,
the same knowledge is explained differently by different acharyas. That means, a
dress, different dressing is given to the same knowledge. According to time,
place, circumstance. So, you know, you know, that means, the scriptures are an
open-ended body of knowledge. So, it is, the goswamis wrote books. Those books
are also scriptures. Then, subsequent acharyas, which, like "Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura"s did, have written books. They are also scriptures. Srila
Prabhupada has written books. They are also scriptures. So, scriptures are an
evolving body of knowledge. And Prabhupada makes this clear wherein he says
that, you know, any book:

"any book that gives enlightenment in the matter of advancing in devotional
service is considered to be revealed scripture."

And then, Prabhupada gives "Madhvācārya"'s li..., you know, list. And then, he
offers as:

"and any other literature written in pursuance of such revealed scriptures."


You know. And then, there are, you know, references which, you know,
substantiate this point. You know. You know. And then, Prabhupada quotes one of
the "phala-śruti" verses of the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". You know.

        tad-rasāmṛta-tṛptasya
        nānyatra syād ratiḥ kvacit

"tad-rasāmṛta-tṛptasya". That the "Bhāgavatam" starts with saying that:

        pibata bhāgavataṁ rasam ālayam
        muhur aho rasikā bhuvi bhāvukāḥ

That is 1.1.3. So, relish the nectar. Relish the nectar. "rasā". And then, it
end, in one of the la..., one of that, verses towards the end of the
"Bhāgavatam". It is Twelfth Canto, 13th Chapter, 15th verse. He says, towards
the end of the "Bhāgavatam", he says that, "tad-rasāmṛta-tṛptasya". Once one has
relished this taste, then what will happen? "nānyatra syād ratiḥ kvacit". One
will not have any taste for anything else. Because this is so captivating that
one is elevated to a different level of, you know, level of purification and
elevation where nothing else is, remains appealing. Then, there is "RESIDING IN
MATHURĀ". You know. You know. So, this is especially talking about, you know,
Prabhu..., then, now, the emphasis of this verse is that, is, it is spe...,
referring specifically to "Mathurā". One can go to many holy places. But now,
there is a reference over here. You know. If we look at the "Brahmā Purā...".
"Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa" reference. What is it saying? In the "Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa", he
said that the:

"all the results of traveling on all the pilgrimages within the three worlds can
be achieved simply by touching the holy land of Mathurā."

So, we discussed earlier, also, in the, you know, "Upadesamrta" by "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" about how all, there may be many pure great pilgri..., holy places.
May, and they may all have enormous potency. But still, there is a hierarchy.
And there:

        vaikuṇṭhāj janito varā madhu-purī tatrāpi rāsotsavād

So, like that, "vaik...", you know, you know, "madh...", "madhu-purī". And then,
goes onto "rāsotsavād". There is a whole long verse over there. so, how
"vaikuṇṭhāj" is great. But above that is "madhu-purī". That is where Krishna
appeared. And above that is that the twelve forests of Vrindavan. Above that is
Govardhan. Above that is, you know, ab..., actually, above that, like that,
there is a whole hierarchy. There is the twelve forests of Vrindavan. There is
Govardhan. And finally, there is "Radha Kund". So, you know, like, in the
hierarchy, if we take it further, there are many, many holy places. But the
"Mathurā Mandal", where Krishna personally descended and performed His various
pastimes, "Mathurā Mandal" includes Vrindavan. That is very special. You know.
You know. You know. Then, we have "RENDERING SERVICE TO DEVOTEES". So,
Prabhupada quotes the famous verse, you know, you know, focu..., famous verse
which is Lord "Śiva" telling "Padma", "Pārvatī" in the "Padma Purāṇa". He says:

        araradhan sarvesam
        viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param
        tasmāt parataraṁ devi
        tadīyānāṁ samarcanam

So, "ar...", so, Lord "Śiva" is telling "Pārvatī" here, "araradhan sarve...",
"araradhan sarvesam". Among all the kinds of "araradhan", "sarvesam", there are
many, many different forms of "araradhan". We have discussed how the Vedic
culture offers multilevel worship. "viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param". What is supreme is
the "araradhan" of "Viṣṇu". That is supreme. And "tasmāt parataraṁ devi". And
higher than that, also, is "tadīyānāṁ samarcanam". "tadīyānāṁ". "tadīyānāṁ"
means, those which are associated with. Here, it specifically, it refers to
devotees. Why? Because Prabhupada would give the example that, you know, if you
want to please a millionaire, what can you do for the millionaire? It is very
difficult to please the millionaire. But if you please the dog of the
millionaire. And give some treat to that dog. The dog starts wagging the tale.
And becomes very happy. Then, the master also becomes happy. So, like that, the
way to have, heart of Krishna is through the heart of His devotees. Krishna is
"Lakshmipati", He does not need anything. And, but if we associate, if we serve
His devotees, do something for them which they need, then Krishna becomes very
pleased by that. So, that is why, you know, rendering service to devotees is so
important. And then:

        ye me bhakta-janāḥ pārtha
        na me bhaktāś ca te janāḥ
        mad-bhaktānāṁ ca ye bhaktās
        te me bhakta-tamā matāḥ

In the "Ādi Purāṇa", Lord Krishna tells Arjuna, "ye me bhakta-janāḥ pārtha",
those who think they are My devotees. "na me bhaktāś ca te janāḥ". They are not
actually My devotees. So, it seems like a paradoxical statement. Those who are
My devotees are not My devotees. What does it mean? He says no. He says, the,
those who claim to be My devotees are not My devotees. But those who say they
are, that is devotees of My devotees, they are the servants of My devotees.
"mad-bhaktānāṁ ca ye bhaktās". Those are the devotees of My devotees. "te me
bhakta-tamā matāḥ". They are actually My devotees. So, the way to Krishna is
through His devotees. And that is why rendering service to them is extremely
important. And, you know, you know, in fact, you know, Krishna Consciousness
becomes a real tangible appealing when we are in the association of devotees.
Especially advanced devotees for who are living Krishna, in Krishna
Consciousness. And then, there are many verses like that. There is, you know,
significant list of verses there. You know. So, I quote, describe this verses,
also. "Ādi Purāṇa" verse, also. Like that, there are all these verses from the
"Bhāgavatam", also. You know. Then, just by:

"Even by remembering the activities of such a Vaiṣṇava, one becomes purified,"

"what, then, can be said of rendering direct service to him?”

You know. You know. Such, the glories of serving, associating with the devo...,
of, ser..., ser..., not just associating with devotees. But serving the
devotees. So, there is a difference here between associating with devotees. And
serving devotees. Generally, association should lead to service. No doubt. But
associating can also mean hearing from the devotees. Hearing is also one form of
service, of course. When we go to our spiritual master. You know. And often, we
may not get the opportunity to do any direct service to him. That is what we may
feel. But we may, if we are getting the opportunity to, to hear from him, that
is also a service. You know. Reading Srila Prabhupada's books, also, is a
service. Hearing the lectures of a Vaishnava is also a service to that
Vaishnava. You know. So, the, because that devotee is rendering service to
Krishna, by speaking about Krishna. And we are rendering service to Krishna. And
that devotee by hearing about Krishna. So, service is what unites devotees with
Krishna at the center. And hearing, and chanting are services like that. So,
hearing is also one service. But here, this verse can, refers to specific
service to Vaishnavas. Then, "SERVING THE LORD ACCORDING TO ONE’S POSITION". So,
you know, here, servi..., the word, title may seem a little, you know, you know,
from the title, it may seem unclear what it is referring to. But if we look at
what Prabhupada is saying.

"perform the ceremonies for the Lord according to one’s financial position."

What does it mean? You know. So, there are now festivals like Janmashtami. Now,
you know, when, in, when the early days of the movement, or when Srila
Prabhupada was present. And for some time, immediately after that, ISKCON was a
temple based movement. So, all the festivals are celebrated in the temple,
itself. But overall, now, ISKCON has expanded. And it is more a congregation
based movement. And there are different parts, you know, there is some
mediterranean, on one city, there may be many temples. Or even if there is one
big temple, there may be different communities in different parts of the city.
Centered around some programmes in those communities. Those particular areas.
So, of, now, when a festival is celebrated, a big festival may be celebrated in
the temple. Say, Janmashtami. But then, local devotees, in small, in different
areas of the city may celebrate Janmashtami separately, also. So, this refers to
celebrating the festivals of the Lord. The advantage of having different
celebrations is that, you know, people who are not ready to come to the temple,
people may not want to travel so much distance. Or people may not want to get
too much into the crowd which are there. When that, when there are big templ...,
festivals in big temples. So, they may come for little smaller programmes in the
houses. Or organised by tho..., in the houses of those, who are famil..., who
may, or if they are acquaintances. Or in localities which they are more familiar
with. So, that way, you know, Krishna's mercy which is especially available on
holy days can be acc..., made accessible to more and more people. So, even when
one's own house. One can, if Govardhan puja is there, say, now, one can cook
some bhoga. And give it in the templ..., to the temple deities. And similarly,
one can have Govardan puja at one's home, also. And cook a, cook items. And make
a Govardhan of those items. So, so, that is the idea of celebrating festivals
according to one's capacity. You know. Now, in general, when we have deities at
home, our home deity is, should be considered expansions of the temple deities.
But expansions are not meant to act as equivalent replacements. That means, in
general, you know, you know, when we, when we have deities in our home, that
should be to expand our service to Krishna. Not to replace our going to the
temple. That means that, you know, if, whenever there are major festivals. We
should prefer to go to the temple. But along with that, the progression is, yes,
Krishna is in the temple. But I want Krishna to be in my home, also. So,
Krishna, as a deity, is in the temple. And the same Krishna, you know, when we
have a deity to serve. And the senior Vaishnavas blessed, then that same Krishna
manifests as a deity in our house. So, whenever we have the opportunity to serve
the deities, you know, in the temple, we should take that opportunity. And when
that is not possible, then we also have at our home deities. Just so that we can
serve the deities at home. That should, we should not stop going to the temple
for programmes. We should not have alternate festivals at each festival at our
home. And think that, now, I have no need to go to the temple. Of course, once,
a suppo..., person starts a separate center, say, there is a huge significant
distance between the temple and the different center. Then, this, if this is
going to become a separate center where there are many devotees coming. And it
is, you know, growing, that is, that may be a different issue. And one can talk
with the local authorities. And finalise the things. But in general, the idea is
that every devotee should contribute to celebrating the festivals of the Lord.
Whether that celebration is in the temple. Or in one's home. Or in one's
community. That will vary.

You know. In general, mood, the mood of a devotee should always be to increase
one's devotional service. So, if we can increase one's devotional, inc...,
increase the, our devotional service by having deities at home, certainly, we
can have deities. And if we can, can increase our devotional service by
celebrating festivals at our home, or in our community, certainly, we can do
that, also. The idea is that we should not use one form of service as an excuse
for minimising another form of service. You know. You know. We, you know, so,
the way we are best devotionally nourished, you know, that is what we should see
based on guru. Sadhu. Shastra. And renge..., render service accordingly. Now,
there is a very important Vedic..., "Ūrja-vrata". "PERFORMING DEVOTIONAL SERVICE
IN KĀRTTIKA".

"One of the most important of these ceremonial functions is called Ūrja-vrata."

So, "Ūrja-vrata", actually, the month of "Kārttika" is said to be the month of
"Rādhārani". It is also called as Damodar Maas. This is the month in which, you
know, there are maximum Vaishnava festivals. Right from the beginning. When
there is "Gopāṣṭamī". And there is Govardhan Puja. And right in the heart of
"Kārttika", we have Srila Prabhupada's disappearance. You know. And then, like
that, there are many, many festivals are there in this one month. And not only
are there many festivals. But the whole month itself is a festival. Because we,
you know, throughout the month, we sing the "Damodarastakam". And offer the lamp
to Lord "Dāmodara". And there are many fe..., many, this is the last month of
"Caturmasya". You know. In general, you know, the bhagavata bhakti is not a path
of austerity. But austerity to the extent is anikul to bhakti, that is
accepted. So, we see, so, some of our acharyas have observed "Caturmasya" quite
ser..., stro..., very strictly. You know. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura,
before he took on very vigorous preaching, you know, he would, you know, he
would, he observed "Caturmasya" very severely. He would just once a day, he
would just, when one mouthful, whatever he would be able to eat, he would just,
with his hands, with his mouth, directly, on the floor, whatever be on the
floor, he would eat like that. And very strictly, he would do. So, that was not
what he recommended later on when he became a spiritual master. And had
disciples. You know. But the principle is, auster..., "Caturmasya" is a time for
austerity. And the last month of "Caturmasya" is "Kārttika". So, devotees often
do different kinds of "vrata". Which chanting extra rounds. Reading more of the
scriptures. Or going to Yatras. You know. "Kārttika" is a time when many
devotees pray..., you know, try to make it, you know, make it, arrange their
life in such a way that they can go to Vrindavan. And have darshan of the
deities there. Be there for many of the important festivals. It is a very
spiritually potent month. And "Kārttika-māhātmya" is a section which is quite
well-known from the "Padma Purāṇa". And gives various section..., various, you
know, glories of "Kārttika". Innumerable glories, in fact. And the last five
days of the "Kārttika", which are also the last five days of the four
"Caturmasya". They are called as "Bhishma vrata". And that they, they are also
filled with spiritual potency. And devotees who can, you know, observe special
vratas on those days. They can all get very spe..., very great spiritual
benefits by that. So, "PERFORMING DEVOTIONAL SERVICE IN KĀRTTIKA". That is
mentioned over here. So, here, Prabhupada quotes from the "Padma Purāṇa". "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" has said as:

“The Lord may offer liberation or material happiness to a devotee, but after
some devotional service has been executed, particularly in Mathurā during the
month of Kārttika, the devotees want only to attain pure devotional service unto
the Lord.”

So, what does this mean? Now, we may wonder, sometimes, when we get, we perform
devotional service. What is the result of that? One time, Srila Prabhupada was
was asked, Srila Prabhupada, what is the result of this chanting? So, Prabhupada
said more chanting. What does it mean? That when we chant, our love for Krishna
increases. And when our love for Krishna increases, we want to stay more and
more connected with Krishna. And the way we stay connected with Krishna is by
chanting more. So, that is how, you know, chanting leads to more chanting. So,
similarly, the, what is the, what is the success of our devotional service? The
success is not that people come and praise us. Yes. Some people may come. And
praise us, also. But that is not the primary success. That is not the goal with
which we do service. The success of devotional service is that, we, you know,
our desire to serve Krishna increases. Our attraction to Krishna increases. We
want to do more and more, you know, for Krishna. So, you know, what happens is,
if we render service in "Kārttika", as this "Padma Purāṇa" verse is saying,
then, you know, we get such a taste in service. Our desire for Krishna, and
service to Krishna, increases so much that other desire, like the desires from
material enjoyment, and the desires for liberation, they get just, you know,
kicked out of the heart. You know. There have no more any place in the heart.
And one simply aspires for pure devotional service. So, that is how it is. Then,
now, the next point is "OBSERVING FESTIVALS CELEBRATING THE LORD’S ACTIVITIES".
You know. You know. You know. Now, this may seem similar to the earlier point,
which I mentioned earlier. "SERVING THE LORD ACCORDING TO ONE’S POSITION". There
are also sep..., perform the ceremonies. But if this specifically refers to:

        krsna janma dina mahotsav

That, that san..., the sanksrit wording is like that. It is, refers to the
festival of Janmashtami. And if we look at the reference, also, what is said?
The "Bhaviṣya Purāṇa" has put in, my dear Lord, "Janār...":

“My Lord Janārdana [Kṛṣṇa], please let us know the date when Your mother
Devakī-devī gave birth to You. If You kindly inform us about this, then we shall
observe a great celebration on this date. O killer of Keśī, we are souls one
hundred percent surrendered unto Your lotus feet, and we wish only to please You
with our ceremonies.”

This is just like, if we have a friend, we were, asked the friend, when is your
birthday? Please tell me. So, here, this is like that in "Bhaviṣya Purāṇa". It
is much more reverential mode. Mood. But still, the idea is the same. My dear
Lord, I, we want to celebrate Your, you know, we want to celebrate your
appearance. Celebrate the festivals glorifying Your ad..., advic..., advi...,
merciful descent of this world. You know. So, the reference specifically talks
about Janmashtami. Now, Janmashtami is the day when Krishna, as in janma
ashtami, the eighth day of the month, so, Krishna appeared on that day. Now,
when Kri..., you know, Krishna appears with some momentous occasion, it is a
thrilling moment in the life of a devotee. Because that very descent of Krishna
is the str..., is among this, is one of the strongest evidences of Krishna's
love for all living beings. It is because Krishna loves all of us. That is why
he descends to this world. And he descends and gives His mercy to everyone. He
performs pastimes. He reestablishes dharma, and he liv..., he, he actually lives
a legacy for all, for long, long time to come. For subsequent generations of
devotees. And aspiring devotees. To hear about His pastimes. And thereby, become
purified. And ultimately liberated. So, that is why, this being a, so, so,
naturally, because we love a person, we want to celebrate that person's
birthday. That is natural love. But when it comes to Krishna, it is even more
special. Because the, Krishna has specially descended for us. Descended to
elevate us. You know. You know. Then, there is "SERVING THE DEITY WITH GREAT
DEVOTION". Now, from "Ādi Purāṇa", it is quoted.

“A person who is constantly engaged in chanting the holy name and who feels
transcendental pleasure, being engaged in devotional service, is certainly
awarded the facilities of devotional service and is never given just mukti
[liberation].”

You know. So, the point here is that, you know, that serving the deity takes one
beyond "mukti". One, takes one far, far ahead. We will come back to this item
when we talk about deity worship in the five potent forms of devotional service.
And then, now, Prabhu..., "RECITATION OF ŚRĪMAD-BHĀGAVATAM AMONG DEVOTEES". So,
now, this is a long item. But the essential point here is that, you know, you
know, "Bhāgavatam" is what? Enables us to, you know, connect with Bhagavan. You
know. The most important ways. Through which, "śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ". So, you know,
so, we see that, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and "Gadadhara Pandita", you know,
they would reci..., they would recite "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam" so intensely. And they
would sit hours and hours together. And later on, when they would be reciting
"Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam", both of them would have tears in their eyes. And "Gadadhara
Pandita"'s copy of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam", the copy was still there. But because of
the tears, the text of the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam" had got washed. The text had got
washed away from the book. The words had got washed away. Such was their
ecstasy. And this ecstasy comes for advanced devotees. But we also, if we keep
pra..., you know, you know, pra..., practicing Krishna Consciousness sincerely,
then we also slowly, but surely, start getting, you know, getting a taste. And
the taste goes deeper. And deeper. As we move forward in our spiritual life.
Then, there is "ASSOCIATING WITH ADVANCED DEVOTEES". You know. You know. You
know. So, here, now, these items, when we look at these items, these are, same
item, or similar items will come when the next item, alsogetting, you know,
getting a taste. And the taste goes deeper. And deeper. As we move forward in
our spiritual life. Then, there is "ASSOCIATING WITH ADVANCED DEVOTEES". You
know. You know. You know. So, here, now, these items, when we look at these
items, these are, same item, or similar items will come when the next item,
also. We will look at this. So, "CHANTING THE HOLY NAME OF THE LORD". And
"LIVING IN MATHURĀ". So, let us look at the five potent forms of devotional
service. Because herein, these five items are repeated again. Now, these are the
last five items. And to some extent, you know, the earlier items that have been
mentioned, they are repeated here. But it is not an exactly the same theme that
is being repeated. There are subtle differences. And even if there are some
things, some similarities, the similarities are also meant to drive home the
point that this is so important. Srila Prabhupada writes in the, one of the
purports to the Second Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, you know, there is, some of
qualities of the soul are repeated. And those qualities of the soul are
repeated beause the, they are just so important to understand. The soul is for
example:

        avināśi tu tad viddhi

Or, and, or for example:

        ajo nityaḥ śāśvato ’yaṁ purāṇo
        na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre

So, "avināśi" is said once in 2.17. "na hanyate" is said again in, you know,
2.20. So, like that, there is a repetition. And Prabhupada writes, repetition of
a point is necessary to make sure that there is no ambiguity in understanding
it. That the point is clear. So, for that purpose, the repetition is sometimes
done. And similarly, here, actually, if we go technically into the sanskrit. And
look at points carefully, we will see that there is no, you know, repetition.
There is, there are subtle differences. But even if we do not go into the
sanskrit technicalities, and even if we feel that there is some repitition, the
repetition is not necessarily undesirable. Because that repetition drives home
the emphasis of the point we can, we, just like we have it in:

        harer nāma harer nāma
        harer nāmaiva kevalam
        kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva
        nāsty eva gatir anyathā

        harer nāma harer nāma
        harer nāmaiva kevalam

So, "harer nāma". The name of Lord Hari, so, chant, you know, chant the name of
Lord Hari. So, what is happening in this verse is, "harer nāma harer nāma harer
nāma". That is said three times. And then, "kevalam". As if to emphasise it,
"kevalam" is said that only the holy names. So, now, this itself, first, saying
it three times. And then, "kevalam". And then, as if that were not enough,
further, what is said? "nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva". There is no other way.
There is no other way. There is no other way. "nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva
gatir anyathā". "anyathā". There is no other way available. So, like that, the
repetition does not necessarily indicate something wrong. The repetition simply
indicates that there is, you know, this point, which is extremely important. So,
what are the five potent forms of devotional servi..., these three..., these,
you know, five potent forms of devotional service? Let us look at these items,
now. You know. You know. Yeah. So, "mathura-mandale sthith".
"sri-murter-anghri-sevane". "Sri bhagavatarthasvado". "Sri-nama-sankirtanam".
"sajatiyasya-snighda-sri-bhagvad-bhakta-sango".
"sajatiyasya-snighda-sri-bhagvad-bhakta-sango". So, let us look at these points.
"mathura-mandale sthith". "mathura-mandale" is the area of "Mathurā" to live in
that Matura place. Then, "sri-murter". "sri-murter" is the deity.
"anghri-sevane". "anghri" is the lotus feet. You know. Then, "Sri
bhagavatartha". "artha" is the meaning. Now, we just do not understand the
meaning. But "asvado". We relish the meaning. This:

        pibata bhāgavataṁ rasam ālayam

So, like that. "tarthasvado". So, you know, "Sri bhagavatarthasvado". And then,
"Sri-nama-sankirtanam". That is straightforward enough. And this is very deep
point. You know. You know. "sri-bhagvad-bhakta-sango". That is there. But then,
"sajatiyasya-snighda-sri-bhagvad-bhakta-sango". "sajatiya". "sajatiya" means of
the same category. "snighda". You know. So, ser..., associating with devotees.
Serving with devotees. "sajatiyasya". ""sajatiya" means, you know, that
"sajatiyas". "sajatiya" actually means, we could say, it simply means caste. But
actually, the meaning is much deeper over here. You know that the castes were
decided by, you know, not just by birth, but by psychophysical orientation. So,
people who have, you know, propensity to be intellectual, and to study, are
classed as brahmanas. And like the same for different classes. So, actually,
different castes. So, we could say, the castes are more of human types. You
know. There are the humans of different types. There is, there is one human type
that is intellectual. There is another human type that is administrative. And
like that, there are different human types. So, serving a devotee refers to
"sajatiyasya". So, what it refers to is that when we have, when we are in the
association of devotees, we need the association of like-minded devotees. If,
you know, I am a book distributor. And I associate with somebody who is a temple
constructor. Then I say that, you know, the most important service is book
distribution. And then, that person no. Ok. Book distribution is good. But after
reading books, what? People have to come somewhere. We need temples. We need
templ..., magnificent temples. only then, people will come. And people be
attracted. And people will become devotees. So, there can be conflict. You know.
Both are right. Srila Prabhupada, at different times, emphasised different
things. And Srila Prabhupada had a habit of encouraging everyone. So, when he
would be writing to those devotees, who were developing, a farm community, say,
in new Vrindavan. At that time, he would tell them, you know, there is no
service more important than, you know, the development of these farm
communities. Because they are going to be our center. Prabhupada, our centres of
our alternative culture. That is what we want to show. The modern culture. That,
you know, that we can live without technology. We can ba..., we will be based on
Krish..., centered on Krishna. We can live simply. And live happily. And then,
when there was a gurukula starting in Dallas, Prabhupada wrote to the gurukula
admininstrators. You know. These children are not ordinary children. They are
Vaikuntha children. That means, sent to us by Krishna. And taking care of them
is a, such, such an important responsibility. There is no service more important
than this. And then, of course, so, when the devotees were raising funds to
build temples. In Ind..., in India. Especially, in places like Mayapur. Or
Vrindavan. He would say, you know, this is, Prabhupada would say about Vrindavan
as is the, the, now, in the place, the heartbeat of ISKCON. So, there is no
project more important than, you know, the Vrindavan project. And then, there
would be book distribution. And the book distributor, Prabhupada would say,
there is no service that pleases me more, more, so, doing that, that is more
important than book distribution. So, now, now, every devotee can, you know,
get, arrange for a battery of pet quotes. It is, the, the quotes which support
what we want to see. Or which support what we want to do. And it is good to have
these quotes.

No doubt. But what we have to understand is that there is no service more
important does not mean that there is no service as important. There is no
service more important than this. But there can be many services as important as
this. And all the services that we are doing, all the services help us move
closer to Krishna. And Srila Prabhupada gave different definitions of success.
You know. For us. And because we are all individuals, so we may be attracted by
differ..., and inspired to fulfill different aspects of Srila Prabhupada's
mission. And vision. You know. So, we may, some devotees may be attracted to
build temples. Some devotees may attracted to, say, develop farm communities.
Some devotees may be attracted to, Prabhupada said that the "Back to Godhead"
magazine is the wheels, this is the backbone of our movement. So, he said we
need to have it going on. Some devotees may feel inspired, ok, I want to take up
this service. And do this service. Most important for me. So, like that,
different people may have different things to say, you know, different devotees
may feel inspired to do different things. In Krishna's service. And we have to
be broad-minded enough to recognise, you know, that others can have a definition
of success that is different from mine. So, when we see, when we meet such
devotees, what should we do? Actually, we should not try to impose our
definition of success on them. Nor should we let them impose their definition of
success on us. That means that, you know, if we have taken the guidance of
senior Vaishnavas. And we are doing a service which is, within, which is helping
fulfill the broad vision of Srila Prabhupada in some way, then we should be
confident that this is the way I am serving Krishna. And I will make spiritual
advancement by this. And this is also tangible contribution which I am making.
Of course, no contribution is very big. But yes, small, but every contribution
is significant. Small. But significant contribution. So, if I, this is how I am
things, inspired to do. Then, it is not that if somebody else is inspired by
something else, I should start feeling insecure. Ok. I am actually doing
service. There is no need for me to feel insecure. But at the same time, there
is no need for me to make that person insecure. You know. You are, you are doing
temple construction. You know. What book distribution are you doing? Or no. You
should do book distribution. There is no need to do like that. Let different
devotees take up different aspects of Srila Prabhupada's mission. And vision.
And let them fulfill that. And in that way, we can keep moving forward steadily.
Marching on. And on. In our journey towards Krishna. You know. Now, this way, we
can have, you know, you know, "sajatiyasya-snighda". "snighda" means
affectionate. "sajatiya" means having the same, having the same mentality. The
same attraction. Same kind of desires. "sajatiyasya". You know. So, that is how
we need the association of devotees. Association of devotees that is
like-minded. Association of devotees that inspires us, and, you know, where we
can all, in a like-minded way, move onwards towards Krishna. You know. So, the
way, I will feel inspired does not have to be the same in which somebody else
has to feel inspired. But of course, all of us are individuals. And Krishna is
an individual. But Krishna is an infinite individual. So, Krishna can
reciprocate with my individuality. And Krishna can reciprocate with somebody
else's individuality, also. And in that way, Krishna can attract everyone. And
that is how we can move forward in devotional service. Steadily. Rapidly.
Smoothly.

Now, let us look at these items more. "RESIDING IN MATHURĀ". When we talk about,
you know, you know, you know, when we talk about these items of devotional
service, the five potents forms. These are the place where mercy resides. This
is the place where special potency is available. You know. Looking at the holy
places. You know. What exactly happens in the holy places? Actually, there are
three aspects to it. There is, you know, textual description. There is sensual
perception. And there is devotional realisation. All these three, when they
combine, then there is an extremely potent experience. Let me explain what this
means. You know. There has to be, you know, the same, we want sensory
perception. You know. When we go to a, you know, you know, when we go to a holy
place, we want to see. You know. Ok. This is the place where Krishna performed
the pastime. This is the place where there is a temple. This is Govardhan hill.
Maybe, this is the place where, you know, you know, where the Kri..., the gopa
friends of Krishna, they also put a stick when Krisna was lifting up Govardhan.
They also wanted to assist. So, they also put a stick over there. So, like that,
there are places where Krishna performed pastimes. And we want to see those
places. You know. So, that sensory perception is important. You know. Seeing
those places is also purifying. We want to see the same Yamuna where Krishna
performed pastimes. So, seeing is definitely important. But seeing alone is not
important. You know. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura would say that, at one
time, in a holy place, he went to the deity. He went to a temple. And he took
darshan from far away. And the devotees in the temple said, please come closer.
And see. He said, from a far distance, he said that, you know, it is enough that
the Lord has seen me. There is no need for me to see the Lord. I have come here
as the servant. And He has seen me. And He has blessed me. By His merciful eyes.
That is enough for me. So, of course, at other times, he would indeed go close.
And take darshan of the Lord, also. But the mood, he was telling us through this
particular example is that, you know, when we go in front, our mood is a mood of
service. And even when we take darshan, the darshan is not like, you know, you
know, it is not done with an enjoying mentality. It is done with a serving
attitude. Service attitude. We want to engage our eyes in the devotional service
of Krishna. And the way we do that is, you know, you know, by let, using, by
letting the eyes meditate on each limb of Krishna starting from His lotus feet
upwards. And thereby, purify our eyes. And purify our heart. So, this is the
mood of a devotee. And when we go in the templ..., you know, holy places,
certainly, there is sensory perception that we do. But along with sen..., now,
the sensory perception itself may not lead to much benefit if there is no
textual description. So, there is sensory perception. There is textual
description. The textual description can come from what we have read earlier. Or
it may come from the scene, the devotees who have read, and they tell us about
the holy place. And that is why some devotees, they may have gone to some holy
places and pilgrimage, alone, earlier. And they may have got some sweet
experiences. But when they come later in the association of devotees, and then,
there is kirtan. And there is hearing. And there is a rare, dramatically
different experience. It is far deeper. And richer. Because the bhakt..., the
bhakti potency is experienced. It becomes much more accessible when we come in
the association of devotees. And hear. So, textual description. If we read
books, like "Bhakti-ratnākara". In which, there is a description of, say, the
travels of the Lord's devotees. And when they come to a particular place, the
main thing that happens is the devotee is, when they see that place, in,
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, when he would come to a particular place, he would not
just see that place. He would remember, oh, what are all the pastimes that
Krishna has performed over here? And those past..., as the thoughts of those
pastimes would flood through his heart, then he would become over ecstasy.

So, how the thought, thoughts of those pasties come? Of course, we can say, it
is the Supreme, he is the Supreme Lord. And he always remembers those pastimes.
He only performed those pastimes. That is true. But how will the same thing
happen for devotees? Especially sadhaka devotees. Like us. It will happen when
we have heard about it. So, we hear from the scriptures. And we hear from those
who have told us about the scripture. Told us based on the scriptures. And then,
when we see, you know, those wonderful places. So that, so, there is this
external, sensory perception that is there. Then, there is the, from there, we,
there is the, you know, textual description. And then, we combine both of
them. And inject them with the devotion. Then, there is, you know, what happens
is, there is devotional contemplation. When it, with that devotional attitude.
Krishna, thank you. This is the place where you uplifted Govardhan hill. Thank
you for descending to this full, thank you for performing such wonderful
pastimes. Thank you for allowing me to practice devotional service. And then, we
remember the details of the pastimes. What Krishna did. What did, the gopas
did. What the gopis did. Or Yashoda Mayi did. And how Krishna acted. Then, all
this attracts our heart. And then, the heart can become filled with ecstasy. So,
all these three have to be there. Before us, to have the potent experience of
the holy name. Holy place. So, now, you know, for very advanced devotees,
whether they are in, in Vrindavan. Or outside Vrindavan. Their heart is so
attracted to Krishna that even when there is no sensory perception, you know,
they can just close their eyes. And they can have recollection of their past
sensory perceptions. And Srila Prabhupada one ti..., at one time, was in, you
know, you know, America. And the devotees had built a big temple for him. And a
big temple. And in that, they had made a big room for it. And as soon as
Prabhupada came that, oh, Prabhupada said, this room is so nice. It is just like
my room in Radha Damodar temple. Now, even if you have been in Radha Damodar
temple, you know, the rooms of Srila Prabhupada, which have been now taken over
by ISKCON devotees. ISKCON devotees are caring for it. You know. They have been
trying to care for it for a long time. So, there, the rooms are quite small,
actually. You know. And the temple, the room that Srila Prabhupada had been
provided in this temple, were big. So, devotees were a little puzzled. You
know. Why is Prabhupada saying that? This is such a big room. Majestic room. And
this is just tiny room. So, why is Prabhupada saying that this room is just like
that room? The point that Srila Prabhupada was making was that was the place
where he was serving Krishna. That was the place where he was serving, it is
also a room where he is going to serve Krishna. Now, he is going to write about
Krishna. Speak about Krishna. Meet devotees of Krishna. And tell them about how
to advance in Krishna Consciousness. So, the activities that Prabhupada was
going to do were the same. And Prabhupada, when he saw this, also, his heart was
so much in Vrindavan, consciousness all the time, that even when he saw such a
room, without, saw what? A facility for glorifying Krishna. And he remembered
the first facility that the had earlier. When he was in Vrindavan. So, that is
how, you know, for an advanced devotee, even if there is no sensory perception,
directly, there was such an indirect perception, in the sense that, this,
another room, which is, which was serving the same purpose as the room, which,
in Vrindavan, was serving. So, even there is no sensory perception, of there is
indirect sensory perception, still, there is immense, you know, there is this
flood of devotion that comes up. So, we see Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, it is said
that, whenever he would see any forest. He would think, oh, this is Vrindavan.
You know. Whenever he would see any river, he would think, this is Yamuna.
Whenever he would see any hill, he would see, oh, this is Govardhan. And
whenever he think like, this is, his ecstasy would increase. Now, and Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu run into the river. And sometimes, bathe in that river. So,
now, when he is doing this, you know, what is the meaning of this? Yes. He is
experiencing ecstasy. And there is some sensory perception. Which is not exactly
the same as Vrindavan. If it were exacty and entirely the same, then Lord
Chaitanya did not have to go to Vrindavan at all. You know. If he sees any
river, any forest as Vrindavan, then he can just be in any forest. And be happy
over there. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was happy in that forest, also. Because that
forest reminded him of Vrindavan. But at the same time, he continued moving
forward. And ultimately, after trying many times, he did reach Vrindavan. And
then, as "Caitanya-caritāmṛta" describes, his ecstasy just became so high. So,
so, he was just overflooded completely in his heart. So, that means that, yes,
there can be recollection of the holy places at different plac..., at other
places, also. And that recollection is also, a sign, you know, where, it is a
sign of devotion. And it is also, you know, favorable for increasing our
devotion. At the same time, you know, it is not a substitute all the time. You
know. Devotees also want to go to the holy places. They want to take darshan at
the holy places. And they want to relish those holy places that way. So, that is
with respect to going to the holy places. And, you know, relishing the
remembrance of Krishna through sensory perception. The scri..., textu...,
scriptural description. And devotional contemplation. When one does that, one
can get special devotional experiences. In those holy place. Very intense.
Unforgettable experiences, one can get.

Now, after that, moving forward, if one sees, you know, there is some, there is
the, here, the five potent forms of devotional service. There is the going to
the holy places. There is deity worship. There is, you know, you know, the
association of devotees. Like-minded devotees. So, let us look at deity worship.
Now, interestingly, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" gives a, you know, very enigmatic sort of
prayer. Which is told by, you know, by he, one gopi to other peopl..., others.
You know. The gopis say that, you know, if you are still attracted to your
material life with family, friends, and things like that, then do not go and see
Krishna who is playing a flute, you know, on the "Keshi Ghat". You know. What
does this mean? Actually, it is an indirectly glorification. It is an indirectly
glorification that if one does this, what will happen by once it, of doing this?
If one goes and beholds the beauty of Krishna, then that beauty of Krishna is so
captivating. That, that captivation will cause our material infatuations to see,
to go away. You know. And we will no longer be attached to material things. So,
indirectly, what it is saying, is please go and see Krishna in the "Keshi Ghat"
in Vrindavan. You know. Because then, you will become free from your material
attachments. So, but it is told in a poetic way, in an opposite way. Sometimes,
he says, you know, you know, sometimes, the way, it, poetic, poetic co..., things are
often said in an indirect way. To convey, not just the meaning, but to convey
the meaning with sweetness. So, with sweetness. So, deity worship, if we have
discussed earlier, also, about deity worship. About how deity worship gives us
sensory experience of God. We can touch the deity. We can see the deity. We can
bathe the deity. We can dress the deity. And in this way, you know, we can, you
know, get sensory experience of God through deity worship. And the glories of
deity worship are talked about repeatedly in the scriptures. And these five
potent forms of devotional service, Srila Prabhupada has incorporated into our
morning programme. Which he gave in the temple. And which is also, you know, you
know, which devotees at home also can do, as much as is possible for them. So,
the idea is, if we see, how are these five potent forms of devotional service
there? You know. You know. In the morning programme, we, of course, we, it is
centered around the deity. We have darshan of the deity. Starting from the
"Mangala Aarti". Then, then there is again, you know, "Sringar Arati". Then,
there is the ecsta..., nama sankirtan. So, there is kirtan that happens
repeatedly. There is kirtan that happens in, you know, all the pujas that is
there. Then, of course, the chanting of the holy names in the forms of japa also
is there. And then, we are, you know, in the association of devotees. We hear
"Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam" over there. And then, in the association of devotees, we
render service to each other. So, we are getting association of devotees. And in
the community of devotees, we will all find some devotees who are
"sajatiyasya". So, some, who are like-minded. And when we get those association
of like-minded devotees, that takes the devotional, you know, ecstasy to a
higher level. The devotional experience becomes richer. In the association of
like-minded devotees. And then, there is going to a holy place. So, going to a
holy place happens at multiple levels.

Srila Prabhupada would say, you know, the temple, the temples are in Vaikuntha.
He would often compare the temples with the material world. And he would say
that, certain places in the material world are in goodness. Certain are in
passion. Certain are in ignorance. You know. But the temples. He said the
forests are generally in goodness. The cities are in passion. And even the
cities, if there are, you know, degraded places, like, say, brothels. Or
winehouses. And things like, they are in ignorance. But, you know, the temples
may be in cities. But the temples are in Vaikuntha. Why? Because the Vaikuntha
activities are happening in the temple.

        yatra gāyanti mad-bhaktāḥ

        tatra tiṣṭhāmi nārada

"yatra gāyanti mad-bhaktāḥ". Where I am being glorified, "tatra tiṣṭhāmi
nārada". There, I reside. Oh, Narada. Lord, the Lord Nara..., Lord Narayana is
telling Narada Muni that wherever I am being glorified. The temple is a place
where the Lord is regularly glorified. There are the kirt..., the various
kirtans are there. There are the classes. Various classes are there. There are
devotees who are trying, who are trying to dedicate their life to Krishna. So,
naturally, there is a spi..., spiritual potency over there. So, going to temple
is also like going to a holy place. And that is why, you know, Srila Prabhupada
wanted to create replicas. You know. Where there was Vrindavan, Srila Prabhupada
wanted to create New Vrindavan. A place of pilgrimage in America. And like that,
devotees have made different communities. There can be New Jagannath Puri. There
can be, like that, there are different places. All over the world. Where
devotees try to replicate, to some extent, the mood of the holy places that are
there. You know. So, of course, these, as I said earlier, our home deities, you
know, you know, they are meant to expand our service to Krishna. The fa..., they
are not entirely equivalent substitutes of, of the temple deities. So, like
that, New Vrindavan is not exactly the same as Vrindavan. But still, one can get
some, a glimpse of that. And like that, depending on, you know, the intensity
and the purity of that devotional service that is performed at a particular
place, that can give us, also, holy experiences. So, going to a holy place along
with, you know, say, going to the local temple. Or the local, you know,
devotional retreat center that might be there. But going to the tirtha, going to
the tirthas. And dhams. Like Mayapur. Vrindavan. That is also very potent. At
one time, you know, Srila Prabhupada encouraged devotees to come to Mayapur
during, say, the annual Mayapur festival. And some, some devotee leader, some of
the GBC, they say, they said, Prabhupada, Prabhupada, but sending devotees is,
you know, it is expensive. So, Prabhupada was quite annoyed by the sound. So, he
said then, no. You know. Feeding "prasāda" to devotees also is expensive. So,
are you going to stop that because, just because it is expensive? No. He said,
you know, this is vital for the spiritual nourishment of devotees. And that is
why we have to do it. So, devotees try to go to Yatras, whenever possible. And
nowadays, you know, you know, because ISKCON is such a big organisation, so,
sometimes, the Mayapur festival becomes very crowded. So, some devotees may not
go in the Mayapur festival. They may go for separate Yatras. And the idea of
Yatras is, Yatra should not be just taken as picnics. You know. You know. We are
bored with our the, with our job. And our home. And we just want to break. And
we go for Yatras. You know. Actually, Yatras should be also done in the mood of
service. And Yatras should not become an escape way from our regular responsible
service. We have services in our home, in our devotee community. We do those
services. And then, by answer, answering, while we adjust those services. And go
for Yatras, also. And in that way, we can make steady spiritual advancement.
Now, moving forward, you know, when we look at these different items of
devotional service. The five potent forms. "Śrīla", now, Srila Prabhupada gives,
based on "Rūpa Gosvāmī"'s, you know, text, various references for each of these
items.

And he especially concludes by saying that these five items. Five, these last
five items. They are, as I said, you know, hearing "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam".
Associating with devotees. Worshipping the deity. Chanting the holy names. And
going to a holy place. These are such potent forms of devotional service that
even for a neophyte devotee, the, be, the performance of these activities can
evoke, you know, tremendous devotional feeling. So, devotional s..., feeling
here refers to how bhakti, rising to the level bhava bhakti. So, that is the
potency of these forms of devotional service. And the more we tap the potency,
the more we can, you know, rapidly advance in devotional service. You know. You
know. And "Rūpa Gosvāmī" in this way, you know, and Srila Prabhupada as
representative, you know, you know, rem..., they remove the whole process of
devotion from the realm of abstract feelings. Or intangible. Oh. Devotion is
just a feeling. We have to, we have to feel devotion for Krishna. Yes, that is
good. But, you know, how will that feeling come? Is it just that just the
longing for the feeling that will brings up feeling? Yes. The longing is ok.
Long..., you know, longing is ok. But along with the longing, what is also
required is a process to bring about the changing. So, there is, longing is
good. But along with the longing, there has to be changing. A longing of the
heart should be accompanied by a process for changing the heart. And that
process for changing the heart involves exposing ourselves to all these
devotional stimuli. When we expose ourselves to these devotional stimuli, by
this, our heart becomes attracted to Krishna. You remem..., we started this
discussion by talking about amnesia. You know. How a person, who has forgotten,
can have the memory revived by exposure to stimuli from one's earlier life.
Similarly, we can have our past, you know, our memory revived by the practice of
devotional service. You know. So, our memory of Krishna, which has been covered
over, that can be revived. "nitya yukta". "nitya".

        nitya-siddhasya bhävasya 

So, as I said, that "bhäva" which is there, you know, which becomes awakened.
That is the definition of sadhana-bhakti that we engage our senses in such a way
that that "bhäva", which is dormant, becomes awakened. And when that "bhäva"
becomes awakened, we make rapid spiritual advancement thereafter. Until we
become purified. And then, we move forward. So, in our next class, we will
conclude with this discussion. And then, we will move unto spontaneous
devotional service.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
